Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, Indonesia would like to thank the United States for drafting resolution 2513 (2020), which we just adapted. We also join our co-penholder, Germany, in paying tribute to our sisterly nation, Qatar, for its role in hosting last week's historic event, with the presence and participation of my Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Marsudi. Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution because of our view that the signing of the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America and the Taliban, as well as last month's Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, are important initial steps towards ending the long-standing conflict in the country. In our view, this is a defining moment for Afghanistan, as all the parties, through these agreements, commit to pursuing Afghan-led and -owned intra-Afghan negotiations to secure a durable peace settlement ending to the conflict. Nonetheless, we know this will not be a short journey. But, with good faith from all in pursuing the common quest to end the war and reach an inclusive negotiated political settlement, peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan are attainable. The reduction of violence will be a sign of good faith and trust-building among the parties. In that regard, the international community is on the side of the people of Afghanistan and will support the peace process and ensure that women have their role in it. Enduring peace and nation-building will be elusive without an increased role for Afghan women and youth. Indonesia will continue to actively support capacity-building for Afghan women and their active participation in the peace process, as we have done in the past, bringing together Afghan women from all walks of life and ulemas, and fostering more dialogue. It is also crucial that all gains achieved since 2001, including the protection of human rights, bemaintained. Afghanistan must no longer be used by terrorist groups to threaten others or their territories. We urge once again a reduction in violence in order to nurture conditions conducive to the process. We again emphasize the importance of stability and security. Accordingly, it is important to ensure stability after the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. In conclusion, Mr. President, you may rest assured of Indonesia's support of this journey, including through the intra-Afghan negotiations. We will never turn our back on the people of Afghanistan. Our support is genuinely only for the people of Afghanistan, and we expect the international community to do the same.
