Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun,
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien and Ms. Askira for
their briefings.

Recently, the overall situation in Central and
West Africa has been stable. The regional countries
have strengthened their security cooperation, and
the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) of the
Lake Chad basin countries has made good progress
in combating terrorism. China appreciates those
developments. On the other hand, the security problems
and the humanitarian situation in the Central and West
African region remain very serious. Repeated terrorist
attacks and displaced civilians, together with rampant
violent crimes, pose a threat to the security and stability
of the region. The international community should
strengthen its support for the countries of Central and
West Africa, including the countries of the Lake Chad
basin region.

First, they should support countries of the region
in their counter-terrorism efforts. African counter-
terrorism efforts constitute a very important component
in international counter-terrorism efforts. Subject to the
condition of respecting the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the countries concerned, the
international community should assist the countries of
the region in building their capacity to fight terrorism,
enable the MNJTF to effectively conduct its operations,
and further eliminate the threats posed by terrorism to
the countries of the region.

Secondly, there must be greater cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, including the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
The international community must respect the leading
role played by regional organizations in addressing
the region's problems and fully leverage the unique
expertise and advantages that those organizations
have with a View to building synergies and promoting
appropriate solutions to regional hotspot issues through
such methods as dialogue, mediation and good offices.

Thirdly, the countries of the region must also
be provided with assistance to accelerate their
development and address the root causes of conflict.
The international community should provide financial
and technical assistance to those countries on the basis
of respect for their national sovereignty, so that they can
truly build their capacities and enhance their economic
and social development.

Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi has just
completed a visit to five African countries, namely,
Madagascar, Zambia, Tanzania, the Republic of the
Congo and Nigeria. That visit achieved its planned goals
of deepening friendship, enhancing communication,
aligning ideas, building greater confidence and
deepening our cooperation. China will continue to
uphold the policy of sincerity, real results, affinity and
good faith and the correct viewpoint on righteousness
and benefit. China will faithfully implement the results
of the Johannesburg Summit meeting of the Forum
on China-Africa Cooperation. China is ready to work
with the international community and the countries
concerned to support the countries of Central and West
Africa in their efforts to achieve lasting peace and
common prosperity and make new contributions to
peace and development in Africa.

