Mr. Petrella (Argentina)(interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to express my best wishes to you,
Mr. President, and congratulate you on the manner in
which you are conducting the Security Council. It reflects
your personal and professional commitment to the search
for consensual and pragmatic solutions which are
characteristic of your country throughout its history.
Allow me also to ask Ambassador Dahlgren of
Sweden to convey my appreciation to his predecessor,
Ambassador Osvald, because his presidency was an
example of transparency and dedication.

On 16 April of this year we participated in the
Security Council debate with satisfaction. The hope for a
future of peace, stability and dialogue seemed to be
emerging on the Angolan horizon. The inauguration of the
new Government of Unity and National Reconciliation on
11 April, the participation of the UNITA deputies in the
National Assembly and the initiation of the normalization
of the State encouraged that hope. The replacement of
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) by United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA) on 30 June signified recognition of the
successful conclusion of one stage - the maintenance of
peace in Angola - and the beginning of a new stage: the
consolidation of peace and the social and economic
reconstruction of the country.

Despite these positive signs, important work remains.
Nonetheless, we were confident that the leaders would be
able in good faith to resolve their differences in good
faith. However, in the Secretary-General's last report, we
read with concern that

 

"The peace process in Angola is experiencing
some of the most serious difficulties since the signing
of the Lusaka Protocol." (S/1997/640, para. 38)

The Secretary-General also points out that UNITA has
not fulfilled the commitments undertaken in Lusaka nor the
obligations stemming from Security Council resolution 1118

(1997).

As a result, a climate of tension and distrust appears
to have taken hold in the country. Confrontations have not
ceased, troop mobilization activities have been reported and
MONUA's verification work, especially in the areas
controlled by UNITA, are subject to restrictions. In the
political sphere, the extension of the State administration
throughout the country is at a virtual standstill.

The international community cannot remain indifferent
to the stagnation of the peace process in Angola. For these
reasons, it is timely to urge the Government of Angola and
UNITA to conclude the reconciliation process. Both are
responsible for its success, and they must refrain from any
measure that could lead to the resumption of armed
struggle. In that context, we call on UNITA to exam the
reasons that led the Security Council to consider new and
exceptional measures today. Finally, we again urge
President Dos Santos and Dr. Savimbi to meet in Angola
with a view towards the future.

In conclusion, we wish to express our appreciation for
the efforts undertaken by the troika, composed of the
United States, the Russian Federation and Portugal, and by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Blondin
Beye of Mali. We also express that same appreciation to
the troop-contributing countries, particularly our sister
republic of Brazil, a main participant. Finally, we place our
complete trust in the Secretary-General for his personal
commitment to this important African cause.

