Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
would like to thank the Force Commanders for their
briefings. The United States places great value on
the contribution that they and the men and women
under their commands make every day to peace and
stability in the countries where they serve. I thank
them for their frankness in presenting the challenges
and capacity gaps that can impede their ability to carry
out the mandates that we on the Security Council have
given them. Regular and open communication with
our military and police leaders is necessary to help us
match mandates to the realities on the ground.

We thank Major General Ngondi for his analysis of
the question of in-mission assessment of pre-deployment
training. There is currently no mechanism for assessing
how well prepared troops are once they have actually
deployed to the field. The United States supports
the proposal currently under consideration for the
appointment of a Director General whose office would,
among other things, assist troop-contributing countries
in reviewing their pre-deployment training regimes in
order to determine how the United Nations or donors
can provide better support to peacekeepers in the
field. We strongly agree that training can play a key
role in bolstering the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Developing effective training
requires the evaluation of results and transparent
conclusions that lead to change where necessary.

The United States is making every effort to
improve the standards for evaluation of our own
training assistance for both military and police. We
encourage other Member States to take similar steps to
foster performance improvements, and we ask that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) work
with troop-contributing countries and Member States
to provide training assistance so that together they can
revise their training when needs dictate.

We would appreciate the General's thought on
what type of gaps in essential skills and capacities
he is seeing to help direct efforts to address these
challenges. In that regard, we welcome the United
Nations decision to proceed as quickly as possible to
develop an additional 10 manuals for skill sets needed
in peacekeeping. The United States is pleased to be able
to support this essential project.

We would also like to draw attention to the
recommendations of the Senior Advisory Group on
rates of reimbursements and related issues, which
were approved by the General Assembly last month.
Those recommendations included the establishment
of premiums for units that performed admirably under
conditions of elevated risk, premiums for enabling
capacities in high demand but short supply, and
incentives for units to deploy with and maintain the
capabilities required to perform their assigned tasks.
We welcome that outcome and believe that it provides
an opportunity to enhance the ability of missions to
achieve their mandates.

We thank Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz
for his remarks on leveraging advanced technology
in United Nations peacekeeping missions. The United
States supports the use of new technologies to help
improve mission security and facilitate mandated tasks,
such as the protection of civilians. We look forward to
learning from the experience of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's (MONUSCO) how these
technologies can best be incorporated by DPKO and the
Department of Field Support, where appropriate, and
whether MONUSCO has the personnel and equipment
necessary to rapidly assess the information from
unarmed, unmanned aerial systems and transmit it to
subordinate units in a timely fashion.

We thank Major General Iqbal Asi for his briefing
on how inter-mission cooperation and the sharing
of assets can effect missions' crisis management.
The current fiscal crisis and the shortage of enabling
forces, such as helicopters and the proximity of several
peacekeeping missions in Africa, make inter-mission
cooperation more important than ever before. It is our
impression that the cooperation between the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations
Mission in Cote d'Ivoire has worked well on the whole.
We would welcome any other recommendations he
would have for Force Commanders in contingents in
other United Nations peacekeeping operations on best
practices for coordination. I think that a number of
other delegations have asked for a similar assessment.

Finally, this Council asks the Force Commanders
and their troops to operate often in dangerous
and difficult environments. I would ask all Force
Commanders to please share our sincere gratitude to
the servicemen and servicewomen at the missions who
are working day and night to bring peace and security
to vulnerable populations.

