Mr. Annabi: Since we last briefed the Security
Council, on 21 March, on the activities of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) there has been steady progress in a number of
areas, on which I am pleased to report.

The overall security situation in East Timor has
remained relatively stable, and the situation at the border
with West Timor has improved since we last briefed the
Council. As members of the Council may recall, in March
there had been an increase in incursions of pro-autonomy
militia members from West Timor. In the last week of
March, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, visited Jakarta and raised these
issues with senior Indonesian officials, including President
Wahid. Since then, militia activity has decreased and
cooperation between the military component of UNTAET
and the Indonesian armed forces has improved noticeably.
On 11 April, a Memorandum of Understanding for Tactical
Coordination in the border area was signed by General de
los Santos, the UNTAET Force Commander, and General
Syahnakri, the Commander of the Indonesian armed forces
in West Timor. The memorandum is along the lines of the
agreement of 12 January concluded at that time between the
Indonesian armed forces and UNTAET. These
arrangements have worked well so far, for example, in
dealing with occasional inadvertent border crossings by
military personnel, including two cases of United Nations
helicopters straying into Indonesian airspace.

As regards the refugee situation, during the past
month, some 7,000 refugees have returned to East Timor.
These returns bring the total number of returnees to a
little over 160,000. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reports that
access to the camps has improved considerably, and the
Government of Indonesia has to date been flexible in its
continuation of aid to the refugee camps in West Timor.
Members of the Council will recall that Indonesia had
announced last month that it intended to cease its support
to the camps at the end of March due to economic
constraints. For its part, UNHCR has requested breathing
space, so to speak, for three months to allow time for the
refugees to choose freely whether to return or to stay in
Indonesia.

According to a survey carried out by the Indonesian
authorities, some 126,000 refugees remain in West Timor.
This figure is considered by UNHCR and UNTAET
to be somewhat high. More precise information will be
available when UNHCR completes the registration of the
refugees, which is currently under way in collaboration
with the Indonesian authorities. This registration exercise
is expected to be completed by mid-May. UN HCR reports
that yesterday the Indonesian armed forces went to a
camp in Kupang and began separating those refugees who
had formerly served in the Indonesian armed forces from
the civilians in the camp. Approximately 15,000 refugees
fall into this category.

Many of the refugees still in West T imor are
regarded as having been sympathetic to the pro-autonomy
cause, and UNTAET continues to work with local leaders
in East Timor to prepare the population for the return of
those refugees and to ensure that they are received
peacefully when they return. In a positive development,
the head of an umbrella organization of former
pro-autonomy groups met for the first time with Mr.
Vieira de Mello during his visit to Jakarta on 30 March.
UNTAET's office in Kupang has maintained contacts
with a broad range of former autonomy supporters and
has facilitated contacts between individuals on both sides
of the border.

Turning to the economic and social conditions in
East Timor, they remain a primary concern and will

 

continue to be, given the almost complete destruction of
civilian structures and East Timor's limited economic
resources, including a serious lack of skilled labour. The
inhabitants understandably look to the United Nations to
resolve their difficulties and have shown some impatience
and sometimes some disappointment at UNTAET' s seeming
inability to respond to their expectations at a faster pace.

Local expectations in this regard tend to focus on
UNTAET's recruitment for public services. A drastic
expansion of this recruitment might provide limited,
temporary relief, but it would create in East Timor a public
sector that the small country would not be able to sustain.
UNTAET has increased its efforts to explain to the public
its position on this issue, which is fully supported by the
National Consultative Council. In this context, a public
meeting was held in Dili two days ago, which was attended
by representatives of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT), the Church and youth organizations.
Mr. Xanana Gusmao, President of the CNRT, spoke at
length about the need to keep the future civil service of
East Timor lean and urged the East Timorese to organize
themselves in order to avail themselves of assistance being
made available to promote private enterprise on the island.

So far UNTAET has registered 1,200 private
businesses, and a number of initiatives are under way aimed
at restoring trade and business activities and at promoting
a favourable business climate. To this end, UNTAET is in
the process of establishing an investment promotion unit,
which will serve as a focal point for potential investors in
East Timor. To encourage East Timorese enterprise,
UNTAET, together with the World Bank and Banco
Nacional Ultramarine, the Portuguese bank, have signed a
small and medium enterprise loan agreement that provides
for the disbursement of between $500 and $50,000 in loans
to East Timorese entrepreneurs.

UNTAET is in the process of establishing local
employment service offices in Dili and Baucau to provide
assistance to those seeking employment.

We reported last month on UNTAET's quick-impact
project scheme for the repair of local infrastructure, which
now provides employment to some 2,750 East Timorese.
On 13 April, the World Bank and the Asian Development
Bank launched the community empowerment project that
we mentioned here at the last briefing. Representatives who
will determine the priorities for this work have been elected
in 5 of the 13 districts, and the first cash disbursement of
$3,000 each was made to the village councils in those
districts. About $20,000, on average, will eventually be
disbursed per village, based on local project proposals.
Bilateral efforts are also under way, including the United
States Agency for International Development-funded
Transitional Employment Programme, which is designed
to create 15,000 jobs for a period of six weeks. Subject
to the outcome of this programme, similar follow-on
programmes are envisaged.

On reconstruction, some $30 million has been
allocated from the World Bank/Asian Development Bank
trust fund for emergency reconstruction of roads, ports
and power facilities. During the next three weeks, $4
million will be disbursed from the UNTAET Trust Fund
for capital expenditures, such as the reconstruction of
government premises. The bidding process for 21 priority
rehabilitation projects has begun. The total amount will be
between $7 million and $8 million. UNTAET has entered
into an agreement with the United Nations Office for
Project Services (UNOPS) to undertake procurement for
the East Timorese Administration for the implementation
of these projects.

The National Consultative Council has continued to
meet and has held a number of informal sessions on the
budget for East Timor. A first draft of a contemporary
criminal procedure code for East Timor is under
preparation and will be presented shortly to the National
Consultative Council. Other items currently under
consideration include vehicle registration, the
establishment of a broadcasting system, a regulation
concerning non-governmental organizations and the
establishment of representative offices for foreign
Governments. In an effort to promote transparency and
broaden understanding of how the National Consultative
Council works, East Timorese groups are now being
invited to observe its proceedings.

Turning to public administration, the recruitment of
civil servants is progressing. Since its inauguration on 25
March, the Public Service Commission has adopted a
number of decisions regarding conditions of service,
working hours, annual leave, public holidays, maternity
and sick leave. The number of public servants receiving
stipends from UNTAET pending the establishment of a
salary scale has risen from 2,500 to 4,221 since last
month. The salaries of some 7,000 primary school
teachers are being paid by UNTAET and the United
Nations Children's Fund. The number of students
attending school has now reached 140,000, which is about
85 per cent of the number of students who had been
enrolled in East Timorese schools before the ballot last
August.

 

To provide greater representation to East Timorese in
the administration, suitably qualified and experienced
individuals will be hired through the Public Service
Commission and appointed as deputy district administrators
working closely with the UNTAET District Administrators.
Other steps include the formation of provisional district
advisory councils to provide the East Timorese with policy
advice at the district level.

On 6 April, eight additional judges and four
prosecutors were appointed to the judiciary in East Timor.
There are now 16 judges and eight prosecutors, including
appointments to District Courts in Oecussi and Baucau.
Eight public defenders have also been hired.

On 7 April, the Government of Indonesia and
UNTAET concluded a Memorandum of Understanding
concerning cooperation in legal, judicial and human rights
matters. This Memorandum, which represents an important
and positive development, provides for mutual assistance
between UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia, in
particular regarding access to evidence and witnesses, to
facilitate the prosecution of crimes. The High
Commissioner for Human Rights has sent a mission to
Indonesia to develop a project of support for the
prosecution of human rights violations, notably those
committed in East Timor last year.

I wish to say a word about the present strength of the
mission. At present, there are 626 international staff in
UNTAET, 1,400 local staff, 228 United Nations volunteers
and over 1,100 civilian police officers out of the 1,640
authorized, as well as over 8,000 troops and 198 military
observers. UNTAET is currently reviewing the possibility
of reducing the strength of the military component starting
this summer. The result of this review will, of course, be
brought to the attention of the Security Council in due
course.

To conclude, I would like to say a few words about
the issue of benchmarks that need to be achieved on the
path to independence. UNTAET has been consulting closely
with the East Timorese on this issue. The key targets which
have been identified include the drawing up of a
constitution, the election of a legislature and Government,
laying the foundations of a legal system and establishing a
functioning administration, including the establishment of
the judicial system and police, as well as sound financial
institutions. In addition, relations with East Timor's
neighbours should be put on a sound basis by the time the
territory becomes independent.

Another important issue that has recently come to
the fore relates to security. It will be recalled that the
National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) had
originally envisaged that East Timor would not have
armed forces, except for security personnel associated
with the police. That position has changed and the CNRT
is now considering and advocating the establishment of a
national defence or security force, including small naval
and air components, that would be based on the members
of Falintil, who remain, for the time being, cantoned in
Aileu. Mr. Xanana Gusmao has written to the Secretary-
General on this matter. This is obviously a complex and
very sensitive issue, which has domestic as well as
external implications. UNTAET is currently studying this
carefully in consultation with the CNRT and others
concerned. We will revert to it in due course.

The consultations with the National Consultative
Council have also been focusing on the sequence in
which these matters are to be addressed and to what
extent they should be resolved before independence.
Understandably, there is considerable debate among the
East Timorese on this issue and it will be an important
item on the agenda of the Congress of the CNRT, which
is scheduled to take place in August.

