Today's Security Council meeting on women and peace and security is especially important this year, as it coincides with our celebrations of the seventy- fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the twentieth anniversary of the Council's adoption of the historic resolution 1325 (2000), which continues to serve as the basis for highlighting the important role that women play and their active participation in preventive diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post- conflict peacebuilding. Significant progress has been made towards strengthening the role of women in maintaining international peace and security. This progress is evident in the integration of the women and peace and security agenda into the various areas of the work of the United Nations, because it is one of the sectoral issues associated with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as well as in related efforts to implement Goal 5 of the Agenda. At the same time, at the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on Women and the Beijing Platform for Action, it became evident that, despite the great strides made in promoting the role of women and their participation in the political, social and economic arenas, the international community must do more to empower women to assume a role worthy of them, particularly in relation to peace and security issues. The Security Council should attach the utmost importance to this in the near future. The reports of the Secretary-General clearly indicate that women's participation in United Nations peacekeeping missions is low, accounting for 4.2 per cent of overall staff, and that very few women participate in negotiations aimed at preventing, containing or resolving conflicts. Despite the progress achieved towards granting women the opportunities they deserve to assume leadership positions at the United Nations, women in many of our countries have yet to assume positions commensurate with their outstanding professional potential as a result of archaic cultural or religious norms. At the regional level, the League of Arab States has been working tirelessly to support the Security Council and the United Nations in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) since it was adopted. The League of Arab States has issued several strategies and recommendations on protecting Arab women and promoting their role, especially in the area of peace and security. In that connection, I would like to note that the Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level adopted the strategy for the protection of Arab women at its 144th session, in 2015. It constitutes a regional strategy and executive action plan for the protection of Arab women, as well as a fundamental platform for raising awareness of regional and international resolutions among officials and relevant stakeholders and for implementing those resolutions by providing protection to women and girls in the Arab region, based on the fundamental pillars of the strategy. Those pillars include supporting active participation by women and young women and promoting their assumption of leadership roles; preventing conflict and eliminating all forms of violence against women; and ensuring that women and girls have their relief needs met promptly. The League, in cooperation with the United Nations and its specialized agencies for women's affairs, supports the promotion and empowerment of women and their assumption of a fully active role in political, security, economic and social matters. It extends this support by organizing joint meetings and intensifying Arab efforts to identify and address shortcomings within a regional framework that makes it possible to benefit from shared experiences. In this context, I would like to refer to the first Ministerial Conference on Women and Achieving Peace and Security, held by the League of Arab States in 2016. Several important recommendations on the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda were adopted at the Conference. Accordingly, and in view of the special circumstances of Arab women in conflict zones in our region - including Syria, Libya, Yemen, Iraq, Somalia and elsewhere - the Council of the League adopted a resolution at the ministerial level entitled "Formation of the Emergency Committee for the Protection of Women during Armed Conflicts in the Arab region", at its 151st session, held in March 2019. Moreover, the Network of Arab Women Peace Mediators was established as a mechanism of the Arab Women's Committee to work in concert with many similar mechanisms in other regions. The Network facilitates the exchange of experiences and enables members to benefit from shared experiences, in coordination and close cooperation with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia. The Organization is celebrating several milestones in its history this year, including the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The League of Arab States urges the international community to seize this important occasion to redouble its efforts to strengthen the role of women and their empowerment in future, in line with the theme of this historic United Nations session, "The Future We Want"; to uphold the full rights of women in various areas; and to ensure that they participate actively, especially in senior leadership positions, and are represented in decision-making, conflict prevention and resolution and post- conflict peacebuilding efforts. By the time we meet again next year, we hope that women will have accomplished even more, overcome more challenges and become active partners in achieving international peace and security.
