I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Helen Meagher La Lime for her informative briefing. I would also like to express Estonia's strong support for the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and for the work of the Special Representative. Estonia is concerned about the lack of political stability in Haiti. More progress is needed in setting a consensual reform agenda and ensuring free, fair and transparent elections. Moving forward with the political process requires a comprehensive dialogue that results in a national consensus. We urge that stronger measures be taken against insecurity and impunity. Despite some progress, justice has still not been met. The cases of the Raboteau massacre, Lilavois, Grand Ravine, La Saline and Bel Air prove the lack of accountability for human rights violations and abuses. Impunity is also a contributing factor to the increase in gang-related violence. We reiterate the importance of enhancing accountability and call on the Government of Haiti to modernize the justice system. Judicial institutions need to be strengthened to ensure that all cases are properly investigated and perpetrators are held accountable for their crimes. We welcome the appointment of a new Minister-delegate for Human Rights and the Fight against Extreme Poverty. That is a sign of the Government's commitment to strengthening national policies on human rights. We encourage the authorities to support the establishment of an office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Haiti. In a long-term perspective, that would help to maintain what has already been achieved. We commend all measures taken by the Government of Haiti to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic. It is of the utmost importance to address the socioeconomic impacts of the pandemic, which has increased the vulnerability and inequality of the people of Haiti. Implementing the United Nations-supported assessment and recovery plan can be a great support for Haiti in dealing with the already dire situation. Haiti and its people deserve a stable State with democracy, the rule of law and sustainable development. That is what we hope the Government of Haiti will strive for. More important, that is what the Haitian people have the right to expect from their political leaders. In conclusion, we encourage all parties to continue to work in a constructive spirit. We remain hopeful that continued efforts will bring about a better future for Haiti.
