Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, let me express
our solidarity with the Government of Sweden and
our condolences in connection with the victims of the
attack this morning in Stockholm.

It bears repeating that the attack conducted on
Khan Shaykhun on 4 April was ruthless and cruel,
with a high death toll that included many children.
It is a vile action that Italy and the European Union
have firmly condemned and that add to Al-Assad's
repeated violations of the ceasefire and the acts of
violence repeatedly perpetrated by his armed forces
against civilians.

The Government of Italy is closely following the
events that are unfolding in the Mediterranean in
consideration of its many and direct interests in the
stability of the region, where we are also playing a role
as the security provider for the international community.

As Foreign Minister Alfano stated this morning,
Italy understands the reasons for the United States'
military action, which was proportionate in time and
manner and a response to a prolonged sense of impunity
that is completely unacceptable. It is also a deterrent
to the risk of any further use of chemical weapons in
Syria, in addition to the cases already ascertained by
the United Nations, for which there already should have
been a prompt and meaningful response, including
in terms of accountability, which the Council must
continue to seek.

It is now, we believe, necessary and urgent to bring
together all the main actors involved in the Syrian
crisis so that they can work together to finally achieve
a political solution that will free the Syrian people from
of the tragedy that they been suffering for the past
six years.

We must take a forward-looking approach. Italy
calls on the international community to continue
and redouble its efforts to achieve a United Nations-
led political transition in Syria, in compliance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex). This remains the
only way out of the crisis and the only way to avoid
further violence and further tragedies in the country.

We believe that all parties must now leverage
all their influence so as to facilitate a real ceasefire,
ensure full access to humanitarian aid and promote a
process aimed at progressively building trust between
the Syrian parties.

All of the different tracks of the Syrian issue - the
non-proliferation of chemical weapons, cessation of
hostilities, the fight against terrorism, humanitarian
access and political talks - can advance only if the
Security Council is united. As an elected member of
the Council, Italy will continue to work towards this
strategic goal.

