The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lomaia
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Matassek (Germany) took the seat reserved
for him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/88, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/2009/69, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1839 (2008).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1866 (2009).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
09-23 802

