Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative taken by Lithuania to convene
this Security Council briefing on combatting foreign
terrorist fighters. I welcome you, Mr. President, to
New York to preside over this meeting. I would like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador
Van Bohemen, Chair of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities;
Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite, Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee; and Mr. Jiirgen Stock,
Secretary General of INTERPOL, for their briefings.

Currently, the international counter-terrorism
situation is grave. Regional conflicts have provided
fertile soil for terrorist and extremist organizations.
The organizational structure of terrorist forces has
become more decentralized, with new forms and means
of conducting terrorist activities. The phenomenon
of the transnational flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and the use by terrorist organizations of the Internet to
conduct terrorist activities have become more serious.
Many young people, incited by extreme ideology, have
joined extremist and terrorist activities.

Terrorism is the current enemy of humankind as
a whole. The international community should closely
cooperate and take effective action to combat that
scourge. International counter-terrorism activities
should give full play to the leading role of the United
Nations and the Security Council, observe the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of countries so as to solidify the widest possible
common understanding among Member States and
take coordinated actions. International counter-
terrorism activities should uphold uniform standards.
Terrorism in whatever form, wherever, whenever and
against whomever or whatsoever it is conducted, must
be resolutely fought against. There must be no double
standards, and still less should terrorism be linked to
specific ethnic groups or religions.

International counter-terrorism activities should
address both the symptoms and the root causes of
terrorism. On the one hand, we should strengthen
information-exchange regarding the new forms,
developments and trends of terrorism so as to establish
and adopt appropriate responses in a timely manner. On
the other hand, we should take integrated measures in
the political, security, economic and ideological fields,
especially to commit ourselves to eliminating the root
causes and breeding grounds of terrorism.

Recently, the notable increase in the number and
movement of foreign terrorist fighters has caused
increasing harm and become a new topic for and
challenge to ongoing international counter-terrorism
endeavours. The presence of foreign terrorist fighters
has exacerbated the intensity of regional conflicts and
made it more difficult to resolve them. It seriously
threatens the stability and security of countries of
origin, transit and destination, and poses an enormous
potential threat ofthe spread ofterrorism. China wishes
to make four observations concerning our efforts to
effectively curtail the transnational flow of foreign
terrorist fighters.

First, we should greatly strengthen international
cooperation through multilateral and bilateral
mechanisms. We should fully leverage the advantages
of the United Nations and relevant international
organizations and establish a counter-terrorism
database as soon as possible so as to share intelligence
resources. Various countries, in particular those
bordering on conflict zones, should strengthen border
control and law enforcement cooperation so as to cut
off the flow of terrorists. Countries should strengthen
their cooperation in financial regulation so as to block
the channels of terrorist financing.

Secondly, we should resolutely fight against the
use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. In recent
years, terrorist organizations have consistently used
the Internet and other new media to spread extremist
ideologies and plot terrorist activities, causing serious
harm. The international community should take
effective measures to combat the use by terrorist
organizations of the Internet to publish audio and video
materials portraying terrorist violence, spread extremist
ideologies, recruit fighters, raise funds and plan and
conduct terrorist activities. Governments should
effectively implement the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions and strengthen their
regulation of the Internet. Internet companies and
operators must exercise self-discipline. We need to
formulate a global code of conduct for businesses in
that area as soon as possible.

Thirdly, we must remain highly vigilant against
the backflow of terrorist fighters, which could pose a
serious threat to the countries and regions concerned,
and even to international peace and stability. The
international community should give its full attention
to that problem, strengthen coordination and effectively
respond to the problem of the backflow of foreign
terrorist fighters.

Fourthly, countries should work together to punish
those who spread extremist ideologies and close facilities
used for that purpose, in accordance with the law. The
United Nations and the international community should
energetically advocate the spirit of intercivilizational
dialogue characterized by mutual respect, openness
and tolerance; create a social environment in which
different ethnic groups, cultures and religions treat
each other equally and co-exist harmoniously; and
build a new kind of international relations with good
will and cooperation at their core.

Chinese President Xi Jinping has stressed that
China will push forward with parallel counter-terrorism
efforts at the international and domestic levels. China
will continue to strictly implement the relevanty
Security Council resolutions, step up its efforts to fight
terrorism in accordance with the law, and severely
punish violent and terrorist crimes. China will continue
to take an active part in and promote counter-terrorism
cooperation at the bilateral and multilateral levels
and, within the limits of its capacities, will provide
developing countries with capacity-building and
material assistance. China is ready to join with other
members of the international community in responding
to the threats and challenges posed by terrorism, and
to work together to maintain international peace and
stability.
