The President: I would now like to make a brief
statement in my national capacity.

I will not review all the elements that have been
discussed. I think we have a pretty clear idea of the
kinds of things that need to be done in West Africa. But
I did want to note that we are not talking about a
natural disaster here; we are talking about a man-made
disaster that was created by the people of the region by
and large, many of whom are still there. It cannot be
solved outside the region. We need to find a way to
support those in Sierra Leone and in the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) who
are looking for a solution.

The United States is committed to that. We have
devoted significant resources to this effort and we will
continue to do so. We want to see results on the
ground - practical, concrete results - in the areas of
humanitarian assistance and human rights. That
includes providing the safety required for refugees to
return, which has been promised for so long, as well as
results in the area of security and in the political
field- first and foremost in security, because that is
the precondition to moving forward.

We were glad to hear what Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno had to say about the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). UNAMSIL
needs to be credible. It is an instrument of the resolve
of the international community and the belief that the
crisis in Sierra Leone pits an elected Government
against a violent insurgency. The goal is, and has to
remain, the extension of the authority of that
Government.

We found the Fall report very thought-provoking.
It addresses many of the concerns that also came up in
the Security Council mission report, now more than six
months ago. I think we all agree on the need for
coordination and integration. That approach is clear,
but it is not clear that the right arrangements are in
place, or coming into place, even after those six to
eight months. We look forward to progress in that area.

We also strongly support the efforts made in the
field by ECOWAS to deal with the problems that we
have discussed today. Its role is essential.

With regard to the idea of extending UNAMSIL's
mandate throughout the region, like the United
Kingdom and some others we are doubtful that that is
the right way to go. In our View, what we really need at
this point is a stronger political process and political
effort in the region, as foreseen by ECOWAS and in the
tasking of its mediation committee. We hope for results
from that effort.

Looking to the future, the United States will not
treat victim and aggressor in the same fashion. We will
not support a party's abdicating a peace agreement
while demanding its protections and privileges. We
oppose treating President Taylor of Liberia, who is
responsible for the founding and maintenance of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), as both arsonist
and firefighter in Sierra Leone. We take note of the
sanctions that have come into effect. Like others, we
hope for their early implementation, and we hope for
early and convincing actions by the Government of
Liberia to stop destabilizing its nature and persecuting
its own people.

The President: I now resume my functions as
President of the Security Council.

I shall give the floor to our guests to respond to
the questions asked and the comments made. Again,
unfortunately, I must remind our guests of the hour.

I call on Mr. Guehenno.


