Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your laudable effort to organize this
public debate on a very timely subject: the role of civil
society in post-conflict peace-building. We are also
pleased to note the participation of many civil society
actors and the President of the Economic and Social
Council in this debate.

The issues of, inter alia, rebuilding State
institutions, promoting democracy, restoring essential
services, resuming economic and social life, promoting
the return and reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons and carrying out disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for ex-combatants are
considerations that led us to engage in this debate on
the role of civil society in post-conflict peace-building
from the perspective of the country approach and
interaction that must be developed between the
Security Council and the national scene to lead that
process.

The complexity of post-conflict peace-building
processes requires a division of labour based on the
comparative advantage of the presence of various
actors as a way to ensure synergy among various actors
of civil society - heterogeneous by nature - and
other interested parties. In that context, civil society
has its role to play in all areas covered by the peace
process, since all the actors and the relations among
them constitute the framework of the social and
economic life of a given country and thus the well
from which nations draw their human resources to
build peace and achieve prosperity.

In these conditions, we would emphasize that
civil society is a very important interlocutor for
achieving peace and establishing peace processes as a
whole and in all aspects. Civil society can also
effectively play the role of bringing pressure to bear to
mobilize social non-violence and ensure good
governance by promoting transparency and
streamlining the use of public resources.

With regard to humanitarian and social
assistance, civil society can help meet the challenge of
providing the basic needs of the population,
particularly the reintegration of refugees and displaced
persons and the rehabilitation of former combatants. In
that context, its role can be crucial in identifying needs
and in mobilizing national and international solidarity
for planning the return and the reintegration of
displaced persons. Civil society can also undertake
relief activities with international partners on the
ground, to provide emergency assistance to affected
populations and ensure support to reinforce social
welfare activities, as well as income-generating
activities.

The Security Council could expressly stipulate in
peacekeeping operations mandates the need for civil
society to fully play a role that is commensurate with
its potential, as well as the need to ensure that civil
society has the assistance necessary to become a truly
effective partner in peace processes. That is
particularly true for the least developed countries of
Africa, where civil society organizations have few
opportunities to mobilize resources locally, given their
limited means.

We are also of the view that we must strengthen
Security Council members' recourse to missions, in
follow-up of peacekeeping missions, by sending small
Council missions to concerned countries, and thereby
encourage greater interaction with civil society on the
ground. The objective envisaged would be to gather as
much firsthand information as possible to assess as
well as possible the progress made and to guide the
Council's actions in order to make them as effective as
possible.

Holding well-organized local Arria-formula
meetings on the ground could contribute to that. That
approach should enable a better grasp of analytical
elements before embarking on the planning and the
implementation of exit strategies of complex
peacekeeping operations. It should also allow for better
planning between the emergency phase and the
stabilization phase strategies in the medium and long
terms and facilitate relay and coordination among all
facets of the United Nations system.

Civil society should also ensure that national
reconciliation be a priority, for example, through truth
and reconciliation commissions, which are critical
instruments. Civil society has a distinct comparative
advantage in that area, particularly through religious
organizations whose moral authority can be very
important. In order to succeed, national reconciliation
efforts must be conducted in a manner removed from
all feelings of adversity; rather, they must be conducted
in terms of promoting harmony and persuasion to
enable people to understand the need for justice and to
facilitate victim identification and resource
mobilization for their compensation. Thus, the
involvement of civil society can be a barometer of the
degree of ownership of the peace-building process.

