The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

Russia supported the Council's adoption today
of resolution 2423 (2018), which extends the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Our
decision was based on the importance of maintaining
consensus in the Security Council and on the
understanding that in helping the Malian authorities
to rectify the situation in the country, MINUSMA
is carrying out a very important task. However, our
agreement with the resolution does not mean that we
are willing to subscribe to a number ofits provisions. In
particular, we oppose the use of the term "intelligence"
in relation to the mandate of peacekeepers, based on
the fact that the terminology should correspond exactly
to the words of the report of the General Assembly's
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations
(A/72/ 19).

We would like to draw the Council's attention to the
resolution's provisions on climate and ecological issues.
We believe that this issue, as it has always been, comes
under the purview of the relevant bodies of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. Let
us not poach from them. Besides that, the Council has
neither the mandate nor the necessary expertise to deal
with such issues. Its main aim, as established in the
Charter of the United Nations, is to examine issues that
directly relate to peace and security. Unfortunately, our
reasoning on this, which other delegations also talked
about during the negotiations on the resolution, was not
taken into consideration. This is therefore another de
facto case ofpenholders abusing their rights. We believe
that a note by the President of the Security Council
aimed at a fair distribution of the relevant powers
would be a good tool for rectifying this situation. The
Russian delegation has circulated such a document and
submitted it to the Council's Informal Working Group
on Documentation and other Procedural Questions.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
