Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We deeply thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ghassan Salame for his
detailed and worrisome briefing about the military and
political situation in Libya.

We thank Ambassador Schulz for his update on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. We appreciate
the work of the delegation of Germany as Chair of
that Committee.

Mr. Salame's briefing clearly revealed that the
military and political continues to deteriorate. The
number of dead, wounded and internally displaced
persons is on the rise. Urban infrastructure is collapsing.
Terrorists are rearing their heads, not to mention the
worsening problem of migration. New dividing lines
are being created and there is an emerging risk of the
country disintegrating altogether.

Let us state frankly that what is taking place is
the destruction of Libyan statehood as a result of
the well-known events that occurred in 2011. Libya
should serve as a reminder of the inadmissibility of
continuing geopolitical experiments. From the very
beginning of the conflict, we have called for regional
and international efforts to focus on the unification of
Libya, including with the aim of consolidating the fight
against terrorism.

Today, the situation in this area is much worse. The
transferral process ofjihadists from Iraq and Syria has
begun, which could turn Libya into one of the major
bases of terrorism in North Africa. Russia has never
had and will never have a hidden agenda with regard to
the Libyan conflict. We support and value our contacts
with all parties, explaining to them our position in
favour of a political settlement. To all our Libyan
interlocutors, we have stressed the fact that only the
United Nations and the Special Representative can play
a central role in this process.

We highly appreciate the efforts of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the courageous
and selfless work of the Special Representative,
Mr. Salame. We support his programme for resolving
the crisis, especially since it includes a key element
that we have supported for many years: the urgent
consolidation of the positions of external players.

The Special Representative's briefing today, as
well as the statement delivered in recent Council
consultations by the High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi, confirms that the migrants are in
a terrible situation, to say the least. We have said many
times that, in order to solve the problem of migration,
we must not fight the migrants themselves but rather
spare no effort in the rehabilitation and recovery of
problematic regions. People will then be able to return
home themselves.

A comprehensive approach is required to solve the
issue of the illegal proliferation of weapons in Libya,
taking into account the fact that the current situation in
this area arises from a flagrant violation of the relevant
provisions of resolution 1973 (2011). We call on all
parties to abandon any unilateral agenda in order to
come together under the auspices of the United Nations
to launch political negotiations that will unite the
country and enable Libyans to develop their own State
and independently manage the wealth of their country.

Once again, we look favourably upon Mr. Salame's
programme for overcoming the crisis. We understand
that it can be implemented only if the key external
actors all play according to the same rules.

