Mr. Powell (United States of America): I would
like to begin by expressing my thanks for the special
effort that each of you made to be here today. This is an
important day for us all as we review the situation with
respect to Iraq and its disarmament obligations under
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002).

Last 8 November, the Council passed resolution
1441 (2002) by a unanimous vote. The purpose of that
resolution was to disarm Iraq of its weapons of mass
destruction. Iraq had already been found guilty of
material breach of its obligations stretching back over
16 previous resolutions and 12 years. Resolution 1441
(2002) was not dealing with an innocent party, but with
a regime that the Council had repeatedly convicted
over the years. Resolution 1441 (2002) gave Iraq one
last chance to come into compliance or to face serious
consequences. No Council member present and voting
on that day had any illusions about the nature and
intent of the resolution or about what "serious
consequences" meant if Iraq did not comply.

To assist in its disarmament, we called on Iraq to
cooperate with returning inspectors from the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). We laid down tough
standards for Iraq to meet, to allow the inspectors to do
their job. The Council placed the burden on Iraq to
comply and disarm, and not on the inspectors to find
that which Iraq has gone out of its way to conceal for
so long. Inspectors are inspectors; they are not
detectives.

I asked for this meeting today for two purposes:
first, to support the core assessments made by Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei. As Mr. Blix reported to the Council
on 27 January,

" Iraq appears not to have come to a genuine
acceptance - not even today - of the
disarmament that was demanded of it".
(S/PV.4692, p. 3)

And as Mr. ElBaradei reported, Iraq's declaration of
7 December

" did not provide any new information relevant
to certain questions that have been outstanding
since 1998". (ibid., p. 10)

My second purpose today is to provide you with
additional information and to share with you what the
United States knows about Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction as well Iraq's involvement in terrorism,
which is also the subject of resolution 1441 (2002) and
other, earlier, resolutions. I might add, at this point,
that we are providing all the relevant information we
can to the inspections teams, for them to do their work.

The material I will present to you comes from a
variety of sources. Some are United States sources and
some are those of other countries. Some of the sources
are technical, such as intercepted telephone
conversations and photos taken by satellites. Other
sources are people who have risked their lives to let the
world know what Saddam Hussain is really up to. I
cannot tell you everything that we know. But what I
can share with you, when combined with what all of us
have learned over the years, is deeply troubling. What
you will see is an accumulation of facts and disturbing
patterns of behaviour. The facts and Iraq's behaviour
demonstrate that Saddam Hussain and his regime have
made no effort to disarm as required by the
international community. Indeed, the facts and Iraq's
behaviour show that Saddam Hussain and his regime
are concealing their efforts to produce more weapons
of mass destruction.

Let me begin by playing a tape for you. What you
are about to hear is a conversation that my Government
monitored. It took place on 26 November 2002, on the
day before United Nations teams resumed inspections
in Iraq. The conversation involves two senior officers,
a colonel and a brigadier general from Iraq's elite
military unit, the Republican Guard.

An audio tape, in Arabic, was played in the
Council Chamber; an English translation
provided by the United States delegation was
projected on screen in the Chamber.

Colonel: Peace. We just have a small
question.

Brigadier General: Yeah.

Colonel: About this committee that is
coming.

Brigadier General: Yeah, yeah.
Colonel: with Mohamed ElBaradei.
Brigadier General: Yeah. Yeah.
Colonel: Yeah.

Brigadier General: Yeah?

Colonel: We have this modified vehicle.
Brigadier General: Yeah.

Colonel: What do we say if one of them
sees it?

Brigadier General: You didn't get a
modified you don't have a modified

Colonel: By God, I have one.
Brigadier General: Which? From the
workshop ?

Colonel: From the Al-Kindi Company.
Brigadier General: What?
Colonel: From Al-Kindi.
Brigadier General: Yeah, yeah. I'll come
to you in the morning. I have some comments.
I'm worried you all have something left.

Colonel: We evacuated everything. We
don't have anything left.

Brigadier General: I will come to you
tomorrow.

Colonel: OK.

Brigadier General: I have a conference at
headquarters. Before I attend the conference I
will come to you.

Mr. Powell (United States of America): Let me
pause to review some of the key elements of the
conversation you have just heard between the two
officers. First, they acknowledge that our colleague,
Mohamed ElBaradei is coming. They know what he is
coming for and they know he is coming the next day.
He is coming to look for things that are prohibited. He
is expecting those gentlemen to cooperate with him and
not hide things. But they are worried: "We have this
modified vehicle. What do we say if one of them sees
it?" What is their concern? Their concern is that it is
something they should not have, something that should
not be seen.

The General is incredulous: "You didn't get a
modified - you don't have one of those, do you?" -
"I have one." - "Which? From where?" - "From the
workshop. From the Al-Kindi Company." -
"What?" - "From Al-Kindi." - "I'll come to see you
in the morning. I'm worried you all have something
left." - "We evacuated everything. We don't have
anything left."

Note what he says: - "We evacuated
everything." We didn't destroy it. We didn't line it up
for inspection. We didn't turn it into the inspectors. We
evacuated it to make sure it was not around when the
inspectors showed up. "I will come to you tomorrow."

The Al-Kindi Company: This is a company that is
well known to have been involved in prohibited
weapons systems activity.

Let me play another tape for you. As you will
recall, the inspectors found 12 empty chemical
warheads on 16 January. On 20 January, four days
later, Iraq promised the inspectors it would search for
more. You will now hear an officer from Republican
Guard headquarters issuing an instruction to an officer
in the field. Their conversation took place just last
week, on 30 January.
An audio tape, in Arabic, was played in the
Council Chamber; an English translation
provided by the United States delegation was
projected on screen in the Chamber.

Headquarters officer: Sir
Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: There is a directive
of the [Republican] Guard chief of staff at the
conference today

Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: They are inspecting
the ammunition you have.

Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: for the possibility
there are forbidden ammo.

Officer in the field: Yes?

Headquarters officer: For the possibility
there is by chance forbidden ammo.

Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: And we sent you a
message to inspect the scrap areas and the
abandoned areas.

Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: After you have
carried out what is contained in the message
destroy the message.

Officer in the field: Yes.

Headquarters officer: Because I don't
want anyone to see this message.

Officer in the field: OK. OK.
Headquarters officer: Thanks.
Officer in the field: Goodbye.


Mr. Powell (United States of America): Let me
pause again and review the elements of that message:
"They are inspecting the ammunition you have." -

"Yes." - "For the possibility there are forbidden
ammo. For the possibility there is by chance forbidden
ammo?" - "Yes." - "We sent you a message

yesterday to clear out all of the areas. The scrap areas.
The abandoned areas. Make sure there is nothing
there".

Remember the first message: "Evacuate it." This
is all part of a system of hiding things, moving things
out of the way and making sure they have left nothing
behind.

You go a little further into this message and you
see the specific instructions from headquarters: "After
you have carried out what is contained in this message,
destroy the message; because I don't want anyone to
see this message." - "OK. OK." Why? Why? That
message would have verified to the inspectors that they
have been trying to turn over things. They were
looking for things, but they do not want that message
seen, because they were trying to clean up the area and
leave no evidence behind of the presence of weapons
of mass destruction; and they can claim that nothing
was there, and the inspectors can look all they want
and they will find nothing.

This effort to hide things from the inspectors is
not one or two isolated events. Quite the contrary, this
is part and parcel of a policy of evasion and deception
that goes back 12 years - a policy set at the highest
levels of the Iraqi regime.

We know that Saddam Hussain has what is called
"a Higher Committee for Monitoring the Inspection
Teams". Think about that - Iraq has a high-level
committee to monitor the inspectors who were sent in
to monitor Iraq's disarmament. Not to cooperate with
them, not to assist them, but to spy on them and keep
them from doing their jobs.

The committee reports directly to Saddam
Hussain. It is headed by Iraq's Vice President, Taha
Yasin Ramadan. Its members include Saddam
Hussain's son, Qusay. This Committee also includes
Lieutenant-General Amir Al-Sa'di, an advisor to
Saddam. In case this name isn't immediately familiar
to you, General Sa'di has been the Iraqi regime's
primary point of contact for Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei. It was General Sa'di who last fall
publicly pledged that Iraq was prepared to cooperate
unconditionally with inspectors. Quite the contrary,
Sa'di's job is not to cooperate. It is to deceive - not to
disarm, but to undermine the inspectors; not to support
them, but to frustrate them and to make sure they learn
nothing.

We have learned a lot about the work of this
special committee. We learned that, just prior to the
return of inspectors last November, the regime had
decided to resume what we heard called "the old game
of cat-and-mouse".

For example, let me focus on the now famous
declaration that Iraq submitted to this Council on 7
December. Iraq never had any intention of complying
with the Council's mandate. Instead, Iraq planned to
use the declaration to overwhelm us and to overwhelm
the inspectors with useless information about Iraq's
permitted weapons, so that we would not have time to
pursue its prohibited weapons. Iraq's goal was to give
us in this room, to give those of us on this Council, the
false impression that the inspection process was
working.

You saw the result. Mr. Blix pronounced the
12,200-page declaration rich in volume but poor in
information and practically devoid of new evidence.
Could any member of this Council honestly rise in
defence of this false declaration?

Everything we have seen and heard indicates that,
instead of cooperating actively with the inspectors to
ensure the success of their mission, Saddam Hussain
and his regime are busy doing all they possibly can to
ensure that inspectors succeed in finding absolutely
nothing.

My colleagues, every statement I make today is
backed up by sources. Solid sources. These are not
assertions. What we are giving you are facts and
conclusions based on solid intelligence.

I will cite some examples, and these are from
human sources. Orders were issued to Iraq's security
organizations, as well as to Saddam Hussain's own
office, to hide all correspondence with the Organization
of Military Industrialization (OMI), the organization
that oversees Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
activities: make sure there are no documents left which
would connect you to the OMI.

We know that Saddam's son Qusay ordered the
removal of all prohibited weapons from Saddam's
numerous palace complexes.

We know that Iraqi Government officials,
members of the ruling Ba'ath party and scientists have
hidden prohibited items in their homes. Other key files
from military and scientific establishments have been
placed in cars that are being driven around the
countryside by Iraqi intelligence agents to avoid
detection.

An image was projected on screen.

Thanks to intelligence provided to them, the
inspectors recently found dramatic confirmation of
these reports. When they searched the home of an Iraqi
nuclear scientist, they uncovered roughly 2,000 pages
of documents. You see them here being brought out of
the home and placed in United Nations hands. Some of
the material is classified and related to Iraq's nuclear
programme.

Tell me, answer me: are the inspectors to search
the house of every Government official, every Ba'ath
party member and every scientist in the country to find
the truth and to get the information they need to satisfy
the demands of our Council?

Our sources tell us that in some cases, the hard
drives of computers at Iraqi weapons facilities were
replaced. Who took the hard drives? Where did they
go? What is being hidden? Why? There is only one
answer to the "why" - it is to deceive, to hide, to keep
from the inspectors.

Numerous human sources tell us that the Iraqis
are moving not just documents and hard drives but also
weapons of mass destruction to keep them from being
found by inspectors.

We know from sources that while we were here in
this Council Chamber debating resolution 1441 (2002)
last fall, a missile brigade outside Baghdad was
dispersing rocket launchers and warheads containing
biological warfare agent to various locations in western
Iraq. Most of the launchers and warheads had been
hidden in large groves of palm trees and were to be
moved every one to four weeks to escape detection. We
also have satellite photos that indicate that banned
materials have recently been moved from a number of
Iraqi facilities for weapons of mass destruction.

Let me say a word about satellite images before I
show a couple. The photos I am about to show you are
sometimes hard for the average person to interpret.
Indeed, hard for me. The painstaking work of photo
analysis takes experts with years and years of
experience poring for hours and hours over light tables.
But as I show you these images I will explain what
they mean, what they indicate to our imagery
specialists.

An image was projected on screen.

Let us look at this one. It is about a weapons
munition facility - a facility that holds ammunition -
at a place called Taji. This is one of about 65 such
facilities in Iraq. We know that this one has housed
chemical munitions. In fact, it is where the Iraqis
recently came up with the additional four chemical
weapons shells. Here you see 15 munitions bunkers in
yellow and red outlines. The four that are in the red
squares represent active chemical munitions bunkers.

How do I know this? How can I say this? Let me
give you a closer look. Look at the image on the left.
Two images were projected on screen.

On the left is a close-up of one of the four
chemical munitions bunkers. The two arrows indicate
the presence of sure signs that these bunkers are storing
chemical munitions. The arrow at the top that says
"Security" points to a facility that is a signature item
for this kind of bunker. Inside the facility are special
guards and special equipment to monitor any leakage
that might come out of the bunker. The truck you also
see is a signature item. It is a decontamination vehicle,
in case something goes wrong. This is characteristic of
those four bunkers. The special security facility and the
decontamination vehicle will be in the area; if not at
any one or the other of them, it is moving around those
four. It moves as needed, as people are working in the
different bunkers.

Now look at the photo on the right. You are
looking at two of those sanitized bunkers. The
signature vehicles are gone, the tents are gone. It has
been cleaned up. This was done on 22 December as the
United Nations inspection team was arriving. You can
see the inspection vehicles arriving in the lower portion
of the picture on the right. The bunkers were clean
when the inspectors got there. They found nothing.

This sequence of events raises the worrisome
suspicion that Iraq had been tipped off to the
forthcoming inspections at Taji. As it did throughout
the 1990s, Iraq today is, we know, actively using its
considerable intelligence capabilities to help hide its
illicit activities. From our sources, we know that the
inspectors are under constant surveillance by an army
of Iraqi intelligence operatives. Iraq is relentlessly
attempting to tap all their communications, both voice
and electronic.

I call my colleagues' attention to the fine paper
that the United Kingdom distributed yesterday, which
describes in exquisite detail Iraqi deception activities.

In this next example, you will see the type of
concealment activity Iraq has undertaken in response to
the resumption of inspections. Indeed, in November
2002, just when the inspections were about to resume,
this type of activity spiked. Here are three examples.

An image was projected on screen.

At this ballistic missile site on 10 November, we
saw a cargo truck preparing to move ballistic missile
components.

An image was projected on screen.
At this biological weapons-related facility, on 25
November, just two days before inspections resumed,
this truck caravan appeared - something we almost
never see at this facility, and we monitor it carefully
and regularly.

An image was projected on screen.

At this ballistic missile facility - again, two days
before inspections began - five large cargo trucks
appeared, along with the truck-mounted crane to move
missiles.

We saw this kind of housecleaning at close to 30
sites. Days after this activity, the vehicles and the
equipment that I have just highlighted disappeared and
the site returned to patterns of normalcy. We do not
know precisely what Iraq was moving, but the
inspectors already knew about these sites, so Iraq knew
that they would be coming.

We must ask ourselves: Why would Iraq suddenly
move equipment of this nature before inspections if it
was anxious to demonstrate what it had or did not
have? Remember the first intercept, in which two Iraqis
talked about the need to hide a "modified vehicle" from
the inspectors? Where did Iraq take all of this
equipment? Why was it not presented to the inspectors?

Iraq also has refused to permit any U-2
reconnaissance flights that would give the inspectors a
better sense of what is being moved before, during and

after inspections. This refusal to allow this kind of
reconnaissance is in direct, specific violation of
operative paragraph 7 of our resolution 1441 (2002).

Saddam Hussain and his regime are not just
trying to conceal weapons; they are also trying to hide
people. You know the basic facts. Iraq has not
complied with its obligation to allow immediate,
unimpeded, unrestricted and private access to all
officials and other persons, as required by resolution
1441 (2002).

The regime allows only interviews with
inspectors in the presence of an Iraqi official - a
"minder." The official Iraqi organization charged with
facilitating inspections announced publicly, and
announced ominously, that "nobody is ready" to leave
Iraq to be interviewed.

Iraqi Vice-President Ramadan accused the
inspectors of conducting espionage - a veiled threat
that anyone cooperating with United Nations inspectors
was committing treason.

Iraq did not meet its obligations under resolution
1441 (2002) to provide a comprehensive list of
scientists associated with its weapons of mass
destruction programmes. Iraq's list was out of date and
contained only about 500 names, despite the fact that
the United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM)
had earlier put together a list of about 3,500 names.

Let me just tell you what a number of human
sources have told us.

Saddam Hussain has directly participated in the
effort to prevent interviews. In early December,
Saddam Hussain had all Iraqi scientists warned of the
serious consequences that they and their families would
face if they revealed any sensitive information to the
inspectors. They were forced to sign documents
acknowledging that divulging information is
punishable by death.

Saddam Hussain also said that scientists should
be told not to agree to leave Iraq. Anyone who agreed
to be interviewed outside Iraq would be treated as a
spy. This violates resolution 1441 (2002).

In mid-November, just before the inspectors
returned, Iraqi experts were ordered to report to the
headquarters of the special security organization to
receive counter-intelligence training. The training
focused on evasion methods, interrogation resistance
techniques, and how to mislead inspectors.

These are not assertions. These are facts,
corroborated by many sources - some of them sources
of the intelligence services of other countries. For
example, in mid-December, weapons experts at one
facility were replaced by Iraqi intelligence agents, who
were to deceive inspectors about the work that was
being done there.

On orders from Saddam Hussain, Iraqi officials
issued a false death certificate for one scientist, and he
was sent into hiding.

In the middle of January, experts at one facility
that was related to weapons of mass destruction were
ordered to stay home from work to avoid the
inspectors. Workers from other Iraqi military facilities
not engaged in illicit weapons projects were to replace
the workers who had been sent home.

A dozen experts have been placed under house
arrest - not in their own houses, but as a group, at one
of Saddam Hussain's "guest houses".

It goes on and on and on.

As the examples I have just presented show, the
information and intelligence we have gathered point to
an active and systematic effort on the part of the Iraqi
regime to keep key materials and people from the
inspectors, in direct violation of resolution 1441
(2002).

The pattern is not just one of reluctant
cooperation. Nor is it merely a lack of cooperation.
What we see is a deliberate campaign to prevent any
meaningful inspection work.

Operative paragraph 4 of resolution 1441 (2002),
which we lingered over so long last fall, clearly states
that "false statements or omissions" in the declaration
and a "failure by Iraq at any time to comply with, and
cooperate fully in the implementation of, this
resolution shall constitute" - and the facts speak for
themselves - "a further material breach of Iraq's
obligations". We wrote it this way to give Iraq an early
test - would they give an honest declaration, and
would they early on indicate a willingness to cooperate
with the inspectors? It was designed to be an early test.
They failed that test.

By this standard - the standard of this operative
paragraph - I believe that Iraq is now in further
material breach of its obligations. I believe that this
conclusion is irrefutable and undeniable. Iraq has now
placed itself in danger of the serious consequences
called for in resolution 1441 (2002).

This body places itself in danger of irrelevance if
it allows Iraq to continue to defy its will without
responding effectively and immediately.

The issue before us is not how much time we are
willing to give the inspectors to be frustrated by Iraqi
obstruction, but how much longer are we willing to put
up with Iraq's non-compliance before we, as the
Council, we, as the United Nations, say: "Enough.
Enough."

The gravity of this moment is matched by the
gravity of the threat that Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction pose to the world.

Let me now turn to those deadly weapons
programmes and describe why they are real and present
dangers to the region and to the world.

First, biological weapons. We have talked
frequently here about biological weapons. By way of
introduction and history, I think there are just three
quick points I need to make.

First, you will recall that it took UNSCOM. four
long and frustrating years to pry - to pry - an
admission out of Iraq that it had biological weapons.
Secondly, when Iraq finally admitted having these
weapons in 1995, the quantities were vast. Less than a
teaspoonful of dry anthrax in an envelope shut down
the United States Senate in the fall of 2001. This forced
several hundred people to undergo emergency medical
treatment and killed two postal workers, just from that
amount - just the quantity I am indicating - that was
inside an envelope.

Iraq declared 8,500 litres of anthrax, but
UNSCOM. estimates that Saddam Hussain could have
produced 25,000 litres. If concentrated into this dry
form, that amount would be enough to fill tens upon
tens upon tens of thousands of teaspoons - and
Saddam Hussain has not verifiably accounted for even
one teaspoonful of this deadly material.

That is my third point, and it is key. The Iraqis
have never accounted for all of the biological agents
they admitted they had and we know they had. They
have never accounted for all the organic material used
to make them. They have not accounted for many of
the weapons filled with these agents, such as their
R-400 bombs.

This is evidence, not conjecture. This is true. This
is all well documented. Mr. Blix told the Council that
Iraq has provided little evidence to verify anthrax
production and no convincing evidence of its
destruction. It should come as no shock, then, that
since Saddam Hussain forced out the last inspectors in
1998, we have amassed much intelligence indicating
that Iraq is continuing to make these weapons.

One of the most worrisome things that emerges
from the thick intelligence file we have on Iraq's
biological weapons is the existence of mobile
production facilities used to make biological agents.
Let me take you inside that intelligence file and share
with you what we know from eyewitness accounts.

We have firsthand descriptions of biological
weapons factories on wheels and on rails. The trucks
and train cars are easily moved and are designed to
evade detection by inspectors. In a matter of months,
they can produce a quantity of biological poison equal
to the entire amount that Iraq claimed to have produced
in the years prior to the Gulf war.

Although Iraq's mobile production programme
began in the mid-1990s, United Nations inspectors at
the time had only vague hints of such programmes.
Confirmation came later, in the year 2000. The source
was an eyewitness: an Iraqi chemical engineer who
supervised one of these facilities. He actually was
present during biological agent production runs. He
also was at the site when an accident occurred in 1998.
Twelve technicians died from exposure to biological
agents.

He reported that, when UNSCOM. was in-country
and inspecting, the biological weapons agent
production always began on Thursdays at midnight
because Iraq thought UNSCOM. would not inspect on
the Muslim holy day - Thursday night through Friday.
He added that this was important because the units
could not be broken down in the middle of a production
run, which had to be completed by Friday evening,
before the inspectors might arrive again. This defector
is currently hiding in another country, with the certain
knowledge that Saddam Hussain will kill him if he
finds him.

His eyewitness account of these mobile
production facilities has been corroborated by other
sources. A second source, an Iraqi civil engineer in a
position to know the details of the programme,
confirmed the existence of transportable facilities
moving on trailers. A third source, also in a position to
know, reported in the summer of 2002 that Iraq had
manufactured mobile production systems mounted on
road-trailer units and on rail cars. Finally, a fourth
source, an Iraqi major who defected, confirmed that
Iraq has mobile biological research laboratories in
addition to the production facilities I mentioned earlier.

An image was projected on screen.

We have diagrammed what our sources reported
about these mobile facilities. Here you see both truck-
mounted and railcar-mounted mobile factories. The
descriptions our sources gave us of the technical
features required by such facilities are highly detailed
and extremely accurate.

An image was projected on screen.

As these drawings based on their descriptions
show, we know what the fermentors look like. We
know what the tanks, pumps, compressors and other
parts look like. We know how they fit together. We
know how they work. And we know a great deal about
the platforms on which they are mounted. As shown in
this diagram, these factories can be concealed easily,
either by moving ordinary looking trucks and railcars
along Iraq's thousands of miles of highway or track or
by parking them in a garage or warehouse, or
somewhere in Iraq's extensive system of underground
tunnels and bunkers.

We know that Iraq has at least seven of these
mobile biological agent factories. The truck-mounted
ones have at least two or three trucks each. That means
that the mobile production facilities are very few -
perhaps 18 trucks that we know of. There may be more,
but perhaps 18 that we know of. Just imagine trying to
find 18 trucks among the thousands and thousands of
trucks that travel the roads of Iraq every single day.

It took the inspectors four years to find out that
Iraq was making biological agents. How long do you
think it will take the inspectors to find even one of
these 18 trucks, without Iraq coming forward as they
are supposed to with the information about these kinds
of capabilities?

These are sophisticated facilities. For example,
they can produce anthrax and botulinum toxin. In fact,
they can produce enough dry biological agent in a
single month to kill thousands upon thousands of
people. Dry agent of this type is the most lethal form
for human beings.

By 1998, United Nations experts agreed that the
Iraqis had perfected drying techniques for their
biological weapons programmes. Now, Iraq has
incorporated this drying expertise into these mobile
production facilities.

We know from Iraq's past admissions that it has
successfully weaponized not only anthrax but also
other biological agents, including botulinum toxin,
aflatoxin and ricin. But Iraq's research efforts did not
stop there. Saddam Hussain has investigated dozens of
biological agents causing diseases such as gas
gangrene, plague, typhus, tetanus, cholera, camelpox
and haemorrhagic fever. And he also has the
wherewithal to develop smallpox.

The Iraqi regime has also developed ways to
disperse lethal biological agents - widely,
indiscriminately. Into the water supply. Into the air. For
example, Iraq had a programme to modify aerial fuel
tanks for Mirage jets. This video of an Iraqi test flight,
obtained by UNSCOM. some years ago, shows an Iraqi
F-l Mirage jet aircraft. Note the spray coming from
beneath the Mirage. That is 2,000 litres of simulated
anthrax that a jet is spraying.

A video was projected on screen.

In 1995, an Iraqi military officer, Mujahid Saleh
Abdul Latif, told inspectors that Iraq intended the spray
tanks to be mounted onto a MiG-21 that had been
converted into an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV).
UAVs outfitted with spray tanks constitute an ideal
method for launching a terrorist attack using biological
weapons. Iraq admitted to producing four spray tanks,
but to this day it has provided no credible evidence that
they were destroyed - evidence that was required by
the international community.

There can be no doubt that Saddam Hussain has
biological weapons and the capability to rapidly
produce more, many more. And he has the ability to
dispense these lethal poisons and diseases in ways that
can cause massive death and destruction.

If biological weapons seem too terrible to
contemplate, chemical weapons are equally chilling.
UNMOVIC already laid out much of this, and it is
documented for all of us to read in UNSCOM's 1999
report on the subject. Let me set the stage with three
key points that all of us need to keep in mind.

First, Saddam Hussain has used these horrific
weapons on another country and on his own people.
In fact, in the history of chemical warfare no country
has had more battlefield experience with chemical
weapons since the First World War than Saddam
Hussain's Iraq.

 

Secondly, as with biological weapons, Saddam
Hussain has never accounted for vast amounts of
chemical weaponry: 550 artillery shells with mustard,
30,000 empty munitions and enough precursors to
increase his stockpile to as much as 500 tons of
chemical agents. If we consider just one category of
missing weaponry - 6,500 bombs from the Iran-Iraq
war - UNMOVIC says the amount of chemical agent
in them would be on the order of 1,000 tons. These
quantities of chemical weapons are now unaccounted
for. Mr. Blix has quipped that "Mustard gas is not
marmalade. You are supposed to know what you did
with it." We believe Saddam Hussain knows what he
did with it, and he has not come clean with the
international community. We have evidence that these
weapons existed. What we do not have is evidence
from Iraq that they have been destroyed or where they
are. That is what we are still waiting for.

The third point: Iraq's record on chemical
weapons is replete with lies. It took years for Iraq
finally to admit that it had produced four tons of the
deadly nerve agent VX. A single drop of VX on the
skin will kill in minutes. Four tons. The admission
came out only after inspectors collected documentation
as a result of the defection of Hussain Kamal, Saddam
Hussain's late son-in-law. UNSCOM. also gained
forensic evidence that Iraq had produced VX and put it
into weapons for delivery. Yet to this day, Iraq denies it
had ever weaponized VX. And on 27 January,
UNMOVIC told this Council that it has information
that conflicts with the Iraqi account of its VX
programme.

We know that Iraq has embedded key portions of
its illicit chemical weapons infrastructure within its
legitimate civilian industry. To all outward
appearances - even to experts - the infrastructure
looks like an ordinary civilian operation. Illicit and
legitimate production can go on simultaneously. Or, on
a dime, this dual-use infrastructure can turn from
clandestine to commercial and then back again. These
inspections would be unlikely - any inspections of
such facilities would be unlikely - to turn up anything
prohibited, especially if there is any warning that the
inspections are coming. Call it ingenious or evil
genius, but the Iraqis deliberately designed their
chemical weapons programmes to be inspected. It is
infrastructure with a built-in alibi.

Under the guise of dual-use infrastructure, Iraq
has undertaken an effort to reconstitute facilities that
were closely associated with its past programme to
develop and produce chemical weapons. For example,
Iraq has rebuilt key portions of the Tareq State
establishment. Tareq includes facilities designed
specifically for Iraq's chemical weapons programme
and employs key figures from past programmes.

That is the production end of Saddam's chemical
weapons business. What about the delivery end? I am
going to show you a small part of a chemical complex
called Al-Musayyib, a site that Iraq has used for at
least three years to trans-ship chemical weapons from
production facilities out to the field.

An image was projected on screen.

In May 2002, our satellites photographed the
unusual activity in this picture. Here we see that cargo
vehicles are again at this trans-shipment point, and we
can see that they are accompanied by a
decontamination vehicle associated with biological or
chemical weapons activity. What makes this picture
significant is that we have a human source who has
corroborated that movement of chemical weapons
occurred at this site at that time. So it is not just the
photo, and it is not an individual seeing the photo: it is
the photo and the knowledge of an individual being
brought together to make the case.

An image was projected on screen.

This photograph of the site, taken two months
later, in July, shows not only the previous site - which
is the figure in the middle at the top with the bulldozer
sign near it. It shows that the previous site and all of
the other sites around that site have been fully
bulldozed and graded. The topsoil has been removed.
The Iraqis literally removed the crust of the Earth from
large portions of this site in order to conceal chemical
weapons evidence that would be there from years of
chemical weapons activity.

To support its deadly biological and chemical
weapons programmes, Iraq procures needed items from
around the world, using an extensive clandestine
network. What we know comes largely from
intercepted communications and human sources who
are in a position to know the facts. Iraq's procurement
efforts include: equipment that can filter and separate
micro-organisms and toxins involved in biological
weapons; equipment that can be used to concentrate the
agent; growth media that can be used to continue
producing anthrax and botulinum toxin; sterilization
equipment for laboratories; glass-lined reactors and
specialty pumps that can handle corrosive chemical
weapons agents and precursors; large amounts of
thionyl chloride, a precursor for nerve and blister
agents; and other chemicals such as sodium sulfide, an
important mustard agent precursor.

Now, of course, Iraq will argue that these items
can also be used for legitimate purposes. But if that is
true, why do we have to learn about them by
intercepting communications and risking the lives of
human agents? With Iraq's well-documented history on
biological and chemical weapons, why should any of
us give Iraq the benefit of the doubt? I do not, and you
will not either after you hear this next intercept.

Just a few weeks ago, we intercepted
communications between two commanders in Iraq's
Second Republican Guard Corps. One commander is
going to be giving an instruction to the other. You will
hear, as this unfolds, that what he wants to
communicate to the other guy he wants to make sure
that the other guy hears clearly, to the point of
repeating it so that it gets written down and completely
understood. Listen:

An audio tape, in Arabic, was played in the
Council Chamber; an English translation
provided by the United States delegation was
projected on screen in the Chamber.

A: Hello -

B: Hello -

A: Hello -

B: May I help you, Sir?
A: Who is this?
that

B:

Captain Ibrahim, Sir.

A: Captain Ibrahim, how are you?

B:

u>wu>9uu>w>

w

[pause]

11>

>w>w>w>w>w>w>w>w>w

B:

God bless you, Sir.

: How is your health?
: May God preserve you.

: How are you?

Good, praise God, Sir.

: Captain Ibrahim.
: Yes, Sir.
: Write this down.

: Yes, Sir.

: Hello?

: Hello? Go ahead, Sir.

: Hello, Ibrahim?

: Yes, Sir.

: Captain Ibrahim?

: I am with you, Sir.

: Remove -

: Remove -

: The expression -

: The expression -

: Nerve agents -

: Nerve agents -

: Whenever it comes up -
: Whenever it comes up -
: In the wireless instructions -
: In the instructions -

: Wireless -

: Wireless -

: Okay, buddy.

[Consider it] done, Sir.


Mr. Powell (United States of America): Let us
review a few selected items of this conversation. Two
officers talking to each other on the radio want to make

nothing

is misunderstood: "Remove."
 

"Remove." - "The expression." "The
expression - I got it." - "Nerve agents." - "Nerve
agents." - "Wherever it comes up." - "Got it -
wherever it comes up." - "In the wireless

instructions." - "In the instructions." -
"Correction - no - in the wireless instructions." -
"Wireless - I got it."

Why does he repeat it that way? Why is he so
forceful in making sure this is understood, and why did
he focus on wireless instructions? Because the senior
officer is concerned that somebody might be listening.
Well, somebody was. "Nerve agents - stop talking
about it. They are listening to us. Do not give any
evidence that we have these horrible agents." But we
know that they do, and this kind of conversation
confirms it.

Our conservative estimate is that Iraq today has a
stockpile of between 100 and 500 tons of chemical
weapons agent. That is enough agent to fill 16,000
battlefield rockets. Even the low end, of 100 tons of
agent, would enable Saddam Hussain to cause mass
casualties across more than 100 square miles of
territory - an area nearly five times the size of
Manhattan.

Let me remind you of the 122-millimetre
chemical warheads that the United Nations inspectors
found recently. That discovery could very well be, as
has been noted, the "tip of a submerged iceberg". The
question before us all, my friends, is, when will we see
the rest of the submerged iceberg?

Saddam Hussain has chemical weapons. Saddam
Hussain has used such weapons. And Saddam Hussain
has no compunction about using them again - against
his neighbours and against his own people. And we
have sources who tell us that he recently has authorized
his field commanders to use them. He would not be
passing out the orders if he did not have the weapons
or the intent to use them.

We also have sources who tell us that, since the
1980s, Saddam's regime has been experimenting on
human beings to perfect its biological or chemical
weapons. A source said that 1,600 death-row prisoners
were transferred in 1995 to a special unit for such
experiments. An eyewitness saw prisoners tied down to
beds, experiments conducted on them, blood oozing
around the victims' mouths, and autopsies performed to
confirm the effects on the prisoners. Saddam Hussain's
inhumanity has no limits.

Let me turn now to nuclear weapons. We have no
indication that Saddam Hussain has ever abandoned his
nuclear weapons programme. On the contrary, we have
more than a decade of proof that he remains
determined to acquire nuclear weapons. To fully
appreciate the challenge that we face today, remember
that, in 1991, the inspectors searched Iraq's primary
nuclear weapons facilities for the first time, and they
found nothing to conclude that Iraq had a nuclear
weapons programme. But, based on defector
information, in May of 1991, Saddam Hussain's lie was
exposed.

In truth, Saddam Hussain had a massive
clandestine nuclear weapons programme that covered
several different techniques to enrich uranium,
including electro-magnetic isotope separation, gas
centrifuge and gas diffusion. We estimate that this
illicit programme cost the Iraqis several billion dollars.
Nonetheless, Iraq continued to tell the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) that it had no nuclear
weapons programme. If Saddam had not been stopped,
Iraq could have produced a nuclear bomb by 1993,
years earlier than most worst-case assessments that had
been made before the war. In 1995, as a result of
another defector, we found out that, after his invasion
of Kuwait, Saddam Hussain had initiated a crash
programme to build a crude nuclear weapon in
violation of Iraq's United Nations obligations.

Saddam Hussain already possesses two out of the
three key components needed to build a nuclear bomb.
He has a cadre of nuclear scientists with the expertise,
and he has a bomb design. Since 1998, his efforts to
reconstitute his nuclear programme have been focused
on acquiring the third and last component: sufficient
fissile material to produce a nuclear explosion. To
make the fissile material, he needs to develop an ability
to enrich uranium.

Saddam Hussain is determined to get his hands on
a nuclear bomb. He is so determined that he has made
repeated covert attempts to acquire high-specification
aluminium tubes from 11 different countries - even
after inspections resumed.

An image was projected on screen.

These tubes are controlled by the Nuclear
Suppliers Group precisely because they can be used as
centrifuges for enriching uranium.

By now, just about everyone has heard of these
tubes and we all know that there are differences of
opinion. There is controversy about what these tubes
are for. Most United States experts think they are
intended to serve as rotors in centrifuges used to enrich
uranium. Other experts and the Iraqis themselves argue
that they are really to produce the rocket bodies for a
conventional weapon - a multiple rocket launcher. Let
me tell you what is not controversial about these tubes.
First, all the experts who have analysed the tubes in our
possession agree that they can be adapted for
centrifuge use. Secondly, Iraq had no business buying
them for any purpose. They are banned for Iraq.

I am no expert on centrifuge tubes, but just as an
old army trooper, I can tell you a couple of things.
First, it strikes me as odd that these tubes are
manufactured to a tolerance that far exceeds United
States requirements for comparable rockets. Maybe the
Iraqis just manufacture their conventional weapons to a
higher standard than we do, but I do not think so.
Secondly, we actually have examined tubes from
several different batches that were seized clandestinely
before they reached Baghdad. What we notice in these
different batches is a progression to higher and higher
levels of specification, including, in the latest batch, an
anodized coating on extremely smooth inner and outer
surfaces. Why would they continue refining the
specifications, go to all that trouble, for something that,
if it were a rocket, would soon be blown into shrapnel
when it went off?

The high-tolerance aluminium tubes are only part
of the story. We also have intelligence from multiple
sources that Iraq is attempting to acquire magnets and
high-speed balancing machines. Both items can be used
in a gas centrifuge programme to enrich uranium. In
1999 and 2000, Iraqi officials negotiated with firms in
Romania, India, Russia and Slovenia for the purchase
of a magnet production plant. Iraq wanted the plant to
produce magnets weighing 20 to 30 grams. That is the
same weight as the magnets used in Iraq's gas
centrifuge programme before the Gulf War. This
incident, linked with the tubes, is another indicator of
Iraq's attempt to reconstitute its nuclear weapons
programme. Intercepted communications from mid-
2000 through last summer show that Iraqi front
companies sought to buy machines that can be used to
balance gas centrifuge rotors. One of these companies
also had been involved in a failed effort in 2001 to
smuggle aluminium tubes into Iraq.

People will continue to debate this issue, but
there is no doubt in my mind. These illicit procurement
efforts show that Saddam Hussain is very much
focused on putting in place the key missing piece from
his nuclear weapons programme - the ability to
produce fissile material. He also has been busy trying
to maintain the other key parts of his nuclear
programme, particularly his cadre of key scientists.
It is noteworthy that, over the last 18 months,
Saddam Hussain has paid increasing personal attention
to Iraq's top nuclear scientists, a group that the
Government-controlled press openly calls his "nuclear
mujahideen". He regularly exhorts them and praises
their progress. Progress towards what end? Long ago,
the Security Council - this Council - required Iraq to
halt all nuclear activities of any kind.

Let me talk now about the systems Iraq is
developing to deliver weapons of mass destruction, in
particular Iraq's ballistic missiles and unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs).

First, missiles. We all remember that, before the
Gulf War, Saddam Hussain's goal was missiles that
flew not just hundreds, but thousands of kilometres. He
wanted to strike not only his neighbours, but also
nations far beyond his borders. While inspectors
destroyed most of the prohibited ballistic missiles,
numerous intelligence reports over the past decade
from sources inside Iraq indicate Saddam Hussain
retains a covert force of up to a few dozen SCUD-
variant ballistic missiles. These are missiles with a
range of 650 to 900 kilometres. We know from
intelligence and Iraq's own admissions that Iraq's
alleged "permitted" ballistic missiles, the Al-Samoud 2
and the Al-Fatah, violate the ISO-kilometre limit
established by this Council in resolution 687 (1991).
These are prohibited systems.

UNMOVIC also has reported that Iraq has
illegally imported 380 SA-2 rocket engines. These are
likely for use in the Al-Samoud 2. Their import was
illegal on three counts: resolution 687 (1991)
prohibited all military shipments into Iraq; UNSCOM
specifically prohibited use of these engines in surface-
to-surface missiles; and, finally, as we have just noted,
they are for a system that exceeds the 150-kilometre
range limit. Worst of all, some of these engines were
acquired as late as December, after this Council
adopted resolution 1441 (2002).

An image was projected on screen.

What I want you to know today is that Iraq has
programmes that are intended to produce ballistic
missiles that fly over 1,000 kilometres. One
programme is pursuing a liquid-fuel missile that would
be able to fly more than 1,200 kilometres and you can
see from this map as well as I can who will be in
danger of these missiles.

An image was projected on screen.

As part of this effort - another little piece of
evidence -Iraq has built an engine test stand that is
larger than anything it has ever had. Notice the
dramatic difference in size between the test stand on
the left - the old one - and the new one on the right.
Note the large exhaust vent; this is where the flame
from the engine comes out. The exhaust vent on the
right test stand is five times longer than the one on the
left. The one on the left was used for short-range
missiles. The one on the right is clearly intended for
long-range missiles that can fly 1,200 kilometres. This
photograph was taken in April 2002. Since then, the
test stand has been finished and a roof has been put
over it so that it would be harder for satellites to see
what is going on underneath the test stand.

Saddam Hussain's intentions have never changed.
He is not developing these missiles for self-defence.
These are missiles that Iraq wants in order to project
power, to threaten and to deliver chemical, biological
and, if we let him, nuclear warheads.

An image was projected on screen.

Now, unmanned aerial vehicles. Iraq has been
working on a variety of UAVs for more than a decade.
This is just illustrative of what a UAV would look like.
This effort has included attempts to modify for
unmanned flight the MIG-21 and, with greater success,
an aircraft called the L-29. However, Iraq is now
concentrating not on these aeroplanes, but on
developing and testing smaller UAVs such as this.

UAVs are well suited for dispensing chemical and
biological weapons. There is ample intelligence that
Iraq has dedicated much effort to developing and
testing spray devices that can be adapted for UAVs.
And, in the little that Saddam Hussain told us about
UAVs, he has not told the truth. One of these lies is
graphically and indisputably demonstrated by
intelligence we collected on 27 June last year.

An image was projected on screen.

According to Iraq's 7 December declaration, its
UAVs have a range of only 80 kilometres, but we
detected one of Iraq's newest UAVs in a test flight that
went 500 kilometres non-stop on autopilot in the
racetrack pattern depicted here. Not only is this test
well in excess of the 150 kilometres that the United
Nations permits; the test was also left out of Iraq's 7
December declaration. The UAV was flown around and
around and around in this circle so that its 80-kilometre
limit really was 500 kilometres unrefuelled and on
autopilot, in violation of all of Iraq's obligations under
resolution 1441 (2002).
The linkages over the past 10 years between
Iraq's UAV programme and biological and chemical
warfare agents are of deep concern to us. Iraq could
use these small UAVs, which have a wingspan of only
a few metres, to deliver biological agents to its
neighbours or, if transported, to other countries,
including the United States.

The information I have presented to you about
these terrible weapons and about Iraq's continued
flouting of its obligations under Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002) links to a subject I now want to
spend a little bit of time on. That has to do with
terrorism. Our concern is not just about these illicit
weapons of mass destruction. It is also about the way
these illicit weapons can be connected to terrorists and
terrorist organizations that have no compunction about
using such devices against innocent people around the
world.

Iraq and terrorism go back decades. Baghdad
trains Palestine Liberation Front members in small
arms and explosives. Saddam uses the Arab Liberation
Front to funnel money to the families of Palestinian
suicide bombers in order to prolong the intifada. And it
is no secret that Saddam's intelligence service was
involved in dozens of attacks and attempted
assassinations in the 19905.

But what I want to bring to your attention today is
the potentially much more sinister nexus between Iraq
and the Al Qaeda terrorist network, a nexus that
combines classic terrorist organizations and modern
methods of murder.

Iraq today harbours a deadly terrorist network
headed by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, an associate and
collaborator of Osama bin Laden and his Al Qaeda
lieutenants. Zarqawi, a Palestinian born in Jordan,
fought in the Afghan war more than a decade ago.
Returning to Afghanistan in 2000, he oversaw a
terrorist training camp. One of his specialties - and
one of the specialties of that camp - is poisons. When
our coalition ousted the Taliban, the Zarqawi network
helped to establish another poison and explosive
training-centre camp. That camp is located in north-
eastern Iraq.

An image was projected on screen.
You are looking at a picture of that camp.

The network is teaching its operatives how to
produce ricin and other poisons. Let me remind you
how ricin works. Eating less than a pinch - imagine a
pinch of salt - of ricin in your food would cause
shock, followed by circulatory failure. Death comes
within 72 hours, and there is no antidote; there is no
cure. It is fatal.

Those helping to run that camp are Zarqawi
lieutenants, operating in the northern Kurdish areas
outside Saddam-Hussain-controlled Iraq. But Baghdad
has an agent in the most senior levels of the radical
organization, Ansar al-Islam, that controls this corner
of Iraq. In 2000, this agent offered Al Qaeda safe
haven in the region. After we swept Al Qaeda from
Afghanistan, some of its members accepted that safe
haven. They remain there today.

Zarqawi's activities are not confined to that small
corner of north-east Iraq. He travelled to Baghdad in
May 2002 for medical treatment, staying in the capital
of Iraq for two months while he recuperated to fight
another day. During his stay, nearly two dozen
extremists converged on Baghdad and established a
base of operations there. Those Al Qaeda affiliates
based in Baghdad now coordinate the movement of
people, money and supplies into and throughout Iraq
for his network, and they have now been operating
freely in the capital for more than eight months.

Iraqi officials deny accusations of ties with Al
Qaeda. These denials are simply not credible. Last year
an Al Qaeda associate bragged that the situation in Iraq
was "good" - that Baghdad could be transited quickly.
We know that these affiliates are connected to Zarqawi
because they remain, even today, in regular contact
with his direct subordinates, including the poison cell
plotters. They are involved in moving more than
money and materiel: last year, two suspected Al Qaeda
operatives were arrested crossing from Iraq into Saudi
Arabia. They were linked to associates of the Baghdad
cell, and one of them received training in Afghanistan
on how to use cyanide.

From his terrorist network in Iraq, Zarqawi can
direct his network in the Middle East and beyond. We
in the United States - all of us at the State Department
and the Agency for International Development - lost a
dear friend with the cold-blooded murder of
Mr. Laurence Foley in Amman, Jordan, last October. A
despicable act was committed that day: the
assassination of an individual whose sole mission was
to assist the people of Jordan. The captured assassin
says his cell received money and weapons from
Zarqawi for that murder. After the attack, an associate
of the assassin left Jordan to go to Iraq to obtain
weapons and explosives for further operations.

Iraqi officials protest that they are not aware of
the whereabouts of Zarqawi or of any of his associates.
Again, those protests are not credible. We know of
Zarqawi's activities in Baghdad. I described them
earlier; let me now add one other fact. We asked a
friendly security service to approach Baghdad about
extraditing Zarqawi and providing information about
him and his close associates. This service contacted
Iraqi officials twice, and we passed on details that
should have made it easy to find Zarqawi. The network
remains in Baghdad. Zarqawi still remains at large to
come and go.

As my colleagues around this table and the
citizens they represent in Europe know, Zarqawi's
terrorism is not confined to the Middle East. Zarqawi
and his network have plotted terrorist actions against
countries including France, Britain, Spain, Italy,
Germany and Russia. According to detainees, Abu
Atiya, who graduated from Zarqawi's terrorist camp in
Afghanistan, tasked at least nine North African
extremists in 2001 to travel to Europe to conduct
poison and explosive attacks. Since last year, members
of this network have been apprehended in France,
Britain, Spain and Italy. By our last count, 116
operatives connected to this global web have been
arrested.

An image was projected on screen.

The chart you are looking at shows the network in
Europe. We know about this European network and we
know about its links to Zarqawi because the detainee
who provided the information about the targets also
provided the names of members of the network. Three
of those he identified by name were arrested in France

last December. In the apartments of the terrorists,
authorities found circuits for explosive devices and a
list of ingredients to make toxins.

The detainee who helped piece this together says
the plot also targeted Britain. Later evidence again
proved him right. When the British unearthed a cell
there, just last month, one British police officer was
murdered during the disruption of the cell.

We also know that Zarqawi's colleagues have
been active in the Pankisi Gorge, Georgia, and in
Chechnya, Russia. The plotting to which they are
linked is not mere chatter: members of Zarqawi's
network say their goal was to kill Russians with toxins.

We are not surprised that Iraq is harbouring
Zarqawi and his subordinates; this understanding
builds on decades-long experience with respect to ties
between Iraq and Al Qaeda. Going back to the early
and mid-1990s, when Bin Laden was based in the
Sudan, an Al Qaeda source tells us that Saddam and
Bin Laden reached an understanding that Al Qaeda
would no longer support activities against Baghdad.

Early Al Qaeda ties were forged by secret high-
level Iraqi intelligence service contacts with Al Qaeda.
We know that members of both organizations met
repeatedly, and have met at least eight times at very
senior levels since the early 1990s.

A foreign security service has told us that in 1996
Bin Laden met with a senior Iraqi intelligence official
in Khartoum and that he later met the director of the
Iraqi intelligence service.

Saddam became more interested as he saw Al
Qaeda's appalling attacks. A detained Al Qaeda
member tells us that Saddam was more willing to assist
Al Qaeda after the 1998 bombings of our embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania. Saddam was also impressed by
the Al Qaeda attack on the USS Cole in Yemen in
October 2000.

Iraqis continued to visit Bin Laden in his new
home in Afghanistan. A senior defector - one of
Saddam's former intelligence chiefs in Europe - says
Saddam sent his agents to Afghanistan sometime in the
mid-1990s to provide training to Al Qaeda members on
document forgery. From the late 1990s until 2001, the
Iraqi embassy in Pakistan played the role of liaison to
the Al Qaeda organization.

Some claim these contacts do not amount to
much. They say Saddam Hussain's secular tyranny and
Al Qaeda's religious tyranny do not mix. I am not
comforted by that thought. Ambition and hatred are
enough to bring Iraq and Al Qaeda together - enough
so that Al Qaeda could learn how to build more
sophisticated bombs and learn how to forge documents,
and enough so that Al Qaeda could turn to Iraq for help
in acquiring expertise on weapons of mass destruction.
The record of Saddam Hussain's cooperation with
other Islamist terrorist organizations is clear. Hamas,
for example, opened an office in Baghdad in 1999, and
Iraq has hosted conferences attended by Palestine
Islamic Jihad. Those groups are at the forefront of
sponsoring suicide attacks against Israel.

Al Qaeda continues to have a deep interest in
acquiring weapons of mass destruction. As with the
story of Zarqawi and his network, I can trace the story
of a senior terrorist operative, telling how Iraq
provided training in those weapons to Al Qaeda.
Fortunately, that operative is now detained, and he has
told his story. I will relate it to you now as he himself
described it.
That senior Al Qaeda terrorist was responsible for
one of Al Qaeda's training camps in Afghanistan. His
information comes first-hand, from his personal
involvement at senior levels of Al Qaeda. He says Bin
Laden and his top deputy in Afghanistan, deceased Al
Qaeda leader Muhammad Atif, did not believe that Al
Qaeda labs in Afghanistan were capable enough to
manufacture these chemical or biological agents. They
needed to go somewhere else. They had to look outside
of Afghanistan for help. Where did they go? Where did
they look? They went to Iraq.

The support that this detainee describes included
Iraq offering chemical or biological weapons training
for two Al Qaeda associates, beginning in December
2000. He says that a militant known as Abu Abdallah
al-Iraqi had been sent to Iraq several times between
1997 and 2000 for help in acquiring poisons and gases.
Abdullah al-Iraqi characterized the relationship he
forged with Iraqi officials as "successful".

As I said at the outset, none of this should come
as a surprise to any of us. Terrorism has been a tool
used by Saddam for decades. Saddam was a supporter
of terrorism long before these terrorist networks had a
name, and this support continues. The nexus of poisons
and terror is new; the nexus of Iraq and terror is old.
The combination is lethal. With this track record, Iraqi
denials of supporting terrorism take their place
alongside the other Iraqi denials of weapons of mass
destruction. It is all a web of lies. When we confront a
regime that harbours ambitions for regional
domination, hides weapons of mass destruction and
provides haven and active support for terrorists, we are
not confronting the past, we are confronting the
present. And unless we act, we are confronting an even
more frightening future.

This has been a long and detailed presentation,
and I thank you for your patience. But there is one
more subject that I would like to touch on briefly. It
should be a subject of deep and continuing concern to
the Council: Saddam Hussain's violations of human
rights.

Underlying all that I have said, underlying all the
facts and the patterns of behaviour that I have
identified, is Saddam Hussain's contempt for the will
of the Council, his contempt for the truth and, most
damning of all, his utter contempt for human life.

Saddam Hussain's use of mustard and nerve gases
against the Kurds in 1988 was one of the twentieth
century's most horrible atrocities. Five thousand men,
women and children died. His campaign against the
Kurds from 1987 to 1989 included mass summary
executions, disappearances, arbitrary jailing, ethnic
cleansing and the destruction of some 2,000 villages.
He has also conducted ethnic cleaning against the
Shi'ah Iraqis and the Marsh Arabs, whose culture has
flourished for more than a millennium.

Saddam Hussain's police State ruthlessly
eliminates anyone who dares to dissent. Iraq has more
forced disappearance cases than any other country.
Tens of thousands of people were reported missing in
the past decade. Nothing points more clearly to
Saddam Hussain's dangerous intentions and to the
threat he poses to all of us than his calculated cruelty to
his own citizens and to his neighbours. Clearly,
Saddam Hussain and his regime will stop at nothing
until something stops him.

For more than 20 years, by word and by deed,
Saddam Hussain has pursued his ambition to dominate
Iraq and the broader Middle East, using the only means
he knows: intimidation, coercion and annihilation of all
those who might stand in his way. For Saddam
Hussain, possession of the world's most deadly
weapons is the ultimate trump card, the one he must

hold to fulfil his ambition.

We know that Saddam Hussain is determined to
keep his weapons of mass destruction. He is
determined to make more. Given Saddam Hussain's
history of aggression, given what we know of his
grandiose plans, given what we know of his terrorist
associations and given his determination to exact
revenge on those who oppose him, should we take the
risk that he will not someday use these weapons at a
time and a place and in a manner of his choosing - at
a time when the world is in a much weaker position to
respond?

The United States will not, and cannot, run that
risk to the American people. Leaving Saddam Hussain
in possession of weapons of mass destruction for a few
more months or years is not an option - not in a post-
11-September world.

Over three months ago, the Council recognized
that Iraq continued to pose a threat to international
peace and security and that Iraq had been, and
remained in material breach of its disarmament
obligations. Today Iraq still poses a threat, and Iraq
still remains in material breach. Indeed, by its failure to
seize its one last opportunity to come clean and disarm,
Iraq has put itself in deeper material breach and closer
to the day when it will face serious consequences for
its continued defiance of the Council.
We have an obligation to our citizens - we have
an obligation to this body - to see that our resolutions
are complied with. We wrote resolution 1441 (2002)
not in order to go to war. We wrote resolution 1441
(2002) to try to preserve the peace. We wrote
resolution 1441 (2002) to give Iraq one last chance.
Iraq is not so far taking that one last chance. We must
not shrink from whatever is ahead of us. We must not
fail in our duty and our responsibility to the citizens of
the countries that are represented by this body.


