Mr. McBride (United States of America): I want
to thank Special Representative Fall for his briefing.
The United States joins the others in this Chamber in
thanking him for four years of leadership in the Great
Lakes region.

Over the past decade, this resource-rich region in
the heart of Africa has suffered from wrenching,
destabilizing conflicts that have produced almost
unimaginable suffering. Today the situation remains
fragile and the challenges remain immense, but the
prospects for peace and development have improved,
in part because of the attention of the international
community, but even more so because of the will and
efforts of the people in the region to overcome these
setbacks.

The transition in Burundi and the historic
elections in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
among a number of encouraging developments. We
have all noted that a spirit of trust and cooperation is
growing among the States in the region. The Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, signed in Nairobi on 15 December 2006 by

11 African States, was a promising conclusion to the
United Nations-sponsored International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. This agreement has the
potential to become a means of preventing future
conflicts in Central Africa, while offering a road map
for consolidating democracy, good governance and
development.

We join others in encouraging the States in the
region to live up to their commitments, to respect
national sovereignty, to seek the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to cooperate to strengthen the economies
of the region. That is a vision that cannot be imposed;
regional ownership of this process is vital.

Bilateral agreements and other regional efforts
can and should complement this process. We would
note, in that regard, one initiative that my country has
facilitated: the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission, which
is aimed at promoting security and stability in and
among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda,
Rwanda and Burundi. We are confident that those
countries, which are also signatories to the Nairobi
Pact, will fulfil their commitments to enhance
cooperation for peace among Commission members.

