Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I
wish to thank Special Representative Lamberto Zannier
for his very comprehensive briefing to this Council,
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk
J eremie, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their remarks.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/281)
offers a factual and comprehensive analysis of the
situation prevailing in Kosovo, of the progress made
during the period under review and of the significant
challenges that still lie ahead in terms of ensuring
security, stability, economic development and respect
for human rights. It clearly makes the case for the
continued commitment of the international community
in order to support the people and authorities of
Kosovo in their efforts to overcome those challenges
and build a modern democratic State.

In that sense, Portugal reiterates its appreciation
and support for the work being done and wishes to
thank and commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), the
Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe for the
accomplishments achieved. We also wish to highlight
the active engagement of UNMIK with the
communities and authorities in Kosovo and with the
Governments of Serbia and Albania in order to fulfil its
mandate. That commitment and cooperation are
essential for furthering our common aims in Kosovo,
but they are also a very important element in
guaranteeing peace and stability in the whole region
and promoting cooperation in the Balkans.

Since our last meeting on UNMIK (see S/PV.6483), the nomination of a new President and
Government have taken place in Kosovo. It is
encouraging that the crisis around the presidential
election and the appointment of Ms. Jahjaga took place
within the applicable institutional framework and
without disturbance. Another important development
has been the beginning of the meetings of the Pristina-
Belgrade dialogue, facilitated by the European Union
(EU). A number of significant issues have been
identified and discussed. I would, as an example,
mention those pertaining to civil registry and cadastral
information, as well as regional economic cooperation
and the movement of goods and freedom of movement,
as particular important ones. It is important that this
dialogue proceeds on all outstanding issues, with the
aim of producing results in the near future. We
encourage the parties to engage actively in that sense.

Despite the fact that the overall security situation
has remained relatively calm since the beginning of the
year, it is obvious that more efforts must be made in
order to fight and prevent organized crime, put an end
to trafficking in drugs and human beings and stop all
criminal incidents that target both Kosovars and
members of the international community. We take good
note that the Kosovo police conducted a number of
successful operations aimed at putting a stop to some
of these criminal activities. We encourage them to
redouble their efforts in that area.

On the other hand, in the community, criminal
acts and vandalism and theft affecting cultural and
religious sites are still occurring. The situation in the
north remains tense. Other elements that may trigger
renewed tensions abound. We commend UNMIK's
efforts and dedication to ensure peace and security, but
those efforts will be to no avail without the full
commitment of the people of Kosovo themselves to

ll-33372
engage fully and in good faith in a process leading to
the settlement of their differences.

Let me also stress the importance of the ongoing
cooperation between Kosovo authorities and EULEX
with regard to the rule of law, namely, on access to
justice, policing and investigation, criminal
prosecution and compliance with international human
rights standards in civil and criminal proceedings.
Again, the task facing Kosovo's Administration is one
of institution- and capacity-building. We commend and
support the efforts made by the EU Special
Representative in that context.

Concerning the report of Senator Dick Marty to
the Council of Europe, I took note of the Secretary-
General's reference in his report (S/2011/281) to the
initiatives that UNMIK and EULEX have undertaken
in that regard. I am encouraged by the declared
intention of the Kosovar and Albanian authorities to
cooperate fully in the investigations. In that context, I
also call upon all other countries that are in a position
to elucidate on these very serious accusations to come
forward and help.

I also paid careful attention to what Minister
Jeremic said to the Council, as well as to the contents
of the Serbian concept paper that circulated previously
defending an international investigation, as well as to
the letter of the Secretary-General of 4 May. I wish to
make two comments on this matter.

First, with regard to the nature of organ
trafficking, this is a complex criminal activity that
requires a sophisticated network and the complicity of
a variety of different actors, and not only doctors and
recipients. It has become a horrendous international
traffic that often has to rely on the complicity of
authorities in different countries. Nearly a year ago, the
General Assembly adopted the Global Action Plan
against Trafficking in Persons, which of course
includes trafficking for the purpose of organ removal
and trafficking in organs.

Dick Marty's report further underlines the
importance and reach of the Action Plan, which
promotes the universal ratification of the Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime and its
trafficking protocol, while reinforcing State's national
and regional commitments to prevent and combat such
trafficking, as well as strengthening cooperation among
States, international organizations and other
stakeholders. All of these elements can be particularly
relevant when addressing not only Senator Marty's
allegations but also the case referred to in annex I of
the Secretary-General's report concerning the
indictment of defendants in the so-called Medicus case
charged with illegal kidney transplant. The EULEX
report states that

"Kidneys were allegedly removed from
impoverished individuals, recruited on false
promises of payment that they never received,
then transplanted to wealthy foreign patients."
(S/2011/28], annex I, p. 16)

In all its horror, that sentence encapsulates the
particularly heinous nature of this type of crime.

My second comment concerns the investigation
of the alleged facts presented in the Council of
Europe's report. Time and again, the Security Council
has rightly denounced impunity and defended the
assertion that the perpetrators of serious crimes and
violations of human rights must be brought to justice.
Impunity is not only intolerable in itself, it can also be
an obstacle to peace and to a healthy and cooperative
political environment, as so many cases illustrate. The
allegations made by Senator Marty, if proven, will
weigh lastingly on our collective memory and
conscience. Their seriousness warrants a thorough,
complete and independent investigation.

Portugal fully supports the role of EULEX in that
context. We were happy to learn that investigations
have started and we hope that they will allow for the
full clarification of the allegations. Portugal also stands
ready to work within the institutional framework of the
European Union to better equip EULEX with the
necessary capabilities to allow it to address the
situation adequately and efficiently. But as I stated here
last February, the seriousness and relevance of this
issue demands that we follow it closely and keep an
open mind on any future action that the full pursuit of
the investigations may require.

That is why we View the letter of the Secretary-
General offering the United Nations assistance with the
independent investigation as an important element in
this context, to which due consideration should be
given if the evolution of the investigations presently
being carried out so warrant.

Despite all the difficulties, the situation in
Kosovo has evolved positively during the past three
months. We hope and trust to register new progress
when we again meet to discuss UNMIK's next report.

In conclusion, allow me to once again underline
the importance of the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. High hopes and much room for progress and
tangible results lie in those conversations. It is
Portugal's strong belief that peace and security in the
region require sustained commitment from all sides to
democratic institutions, the rule of law, justice and
human rights. Those will, in the future, prove to be the
enduring mark of the cooperation of the international
community in the Balkans.

