Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Lebanon, for having assumed the presidency. We
also commend Ambassador Takasu and the Japanese
delegation for their excellent work last month.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important briefing focused on United
Nations/European Union (EU) cooperation. I would
like to thank Baroness Ashton, EU High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her
informative briefing. Let me also thank the Foreign
Minister of Austria for his briefing.

Uganda is convinced that, given their
complementary role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, prioritizing the strengthening of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations is the best approach.
Fostering effective partnerships will improve the
capacity of the United Nations to address complex
challenges to peace and security in various regions of
the world. We welcome the EU's strong commitment to
developing an active partnership with the United
Nations. We are convinced that the EU, as well as other
regional and subregional organizations, has a
significant contribution to make to conflict prevention,
mediation and resolution and to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

It is important to strengthen cooperation between
and among regional and subregional organizations. We
particularly want to commend the European Union for
the support it has given the African Union (AU) in
dealing with peace and security challenges on the
continent. A case in point is the support given to the
African Union Mission in Somalia. The partnership
between the EU and the AU in support of the African
Peace Facility, for instance, has been instrumental in
enhancing AU peace support operations and capacity-
building, especially in area of early response activities.
Uganda emphasizes the need to enhance regular
interaction, coordination and consultation between the
United Nations Secretariat and respective regional and
subregional secretariats and commissions on matters of
common interest. That will enhance complementarity
and minimize the duplication of efforts.

In conclusion, we welcome the Security
Council's continued engagement and exchange of
views with the EU and other regional and subregional
organizations on practical ways to strengthen and
utilize those useful partnerships. The open debates on
AU/United Nations cooperation held in March and
October 2009, as well as the open thematic debate on
cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations held on 13 January, attest to that. Uganda
supports such a far-sighted approach.

