Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council and by complimenting your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Kenya, on
the excellent manner in which he guided the affairs of the
Council last month.

Pakistan has kept the United Nations Secretary-
General and the Security Council fully informed, at all
stages, of the developments pertaining to the current
grave situation and security crisis in South Asia. Indeed,
to some extent, it was the dereliction of its responsibilities
by the Security Council that emboldened India to
implement its hegemonic and aggressive designs by
crossing the nuclear threshold, threatening the use of
nuclear weapons against Pakistan and resorting to nuclear
blackmail to impose a military solution on Kashmir. We
informed the Council about India's provocative actions
and unambiguous expression of intent to commit
aggression against Pakistan. Unfortunately, the Council
did not pay heed to the impending breach of peace.

Faced with these ominous developments resulting
from India's deliberate and calculated actions to alter the
strategic equation, Pakistan was left with no choice but to
exercise its nuclear option in its supreme national interest
to restore the strategic balance and to preserve peace.

For almost 50 years, Pakistan repeatedly drew the
attention of the United Nations to the illegal Indian
occupation of Jammu and Kashmir. We demanded the
implementation of the Council's own resolutions. We
sought to draw the attention of the international
community to the brutal Indian campaign to deny to the
Kashmiri people their inalienable right to self-
determination, as provided for in the Council's
resolutions.

We repeatedly drew the attention of the Secretary-
General and the Security Council to the extremely volatile
situation in Kashmir resulting from grave violations of the
line of control by Indian troops. We urged the Secretary-
General and the Council to take cognizance of this
situation and even proposed the strengthening of the
present United Nations Military Observer Group in India
and Pakistan.

We regret to note that the Council paid no attention
whatsoever to Pakistan's repeated warnings and requests.
Today again, the central issue which has bedevilled
relations between India and Pakistan and is at the source
of all conflicts and tensions in South Asia is being
ignored.

 

Now that the Council is seized of the volatile situation
in South Asia, we note with regret that the approach that is
being adopted is once again devoid of realism. Non-
proliferation cannot be pursued by creating or acquiescing
in a situation of a security void. This has been and
continues to be a major failure on the part of all those who
have sought to promote the goal of non-proliferation. It is
obviously counter-productive to bank once again on a
unidimensional approach to non-proliferation based on
selective sanctions, pressures and intimidation.

The Council has contented itself to deal with the non-
proliferation aspects. N on-proliferation is no longer an issue
in South Asia. South Asia, which we had wanted to be a
nuclear-weapon-free zone, is today nuclearized thanks to
the encouragement and acquiescence of major Powers.
There is a real danger of nuclear conflict. Proliferation
regrettably has taken place. No amount of sermonizing and
lamentation can rectify or reverse this unfortunate
development. If the Council really wishes to have any role
in containing the crisis and in preventing the situation from
deteriorating further, it must adopt a pragmatic and realistic
approach.

We are convinced that a comprehensive approach to
the issues of peace, security, confidence-building,
conventional imbalance, and conventional and nuclear arms
control is the only realistic way whereby the Council and
the international community could contribute to defusing
the security crisis in South Asia, which has endangered
global peace and stability.

The resolution which has emerged from the
consultations is deficient in several aspects. Let me first
deal with the procedural points.

Under Article 31 of the Charter, any Member of the
United Nations which is not a member of the Security
Council may participate, without a vote, in the discussion
of any question brought before the Security Council,
whenever the latter considers that the interests of that
Member are specially affected. We deeply regret that the
Council has disregarded this Charter provision by not
giving us an opportunity to participate in the discussions on
this resolution. The attitude of the Council can, in short, be
described as, "My mind is made up; please do not confuse
me with facts."

While I will be pointing out the substantive
inadequacies, let me make a more general point. I wish to
state for the record and for posterity that the adoption of
this resolution will further marginalize the role of the
Security Council, not only in dealing effectively with the
security crisis in South Asia but on global security issues
as a whole. The approach that the Security Council has
adopted is again devoid not only of realism but also of
legality and morality. I wonder whether the Security
Council is not about to ignite an extremely short fuse that
will destroy the entire global security order as it is
envisioned in the United Nations Charter.

Now let me deal with salient aspects of this
resolution, which I believe fall in the following three
categories: non-proliferation, the security problem in
South Asia, and the role of the Council.

As far as the non-proliferation aspects of this
resolution are concerned, we cannot help but comment on
the extremely short- sighted approach that the Council has
chosen to pursue. This resolution is not an expression of
global concern about the failure of non-proliferation and
ways and means to deal with this serious issue. It is in
fact a transparent exercise in self-assurance by the official
nuclear Five to seek legitimacy for their possession of
lethal arsenals of weapons of mass destruction. The
nuclear Five draw comfort and questionable legitimacy
from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Pakistan had never questioned this
dubious distinction that they draw from the NPT. Today
we are obliged perforce to reconsider our position.

Today for the first time, this sacrosanct institution is
being used to confer legitimacy upon the nuclear Five. It
is therefore not what is contained in this resolution but
what is implied which needs to be seen in its proper
legal, strategic and political perspective. For the first time,
the Security Council is being asked to play a role in
enforcing non-proliferation. This is contrary to the letter
and spirit of the various international instruments and
treaties on this subject.

Nuclear non-proliferation is the obverse side of
nuclear disarmament. Nuclear non-proliferation cannot be
promoted in the absence of corresponding progress
towards nuclear disarmament. The nuclear Five have
continued to use the NPT for a twofold purpose: to
legitimize their own possession of huge nuclear arsenals
and the right to retain them in perpetuity, and as a blunt
instrument to curb further proliferation. It is indeed
evident that the resolution welcomes the commitment of
the nuclear Five to article VI of the NPT. There could be
no more poignant travesty of facts. Treaty provisions
cannot be enforced on non-parties. Treaty obligations can
only be assumed on a voluntary basis. Any attempt at

 

imposition of treaty obligations on non-parties is, by its
very nature, unequal and unsustainable.

How would the Council deal with the issue so aptly
raised by the decision of International Court of Justice on
the illegitimacy of nuclear weapons? How would the
Council deal with the question of non-proliferation? How
would the Council deal with the interlinked issues of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation? The Council
has given its verdict. Nuclear disarmament is apparently in
safe hands. Nuclear non-proliferation is the only real issue.

The Non-Aligned Movement has consistently held that
there is no justification for the maintenance of nuclear
arsenals or for concepts of international security based on
a policy of nuclear deterrence. The N on-Aligned Movement
has also categorically pronounced itself on the present
situation, whereby nuclear- weapon States insist that nuclear
weapons provide unique security benefits and continue to
make feverish efforts to monopolize them. The Non-
Aligned Movement has said that this is a highly
discriminatory and untenable approach, and one that cannot
be sustained.

The Non-Aligned Movement's ministerial meeting in
Cartagena recently affirmed the importance of the adoption
of an action plan for the total elimination of all nuclear
weapons within a time-bound framework, as well as the
need for negotiating and implementing universal, non-
discriminatory disarmament measures and mutually agreed
confidence-building measures. If the Council is really
concerned today about non-proliferation, then the resolution
that it has adopted does less than full justice to the
predominant views of the Non-Aligned Movement,
including those of its members which are parties to the
NPT.

Let me once again clarify that the issue for Pakistan
is one of security and not one of status. Pakistan has
demonstrated its nuclear-weapon capability. We have
officially stated that the nuclear devices tested on 28 and 30
May 1998 correspond to a weapons configuration
compatible with delivery systems.

We have already stated that South Asia has been
nuclearized. We have been compelled to join the process of
nuclearization by India's decision to weaponize and induct
nuclear weapons. We have been obliged to do so for our
self-defence and to restore the strategic balance in South
Asia. It is India which has claimed status as the sixth
nuclear-weapon State. Does the Council, by its lopsided
approach, desire that we also claim status as a nuclear-
weapon State and thus contribute to shredding to bits the
myths about the legitimacy or otherwise of nuclear
weapons? Moreover, the resolution does not take into
account the fact that besides India and Pakistan, there are
other States, non-parties to the NPT, which possess
nuclear weapons and have acknowledged the fact.

We do not want to complicate the issue. The issue
is simple and straightforward. It is about the security
crisis in South Asia. We do not want to dilute the focus
and enter into academic arguments about non-proliferation
and nuclear disarmament. Neither do we want to link
extraneous issues which only serve to detract from the
main issue: the security crisis in South Asia, which has
endangered global peace and stability.

So a highly skewed and self-defeating approach has
been taken by the Security Council in trying to handle
non-proliferation, which is strictly not within its
competence. The future of non-proliferation cannot be
assured by setting aside its very legal and moral basis.
This is exactly what is being done today by this Council.
It is evident, therefore, that what is at stake is not the
future of non-proliferation, but the exclusive privileges
and status that the nuclear Five arrogate to monopolize,
caring little about the wider aspects. I therefore dread to
say that the Council is about to embark on a totally
unrealistic and self-defeating course as far as the future of
non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament is concerned.

Pakistan has been subjected to double discrimination.
At the regional level we are discriminated against because
of a failure by the Security Council to make a distinction
between action and reaction, between a provocation and
a response, between a cause and its effect. Pakistan has
acquired its nuclear capability only in reaction to India's
steady development of its nuclear weapons programme.
We cannot be asked to give up the right to defend our
country against any external threat emanating from
conventional weapons or weapons of mass destruction.
Pakistan reserves the right to maintain the ability to deter
aggression by conventional weapons or non-conventional
means.

We are also suffering from discrimination at the
global level by the nuclear-Five States, who claim for
themselves the right to acquire and retain weapons of
mass destruction against each other, or against non-
nuclear-weapon States, and thus threaten the rest of the
world. This discrimination, at the global level, is
epitomized by the possession of over 30,000 nuclear
weapons, which are in the hands of the nuclear-Five

 

States, and which they claim they will retain indefinitely
while taking coercive measures to prevent any other State
from acquiring similar capability, even in the legitimate
exercise of the right of self-defence. This is totally unjust
and unacceptable.

While the Security Council adopts this unjust decision,
we are confident that the international community, the
majority of the membership of the United Nations and the
General Assembly, will reject this unfair and unequal
decision and uphold its demand for general and complete
nuclear disarmament in the shortest period of time by the
nuclear-Five States.

The resolution before the Council presumes to deal
with the security aspects of the situation in South Asia.
Here again the Council is ensuring that it would, in fact,
have at best a disinterested spectator's role. What are the
immediate issues in the context of the situation in South
Asia? We would have expected the Council to seek to
address earnestly and reasonably the following issues: first,
reducing the risk of a nuclear conflict; secondly, promoting
nuclear restraint and stabilization measures between
Pakistan and India; and thirdly, defusing the volatile
situation in J ammu and Kashmir, especially along the Line
of Control.

Unfortunately, the Security Council is once again
abnegating its responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security by adopting
a totally unpragmatic and unrealistic approach. This
resolution urges India and Pakistan to exercise maximum
restraint and to avoid threatening military movements,
cross-border violations or other provocations in order to
prevent an aggravation of the situation. This resolution also
urges India and Pakistan to resume the dialogue between
them on all matters pertaining to peace and security and
encourages them to find mutually acceptable solutions to
address the root causes of tension.

The mere mention of the root cause - Kashmir - is
not enough. We regret that even the important element
contained in the P-5 ministerial communique - their
readiness to assist India and Pakistan in promoting
reconciliation and cooperation - has been omitted from
this resolution. It is evident that by adopting this approach
the Council is in fact acknowledging its failure to address
the critical elements of the situation.

In short, the Council wants Pakistan and India to settle
by themselves the issues bedevilling their relations. If
Pakistan and India could have sorted out these problems by
themselves, South Asia would not today be nuclearized.
What the Security Council is today asking us to do, in
short, amounts to an appeal to two nuclear-weapon States
to settle their differences on the basis of the de facto
situation. This de facto situation is based on complex
factors underlying the power balance in strategic and
conventional terms. In fact, what you are today asking us
to do is to remain embarked on a disastrous course. You
are asking us today to cross new thresholds in nuclear and
ballistic system escalation. You are asking us today to set
aside the Charter and international law, and to base our
conduct on the imperatives of maintaining a strategic
balance, whatever the cost. You have once again ignored
the fact that the direct cause of the aggravation of the
security situation in South Asia was the unilateral altering
by India of the delicate strategic balance that had
maintained peace in South Asia for the past two decades.

We cannot read any other message in the resolution.
The Security Council has once again abandoned its
responsibility by asking us to find a mutually acceptable
solution. I say this more in sorrow than in anger, for the
implications of this approach will be far and wide. It will
oblige not only the countries of South Asia, but also 180
States Members of the United Nations, to draw their own
conclusions about the pathetic state of the United Nations
and the global security order, which is premised to serve
the strategic interests of the official nuclear Five.

I regret to say that Pakistan is disappointed. We had
pinned our hopes on the United Nations for more than 50
years. We were confident that it would be able to usher
in a new era, free from the scourge of war for our
succeeding generations. What we have witnessed instead
is a tale of missed opportunities, abdication of
responsibilities and selective and discriminatory
application of the Charter. This track record does not fill
anybody with pride. Nor does it conform to the ideals of
the founding fathers, or to the principles of democracy.
Let me, however, hasten to add that we will still
continue to base our conduct and actions on the noble
principles of the Charter. The vision of the Charter will,
I hope, one day bring the dawn of a new era. This would
come about if the nations of the world would become true
adherents to the principles and purposes of the Charter.

The Government and the people of Pakistan have
faith in the inherent goodness of humankind. We place
great value on the collective civilizational
accomplishments of the human race and the eventual

triumph of morality. It is

in view of these sublime

 

sentiments that we have taken the liberty. today, to make a
critical analysis of the shortcomings of the Security
Council, which have only contributed to the spread of chaos
and anarchy in various parts of the world.

Pakistan will continue to comply with its obligations
under the Charter and international law. We will continue
to seek a just resolution of the Jammu and Kashmir
dispute, in accordance with Security Council resolutions.
May I, at this stage, remind the Council of its own
resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir. which explicitly
provide for the final disposition of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir in accordance with the will of the people
expressed through a democratic method of a free and
impartial plebiscite conducted under the auspices of the
United Nations.

The Prime Minister of Pakistan has already stated,
and I would like to reiterate, that Pakistan is ready to
enter into talks with India on all matters of mutual
concern, including a non-aggression pact, on the basis of
a just. equitable and expeditious settlement of the Jammu
and Kashmir dispute.

