Ms. Mogherini (spoke in French): It is an honour
for me to address the Security Council in my first
months as High Representative of the European Union
(EU). I thank the French presidency of the Council for
this opportunity to discuss our partnership.

(spoke in English)

I would like to thank the Secretary-General not
only for his briefing, but most of all for his friendship
and for the excellent cooperation we have established
already during these first months.

Today is my first Security Council meeting in my
current capacity, but it is the fifth on United Nations-
EU cooperation. This regularity is testimony to our
deepening relationship and also to the importance that
the United Nations and the EU place on this relationship.

In February last year, the Security Council adopted
its first presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/4) on
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU,
encouraging us to strengthen our institutional relations
and strategic partnership. And we all know how much
this is needed, in particular in these difficult times. It
has been a tumultuous year in the world. Hopes for a
more peaceful and cooperative global order have been
shattered by blatant violations of international law,
the spread of terrorists groups, crises with disastrous
humanitarian consequences, and the outbreak of
diseases with the potential to destroy entire regions. We
did not resign ourselves to the challenges; we rose to
them together. And where cooperation among different
forces prevailed over confrontation, things have started
to change in the right direction.

Europe's commitment to multilateralism - with
the United Nations at its core - arises from our values
and beliefs. But it is also an act of realism. The threats
we face have never been so complex, as the Secretary-
General very rightly said. They require complex,
articulated responses. The time when super-Powers
thought they could split the world into spheres of
influence is long gone, we should all realize that. The
number of regional and global actors has multiplied,
and none of them can realistically aspire to facing the
challenges or truly benefiting from the opportunities
alone. We need cooperation more than ever. The new
global order will be multilateral, or it will not be.

We see the strategic partnership with the United
Nations as a key relationship, but I should also
underline the importance to us of regional partners,
notably the League of Arab States, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the African
Union, and our regional interlocutors in Latin America,
the Caribbean and Asia. Multilayered partnerships
under the guidance of the Security Council, which has
the primary responsibility for international peace and
security, will be the only possible foundation of the
future global security agenda. With that in mind, I will
address a few issues I am sure we all put at the top of
our agenda, starting with Libya.

We need to put the country back on track, and
there is not much time left. Libya needs a united and
effective State, or chaos will prevail. Like the Council,
we strongly support the tenacious efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leon to bring
the parties together. Libya's factions should know
that Europe and the whole international community is
ready to help them rebuild their country by all possible
means. The European Union is ready and willing to
provide all kinds of assistance, in strong coordination
and permanent with the United Nations and with other
regional players, but first of all with our Libyan friends.
We need the Libyan factions to take the first step. Libya's
political leaders should now make every effort to find
the necessary compromises to grasp this last chance to
agree on a transitional national unity Government. That
should happen within days, not weeks, as time does not
work on our side.

With the deepening crisis, the Daesh franchise
has been spreading thousands of miles away from the
Levant. With no State control on Libya's coasts or land
borders, human traffickers have already been able to
put at risk the lives of too many migrants. We have
witnessed the destabilizing effects of the conflict on
the entire Sahel and sub-Saharan regions. Terrorism,
uncontrolled migrations, regional instability - a unity
Government in Libya is vital for addressing all these
issues. It will be vital, first of all, for giving all Libyans
the security and the decent living conditions that their
country can offer and that they deserve after so many
difficult years.

But these are not simply Libyan problems; they
concern all of us. So it is in our common interest and
our common responsibility to contribute in all possible
ways and, as a matter of urgency, to solve them. Strong
cooperation between the United Nations and the EU,
which we have developed in these months working on
the Libya crisis, is crucial. I expect that in the coming
months such cooperation will become even more vital.
Tackling terrorism means closing all the spaces where
extremism flourishes. It is a security challenge, of
course, but we should not forget its political and cultural
dimensions. As I said, defeating Daesh in Libya requires
a political agreement among the country's factions.
The same applies to Syria. This is one of the reasons
the European Union fully supports the United Nations
efforts for peace. Staffan de Mistura's work for local
ceasefires can pave the way towards a political solution
to the crisis. We hope it may be the first move in the
direction of a Syrian-led transition after too many years
of bloodshed. At the same time, the grave violations
committed against the civilian population demand
accountability and an end to impunity.

The EU is united in its support for the work of the
Council, in particular its resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). I call on all countries to swiftly implement
those resolutions with full respect for human rights
and the rule of law. We believe that long-term stability
and security can go hand in hand with respect for
human rights and freedoms. Respect for human rights
and international humanitarian law are key factors
for peace and stability and a guiding principle for the
European Union. At last week's meeting of the Human
Rights Council, I personally underlined the strong
commitment of the European Union to the human rights
bodies and mechanisms of the United Nations. There
is no stability without democracy; there is no security
without human rights. Stability and security cannot
exist without a fair trial system, a serious commitment
towards good governance, the rule of law and the fight
against corruption. Stability versus democracy or
security versus human rights are false dilemmas. We
should never fall into that trap.

But the fight against terrorism is a battle for hearts
and minds, too. Daesh and other terrorist groups are
trying to revive a fabricated clash of civilizations. We
will not forget that the first victims of their attacks are
Muslims - Sunni and Shia - Arabs, Africans and
Asians. This is not a clash of civilizations; this is not
a fight between Islam and the West. This is a criminal
misuse ofa noble religion to perpetrate terrorist attacks
in a fight for power.

As we have all realized, Daesh is good at
propaganda. We need to counter its narrative both in
our home countries and abroad. We need to work on our
own European challenges when it comes to integration,
opportunities, dialogue and respect. We need to work
more with our partners outside Europe. We will follow
up on the outcome of the Washington, DC, Summit on
Countering Violent Extremism, in particular through
fostering cooperation, which includes education through
engaging more with local communities, especially in
the Horn of Africa. That is where we plan to hold our
annual plenary session of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum Horn of Africa Working Group, which will take
place in Uganda on 17 to 20 March this year.

We stand ready to facilitate further forms of
dialogue, including the possibility of creating a round
table of eminent persons from Europe and the Islamic
world to encourage intellectual exchanges and promote
dialogue on the roots and ramifications of terrorism in
our societies. On education, the European Union will
host a regional experts' meeting in early summer to
involve the European Union's Radicalisation Awareness
Network, and with the United Nations, we will explore
options to host a high-level side event during the
General Assembly's seventieth session in September to
promote the message for enhanced global partnerships
in countering violent extremism.

We all know how war, terror and poverty force
millions ofpeople to leave their home countries in search
of a better future. We need to face the phenomenon of
migration under many perspectives - international
aid, crisis management, border control, integration,
social inclusion. All those issues need to be tackled
effectively, but there is one thing we should never
forget; this is a matter of human lives - saving human
lives.

We cannot let the Mediterranean, the cradle of
millennial civilizations, turn into a grave for tens of
thousands ofinnocent people. Along with my colleagues
responsible for internal affairs and migration, we are
promoting deeper cooperation among EU member
States to find political and operational solutions to
prevent further tragedies. At the same time, we are
stepping up efforts to support the work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration, and
we must face collectively, in solidarity, our duty to
provide for the needs of refugees and asylum seekers.
There is much work to be done to guarantee that
refugees are welcomed in our societies. They should all
be provided with an opportunity to pursue their own
happiness and to contribute to the development of the
new communities.

Social cohesion, solidarity, the protection of human
life - these values are at the core of the European
project. This is a test the European Union cannot
fail, but we will never succeed alone. Addressing
uncontrolled migration is not just a task for Europe;
it is a responsibility we share. Countries of the region
are already making an effort that calls for all our
international support, starting with Jordan, Lebanon,
Turkey, Tunisia and many EU countries. I can guarantee
we are doing our part and will be doing so even more,
but we need all countries to stand up to the challenge. It
is a common interest and a common moral duty, since
we need to work together for the stability of regions that
in our world are facing terrible threats.

Yesterday in Kidal, a rocket attack on a camp
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali killed 2 Malian children
and a Chadian United Nations peacekeeper, and injured
11 peacekeepers and 3 civilians. No more than two
days ago, a terrorist attack in Bamako claimed the
lives of several people, including a security officer
of Belgian nationality working for the EU delegation
in Mali. Those acts strengthen even more our resolve
to help fight terrorism throughout the region and to
conclude a peace agreement in Bamako. In Mali the
EU is providing both civilian and military training
missions for the reconstruction and retraining of the
armed forces. This is part of a coherent medium-term
strategy to build up African national capacity, enabling
them to replace in due course the United Nations peace
support operation.

I am pleased that the Security Council is travelling
to Africa later today, as cooperation among the African
Union, the EU and the United Nations is key to regional
stability, and we have long-standing partnerships with
both organizations. In the field of security and peace
support operations, these partnerships increasingly
overlap, and it is time to reflect on how this trilateral
cooperation works and could work even better. As
was reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in Brussels
in April 2014, the EU is committed to supporting
Africa's efforts to manage its own security. We have
supported the African peace and security architecture
from the outset and aim to give practical help at all
levels - national, regional and continental - to enable
its implementation.

The EU has put its money where its mouth is. In the
10 years since 2004, the EU has provided €1.2 billion
in support of the African Union-led peace operations
through the African Peace Facility. All in all, 16
Common Security and Defence Policy missions and
operations have been deployed on the African continent
so far, bringing practical support and concrete results
in a number of fragile or post-crisis countries. In the
Central African Republic, the European Union force,
under a mandate from this Council, has been working
closely with both the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, to provide
vital protection for the civil population in Bangui.
Indeed, we feel our cooperation with the United Nations
in the planning and conduct of that mission has been
exemplary. Off the Horn of Africa, Operation Atalanta
has helped drive piracy from the seas.

To prevent conflict, however, nothing works better
than transparent and accountable Government in which
all citizens and groups in a country feel represented
and protected and that their concerns are heard, their
needs are taken care of, and their active participation
is welcomed. Hence, the efforts of the African Union
and the United Nations to encourage good governance,
the fight against corruption, and the full respect of
constitutional rule are fundamental building blocks to
prevent crises.

Through strong cooperation among the African
Union, the United Nations and the European Union,
we can combine our efforts to the greatest effect as we
face the immediate challenges and build capacities to
address the underlying causes in a comprehensive and
long-term perspective. This year, Africa has had to cope
not only with crisis and conflict; last week in Brussels,
we sent a message of hope but also of continued
determination to fight Ebola. That fight will not stop
until we see an end to the disease and the recovery
of the countries, societies and communities affected.
It is a fight that is based on cooperation, partnership,
trust, and ownership of the response, in particular of
local communities. It has been a fight that has been
conducted primarily in West Africa by the people and
authorities of the three most affected countries. It has
also been very much a collective effort. The lead role
of the United Nations has been crucial for all of us. It
has expertise, experience and global convening power.
I would like to pay tribute to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his work in rallying international support.
It has been very important, and will continue to be so.

As we focus on the southern border of Europe and
on the neighbours to the south of our own southern
neighbours, we have to face the events in the eastern
part of our continent as well. What has happened in
Ukraine over the past year is the most serious crisis in
Europe since the Balkan Wars. And let me add here that
the Balkans offer us all, today, reasons to be proud and
optimistic. Exactly 20 years after Srebrenica, we see
how far peace, democracy and regional integration can
go, if we invest in it.

But in Ukraine, today, achieving a sustainable
solution is urgent, not least due to the death toll and the
humanitarian impact of the conflict. The cost of that
crisis in terms of human lives is huge; almost 6,000
people have been killed and many more injured. And
let us not forget the number of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Fundamental norms of international
law, enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
are being challenged. That cannot go unanswered. The
European Union condemns the illegal annexation of
Crimea and Sevastopol as a violation of international
law. That is also the position of the United Nations,
as expressed in the 2014 General Assembly resolution
68/262.

Let me say that the United Nations counts. It was
important that the package of measures adopted in
Minsk on 12 Feb was endorsed by the Security Council.
The ceasefire is fragile and no effort should be spared
to sustain it. The Withdrawal of heavy weapons is only
a first step. The swift and full implementation of all
points of the Minsk Agreements by all sides is key to
bringing about a sustainable political solution to the
conflict.

We will continue to support the implementation
of the Minsk agreements, notably through in-kind
and financial contributions to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special
Monitoring Mission. I am constantly in touch with
the United Nations Secretary-General, as well as the
Secretary General of the OSCE, Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
to ensure that our respective support is effective and
well coordinated. We are also grateful to various
United Nations agencies for coordinating international
humanitarian efforts and for their objective reporting
on the human rights situation.

Our policy towards Ukraine is crystal clear - we
want to put an end to the conflict. We need to put an
end to the conflict and to safeguard the territorial
integrity of Ukraine. But we also have to make sure
that Ukraine becomes a functional State that honours
the aspirations of its peoples. Whoever wishes to push
towards those goals will find Europe's door wide open
for cooperation. Europe was built on the principle of
cooperation, both within its borders, and with our
neighbours. We want to keep that as a core principle of
our policies. The conflictual, complex world we live in
needs more cooperation, not less, everywhere.

The most recent crises should not distract us from
the Middle East peace process. Let us not forget that
another war was fought in Gaza no more than six months
ago. We should all put our best efforts into restarting
the peace process. The alternative to peace is not the
status quo. If we do not mend the wound, it will only
get worse. If we do not act, more violence will come.
We need action. For that reason, my first visit as High
Representative was to Gaza, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv and
Ramallah in the Middle East. Europe is ready to take
its part of the responsibility in restarting the process,
which is why we took the initiative of hosting, a few
weeks ago in Europe, a Quartet meeting - the first one
in over a year, at principals level. We need to recreate
the international framework that can lead to a solution.
We all know that the only way to resolve the conflict is
through an agreement between the parties that ends the
occupation which began in 1967, that ends all claims,
and that fulfils the aspirations of both sides.

There is no other solution than a two-State solution,
with a secure State of Israel and an independent,
democratic, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security and mutual
recognition. We also know that we need to facilitate
a regional framework that can support a solution. Out
of the current regional crises, we have the opportunity
to redefine a different balance that would be peaceful
for all, but we have to start from the fundamentals: we
need to protect the viability of the two-State solution.
Israel should renew its commitment to halt all new
settlements in the West Bank and should resume the
transfer of Palestinian Authority revenues, in line
with its obligations. The Palestinian factions should
set aside their rivalries with a view to moving towards
real national reconciliation, and restore governmental
control in Gaza.

As I mentioned previously, I visited Gaza a few
months ago. The humanitarian situation faced by the
population ofthe Gaza Strip must be addressed urgently.
Basic infrastructure and services must be restored.
The European Union has welcomed pledges made by
members of the international community towards the
reconstruction of Gaza; those pledges now need to be
honoured as a matter of urgency. The European Union
calls for a fundamental change of the political, security
and economic situation in Gaza, including the end of
the closure, and responses to Israel's legitimate security
concerns.

Direct negotiations between the parties should
resume as soon as possible. The international
community must take its responsibility in facilitating
the resumption of negotiations. We are ready to do our
part. The Quartet must redouble its efforts to facilitate
a renewed peace process and, in doing so, reach out
to all stakeholders, in particular in the region, to make
sure that the push for peace is supported and embraced
by all key actors. In that context, allow me to recall that
the Arab Peace Initiative remains a cornerstone of any
future peace.

The regional turmoil reinforces the sense of
urgency. As Daesh challenges our frontiers, and the
frontiers and sovereignty of existing States, Israel and
Palestine have the chance to mutually recognize their
borders and their right to security. Peace in the Holy
Places could lay out the most resounding message
against extremism, for the region and the whole world.

Speaking of the Middle East and of cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations,
we cannot forget the European Union's role - and
my personal one - as a facilitator in the talks with
Iran. Our aim is ambitious, and at the same time very
realistic: we need an agreement that both satisfies Iran's
legitimate aspirations to a peaceful nuclear programme,
and guarantees the security of the region and the whole
world.

The only possible deal is one that guarantees
the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. There is still work to be done, and the next
weeks will be crucial ones. But, we have never been so
close to what could be a turning point in the history of
Iran's relationship with the West and with the region.
We should not waste such a historic opportunity.

Just before I conclude, allow me to look ahead.
The year 2015 is a crucial year for the United Nations;
not only will we celebrate its seventieth anniversary,
but we will also see crucial processes coming to their
conclusions and new ones taking shape - processes
that will determine the global agenda for decades to
come. The results will influence global security for a
generation or more.
We are in the midst of discussions on the post-
2015 agenda. We must advocate a truly transformative
agenda. It must address the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development
in a balanced way, and everywhere in our world.
Peaceful societies and freedom from violence
are crucial ingredients, and peace is not possible
without development and respect for human rights.
Understanding these interdependencies should make
us even more committed to supporting the efforts of
the Secretary-General for a truly transformational and
comprehensive approach to poverty eradication and
sustainable development this year.

This year is also the twentieth anniversary of the
Beijing Declaration and the fifteenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). It is a unique
opportunity for us all to support the United Nations in
its work for the advancement of gender equality, the
empowerment of women and girls and the fight against
all forms of violence against women. I am pleased to
have just attended the opening session of the fifty-ninth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.

This is an important year, too, for our common
work on peace. When peace fails, we must be willing
and able to act decisively and, often, quickly. Most
often the United Nations is called upon to take the lead.
The result is that United Nations peacekeeping is facing
ever-increasing demands. The United Nations needs to
adapt its response to crises that are ever more complex
and increasingly involve a large number of non-State
stakeholders. Conflicts have changed; so must the
means to respond to them.

The EU fully supports the review of United Nations
peace operations the Secretary-General launched last
year. The review is timely and very necessary. We look
to the Security Council to take on the leadership role
as prescribed by the Charter. The world expects the
Security Council to respond decisively and timely to
the crises we face.

Our Union, the European Union, is built on the
same values and the same vision of a cooperative world
order that led to the foundation of the United Nations,
70 years ago. In 70 years, the threats to peace have
evolved continuously, and so must we. Our tools need
to be updated so as to meet new challenges. But our

hopes and aspirations - to save future generations
from war, fight for democracy and human rights, and
promote social progress - are still the same. The

European Union is confident it can play a key role in
working towards a more peaceful future. We seek the
cooperation of others in the world, under the guidance
of the United Nations. We will only succeed if we all
do our part. We will only succeed if the nations of our
world are truly united.

