The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Luis Ernesto Derbez, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mexico.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Derbez
(Mexico) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Luis
Ernesto Derbez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mexico.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of the
Netherlands, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. van den
Berg (Netherlands) took a seat at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and under rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
representatives of regional organizations to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber: His Excellency Mr. Said Djinnit,
Commissioner for Peace, Security and Political Affairs
of the African Union; His Excellency Mr. Peter Feith,
Deputy Director-General of European Security and
Defence Policy of the European Union; His Excellency
Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States; His Excellency Mr. Alounkeo Kittikhoun,
Chairperson of the Standing Committee of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Robert F. Simmons, Deputy Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization; His Excellency Mr.
Dmitry Boulakhov, Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Independent States; His Excellency
Mr. Mokhtar Lamani, Permanent Observer of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference; His
Excellency Mr. Solomon Passy, Chairman-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bulgaria;
and His Excellency Mr. Effah-Apenteng, representative
of the Chair of the Economic Community of West
African States.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2004/546, which contains the text of a letter dated 8
July 2004 from the Permanent Representative of
Romania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a background paper on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes.

The Security Council is holding an important
debate today. The topic is not new; nor is it ground-
breaking. And it is certainly not anywhere close to
being concluded. To paraphrase the words of the
Foreign Minister of Mexico, Mr. Luis Ernesto Derbez,
who presided over the Council in April 2003 during a
meeting on a related topic (see S/PV.4739), as long as
we aspire to build a secure, prosperous and democratic
international environment that is governed by the rule
of law, we shall continue to bear the unavoidable
responsibility of bringing out the best there is in the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
arrangements.

Romania chose to convene a meeting on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes to improve
interaction between the United Nations and regional
bodies and to determine ways forward for collaborative
and reinforced relationships. I therefore invite those
participating in the discussion today to give
consideration to principles and mechanisms for
enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the future.

I wish to express my appreciation for the
presence among us of heads and representatives of
regional organizations. Their participation in this
meeting will greatly enhance the prospects for
strengthening coordination between the United Nations
and those organizations in stabilization processes.

A final word on my part: I should like to recognize
the presence in the public section of this Chamber of
three remarkable students from Romania - Oana
Amaricai, Adrian Cazan and Radu Pavel - who are
here because they won a Security Council simulation
contest. Joining them are students from the Seton Hall
University School of Diplomacy and International
Relations. I salute all those young representatives, who
take enthusiastic interest in our work.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, and I invite him to
take the floor.


