Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank all three of
our briefers for their very informative briefings today.
If I may, I would like to particularly thank Michael
Keating for his work and commitment during this
historic period in Somalia's State-building process and
for his resilience while holding this challenging and
dynamic portfolio. He has been an exemplary Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and I think the
whole Security Council wishes him well in his future.

As Mr. Keating set out in the nearly three years
he has represented the Secretary-General, there has
been real progress to advance peace, stability and
State-building in Somalia. But there have also been and
remain significant challenges, and we have seen both in
recent months. I think the biggest single positive - ifwe
start with the positives - must surely be in the overall
regional dynamic. It has been exciting and inspirational
to see the rapprochement brought about in the Horn of
Africa, in particular, led by Ethiopia and Eritrea.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
to the Council the new Ambassador of Ethiopia and
to also pay tribute to his predecessor, who was such
an influential member of the Council. I have known
Mr. Alemu for a decade; I have learned so much
from him, and I count him as a friend. That is why I
wanted to welcome the new Ambassador and thank his
predecessor for all he did for us here and for Africa in
the Council.

In Somalia, I think that the other positives we have
seen are the agreement in principle on an electoral
model and resource-sharing signed in June, and we
welcome and need to see further progress to take those
forward. It has been extremely encouraging to see
the strong progress on economic recovery, including
efforts to tackle corruption, improve public financial
management and commitments to ambitious reforms
under the recently agreed on third International
Monetary Fund programme. We commend those efforts
and their results. I agree very much with Mr. Keating
on the economic potential of Somalia, which of course
requires a political commitment and courage if we are
to get there.

We also warmly welcome the much-needed
improvement in the humanitarian situation following
both the strong humanitarian response and the better
than average rainfall. Recovery remains fragile. We
must notbe complacent. The situation is still concerning,
with 2.6 million internally displaced persons in urgent
need of assistance.

Unfortunately, however, as our briefers set out,
significant challenges remain. The current political
difficulties between the Federal Government and the
federal member states urgently need to be resolved. That
is critical across all areas of State-building. A failure
to resolve that challenge would seriously limit the
opportunity for further progress. Cooperation between
the parties is needed to meet the December time frame
for passing the electoral law, and in particular to agree
on the final outstanding issue of constituency size. It is
needed to complete the constitutional review process
and strengthen the federal system, and it is needed to
take forward the Vital work of security reform. We must
therefore have cooperation.
I would like to now address security. Let me start
with condemning in the strongest terms the attacks in
Mogadishu on 2 and 10 September, and sending my
deepest condolences to all those affected. Security
reform is at a criticaljuncture. The implementation ofthe
national security architecture, including the integration
of and support for regional forces, is vital, and faster
progress is needed. The national security architecture
is the critical underpinning of a successful transition
to Somalia-led security. We therefore welcome the
development of the transition plan and we pay tribute to
the ongoing commitment and sacrifice of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the troop-
contributing countries in the fight against Al-Shabaab.
I thought that was made very clear by Mr. Madeira in
his briefing.

It is important that the transition plan be delivered in
a managed and coordinated way, with close engagement
from AMISOM, the federal member states and other
partners. To support the practical requirements to
transition, AMISOM. needs to reconfigure accordingly.
We all, as international partners, must play our part
by coordinating the assistance we give as part of
a comprehensive approach to security structures.
Mr. Keating again set out the importance of us
coordinating together and ensuring that we do not end
up in a situation where essentially we are accidentally
funding a set of different and private armies. We must
bring together one army, and we must ensure that the
transition is sustainably financed. The United Kingdom
announced in recent weeks an additional $9 million in
funding for AMISOM. I expect that there will be a
number of calls today around the table for predictable
and sustainable funding for AMISOM, and I urge all
those who make those calls to ensure that they also
make similar contributions.

May I welcome Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka to the Security
Council table, and I hope to see her even more often. I
would just like to very much welcome her briefing. The
rise to 73 of the number of women elected as Members
of Parliament in 2016 was a significant change and
really worthy of commendation. The country must
build on that to support and strengthen the role of
women as decision-makers and in leadership roles by

strengthening the position of women, along with young
people, people with disabilities, displaced people and
minority groups, in the upcoming electoral law and
constitutional review. I agree wholeheartedly with
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka that sustainable development and
a sustainable peace require inclusion, and inclusion
requires the particular inclusion of women. Legislation
is important to strengthen the protection of women
and girls, and ensure that perpetrators of abuses are
held to account, including for sexual and gender-based
violence. We look forward to further progress on the
sexual offences bill and commend the progress made
in Somaliland.

Overall, we believe that we are on the right side of
the ledger in Somalia, but we cannot be complacent.
We must continue to work, and we must work harder.
I hope that the remarkable and exciting progress in the
Horn of Africa also has an impact in Somalia. The key
is dialogue and cooperation. All Somali leaders must
work together and find ways to set aside short-term
interests and gain in favour of longer-term stability,
which will be of far-higher political, security and
economic benefit to all in Somalia. That is the only way
to ensure ongoing international support.

