Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I shall try to be brief. I
would like to begin by thanking Ambassador
Menkerios and the rest of the Committee of Experts for
their report (S/2001/511), which was compiled in
difficult circumstances and which contains many useful
recommendations. I would like also to take this
opportunity to recognize the energy and leadership of
Ambassador Valdivieso in his chairmanship of the
Afghanistan sanctions Committee.

As the wider issues of Afghanistan will be
discussed later this month, I shall restrict my comments
here to the report of the Committee of Experts. Ireland
supports the recommendation of the Committee of
Experts that an office for sanctions monitoring and
coordination be established in a central location with
sanctions enforcement support teams working with
border control services in the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan. The practical aspects of that structure,
including the modalities for cooperation with
neighbouring States, should now be discussed in the
sanctions Committee, which has the relevant expertise,
with a view to presenting recommendations to the
Council as soon as possible.

In order for such a mechanism to be effective, it
must, we believe, have sustainable and continuous
funding. When costings become available, Ireland will
consider offering assistance in the light of available
resources.

Many of the other recommendations of the
Committee of Experts are also worthy of consideration
and should be further examined by the sanctions
Committee. We appreciate the emphasis placed on the
significance of drug trafficking, and we fully agree that
this must be addressed as part of the overall problem.
We also agree with the two-pronged approach to the
closure of terrorist camps, as outlined in paragraph 52
of the report.

We note with interest the recommendation in
paragraph 32 regarding aircraft turbine fuel and fluids
for armoured personnel carriers. But on that point, I
would be grateful for clarification that this proposal
relates to military flights and that any restrictions could
be implemented without inadvertently affecting
humanitarian flights.

