Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation is following with
alarm the developments in Angola. The situation there has
steadily worsened in recent months, and there exists a
great danger of the resumption of war in that country.

 

The cause of the worsening situation is UNITA's persistent
failure to comply with its obligations under the peace
settlement, its hindrance of the extension of the State
Administration and its active military build-up.

There has been a dangerous escalation in armed
attacks on representatives of governmental authority,
personnel of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), international staff and the civilian
population. Rather than working for the complete
transformation of UNITA into a political party, in
accordance with the Lusaka Protocol, UNITA's leadership,
despite its earlier promises, is increasing its demands and
pretexts. By acting in such a way, UNITA is not only
harming the cause of reconciliation, it is ignoring outright
the repeated warnings of the Security Council. UNITA's
conduct is all the more inadmissible because its activities
heighten instability not only within Angola, but in
neighbouring countries as well, which could cause the
conflict to spread to the broader African subregion.

The international community has made considerable
efforts to promote a political settlement in Angola. We are
convinced that this policy must continue. However, the
Angolan parties themselves must also acknowledge that
without respect for peace in Angola such assistance cannot
be effective.

We demand that UNITA fulfil unconditionally and on
time its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol. We also
expect the Government of Angola to continue to honour in
good faith its commitments under the peace agreement.

The draft resolution to be adopted today by the
Security Council is to some extent of a transitional nature,
as we are discussing the extension of the mandate of
MONUA for 30 days, in expectation of new, major,
important recommendations from the Secretary-General,
during the preparation of which the future role of the
United Nations in Angola must be reassessed. We welcome
the mission of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Brahimi, and we await his report.

We believe it important that the Secretary-General
continue to play a role in the peace process. The
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and progress on
national reconciliation would be the best tribute one could
pay to the late Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Beye, who died so tragically while carrying
out his duties. We express our full support for his
successor, Mr. Diallo, and we hope the Angolan parties will
cooperate fully with him. The Security Council must
continue to follow developments in Angola.

