Mr. Valinakis (Greece): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's public meeting on
the situation in Sudan, and particularly Darfur, an issue
of great concern for the international community, given
its grave security and humanitarian implications for the
wider African region.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

The signing of the peace agreement between the
Government of Sudan and the Sudan Liberation
Movement/Army on 5 May 2006 in Abuja constitutes a
very significant step forward, which we hope will
create a new momentum in Darfur and will mark the
beginning of a reversal of the deplorable humanitarian
situation.

The agreement in Abuja also epitomizes the
determination of Africa to resolve its problems in a
collective and effective manner, in cooperation with its
international partners. In that regard, I would like to
commend the African Union (AU); your Government,
Mr. President, as Chair of the African Union; the
Government of Nigeria; and, of course, the AU chief
negotiator, Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, and his team for
their tireless mediation efforts to achieve a positive
conclusion of the Abuja talks. Credit should also be
given to the AU's international partners, such as the
European Union, the League of Arab States, the United
States and the United Kingdom, among others, for
engaging actively in the Abuja process over the past
few years.

It is indeed unfortunate that the smaller faction of
the Sudan Liberation Movement and the Justice and
Equality Movement have refused to sign the
agreement. We urge those parties to overcome their
remaining difficulties and to subscribe to the
agreement. We hope that they will soon realize that it is
in their interest to agree to the agreement proposed by
the AU for the sake of their own people.

The apparent breakthrough in the Abuja talks
does not allow the international community to be
complacent. The implementation of the agreement is
likely to be more challenging than its signing. The time
frames should be fully respected so that the
implementation moves forward as smoothly as
possible.

At the same time we cannot but express grave
concern over the continuous deterioration of the
humanitarian situation. The humanitarian operation
launched in Darfur in late 2003 - which is the largest
humanitarian operation in the world and which has
been extremely effective - is now at risk because of
rising insecurity and a lack of funds.

In the light of those facts, it is vital to address the
following key issues in the next few weeks.

The agreement signed in Abuja cannot be
implemented without a strong international presence on
the ground, which will monitor the compliance of the
two parties to the agreement. The African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) has spared no effort to
bring security and stability to Darfur in extremely
adverse circumstances. It is therefore extremely
important that AMIS be further reinforced, given that
its role in the implementation of the agreement will be
of paramount importance.

The European Union and its member States have
provided planning and technical, financial and
equipment support to both the military and the police
components of AMIS, while reaffirming their readiness
to continue to provide such support. Greece has also
contributed to that effort, within its capabilities, and
we will continue to do so.

With an agreement reached in Abuja, it is now
more crucial than ever that the planning for the blue-
hatting of AMIS be accelerated. In that respect, we
look forward to the discussions in the Security Council
and the expeditious finalization of the draft resolution
proposed by the United States. We believe that by the
end of this year, a United Nations mission should be in
a position to take over from AMIS, because such a
mission is the only viable option for providing
sustained stability and security in Darfur over the long
term. In that regard, we look forward to the swift
dispatching of an African Union-United Nations
technical assessment mission to Darfur.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation must be
addressed. In that regard, the restrictions on non-
governmental organizations and humanitarian agencies
should be lifted. In addition, humanitarian assistance to
Darfur should be increased; in that regard, Greece is
examining ways in which it can be of most help.

The tension and instability on the border between
the Sudan and Chad should be resolved as soon as
possible on the basis of the Tripoli Agreement. If not
addressed, that problem may potentially have a
detrimental effect, with serious ramifications, on the
humanitarian situation of the entire region.

Finally, Greece expresses its commitment, both as
a member of the European Union and as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, to support
the effective implementation of the agreement reached
in Abuja, including through the mandate of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1591 (2005), which is chaired by Greece.
