Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
very grateful to Ambassador Holbrooke for his report,
and as the first member of the mission to speak after
him, I wish to thank him for his generous words about
the mission and the members of the mission. I echo
everything he said about the value, the pressures and
the enjoyment of being on the mission, and I would
like to pay tribute to him as leader. It may have
seemed, from what one saw in the media and on the
television, that this was a one-man mission. One would
be wise to imagine what it would have been like if
Ambassador Holbrooke had been a mere member of the
mission, and not its leader. But I would like to say that
he led the mission with a sense of inclusiveness and
equality among members of the mission that was both
an example and an inspiration to us, and I would like to
thank him for that.

It is also important that we recognize how much
we owed on that mission to the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), Ambassador Morjane, General
Diallo, the people on the ground who looked after us
and to the Secretariat staff who came with us and
looked after and supported us in extremely difficult
circumstances. Nor could we have done without a
remarkable service from the Egyptian company MC,
which gave us an aircraft and a crew with remarkable
support for the journey that we had to accomplish. The
third tribute has to go to the Governments that we met.
From President Kabila onwards, there was a
responsiveness, an interest and a willingness to do
business on the detail that was extremely important to
the mission.

I believe that overall the mission accomplished a
timely and much-needed boost to the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and beyond
that it demonstrated a commitment that we had only
evinced from this Chamber previously of the Security
Council to problem-solving in Africa on the ground,
which was and is extremely important in raising the
morale of Africans and people dealing with Africa that
the Security Council is not going to let go of the need
to address the problems we are facing at the moment.
The fact that we did this when we were there, I think,
was a very important symbol of that.

Yes, as Ambassador Holbrooke has indicated, it
was also important for three of us to get out to a
provincial town in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Kananga is a city of 700,000 people with no
electricity supply at present, with no regular water
supply, but with a spirit for peace and an organization
in difficult circumstances under a remarkable
provincial governor that I think was an inspiration to
those of who travelled to that city. The look on the
faces of the people in the streets of Kananga calling out
for peace as we went past is an abiding memory of that
mission.
It reminds me of a similar visit I paid a few
weeks earlier to a town in Sierra Leone, only 30
kilometres outside Freetown, where the people had just
come back to a city without electricity or water and
were calling upon the British team that was there for
peace in exactly the same way. That city has now been
overrun again by the Revolutionary United Front. It is
empty. The people have fled out into the bush. I think
we have got to make sure that that does not happen to
Kananga or to the other cities of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. If, as Ambassador Holbrooke
has said and as our report says, Sierra Leone is not to
cast a shadow over what we are trying to do in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it also reminds the
leaders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the leaders involved in the Lusaka process of what can
happen again to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
if the ceasefire breaks down and we come back again to
trying to solve these long-standing differences by
military means rather than by addressing the political
root.

That means we must now follow up quickly on
the report's recommendations, because the Lusaka
parties are looking for results, the ceasefire is holding
but it is fragile and, in particular, Kisangani is still
tense. I think we achieved something there, but
MONUC has got to follow up quickly, and the capacity
of the observers there to act on what we achieved on
Kisangani is absolutely vital. The wider assurances that
we received while we were there, on security and
access for the United Nations to Kisangani, must be
followed up. Part of this is the agreement between the
leaders of Uganda and Rwanda to deconflict in
Kisangani. They met again in Tanzania on 14 May. We
have had reports about that meeting to the effect that
they wish to reaffirm their commitment not just to the
Lusaka Agreement, but to the withdrawal of all their
troops from the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
due course and to this agreement in particular, the
Rwakitura agreement signed at President Museveni's
farm, to reduce their forces at Kisangani to no more
than two companies each. That is a very important
piece of follow-up.

On the issue of co-location, we have said in our
report that Kisangani is at least a prime candidate for
co-location, both of MONUC and the Joint Military
Commission (JMC) together, and for the national
dialogue. It would be helpful if the Council could have
an assessment from the Secretariat, and from MONUC
through the Secretariat, on the practicality of using
Kisangani in this way. We would like to know
something about the logistical and resource
requirements of taking this route and whether they
think it is going to be generally acceptable to the
parties. I hope, Sir, that under your presidency we can
come back to this point quite quickly; otherwise, there
will be no sense of follow-up to what we achieved in
Kisangani, which will be only short-term and will
evaporate unless there is this follow-up.

This is true also, but perhaps in a longer time-
frame, for disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement. We raised this with the Political
Committee, and we will need to raise it again when the
Political Committee comes to New York in June. We
need to prepare a way forward on disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement, which
gives a role not just to the United Nations presence on
the ground, but also to the Joint Military Commission,
where I think there could be a specific function for the
JMC as regards the precise definition of the groups we
are talking about and a monitoring of early action on
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement. That is something we would like to see
taken forward under Ambassador Levitte's presidency
next month.

On the national dialogue, we have to recognize
that the parties will not leave aside the military option
unless the political option is alive and running. We
recognized on the mission that all the Governments,
especially Kinshasa, want to see the proper
arrangements made for this and want everybody to get
a move on, but we think that facilitator Masire's
timetable for a beginning of the national dialogue in
early July is, in the circumstances, the only realistic
one and the international community should support it.
He needs funds - not just pledges, but disbursements
- and all of us need to work to ensure that that
happens.

We also need to drive home the message in this
debate and beyond that the national dialogue is for the
Congolese people to decide on. The substance of it is
for the Congolese people; the outside facilitation is to
provide the mechanism for that. The outside
mechanism will not affect or decide the substance. If
we can give that clear message, then I think all parties
will be prepared to proceed with this in a way which
removes their apprehensions.

I echo Ambassador Holbrooke's remarks on the
need to move also on an expert panel on illegal
exploitation of resources. When we next meet on this,
we need to take action on that. That panel needs a
mandate and it needs a decision by the Council. The
United Kingdom would like to see early movement on
it.

Finally, let us come back to the point that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to be judged
on its merits. We are focusing on Sierra Leone this
week, perhaps next week, but we have to come back to
the next steps on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In asking the Secretariat for further work on
this, could it please also let us know frankly if its
preoccupation with Sierra Leone is having an effect on
its ability to deal with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. If that is the case, it must have immediate
reinforcement, because the needs of the Congo cannot
wait for other problems elsewhere to be solved before
we take up the issues that we uncovered and took
forward on our mission. The follow-up is as necessary
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo as it is on
Sierra Leone.

