Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
listened carefully to the briefing by Mr. Kafando in
his capacity as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi. We hope that the Special Envoy will
continue to strengthen dialogue and cooperation with
the Government of Burundi.

The current situation in Burundi is generally
stable. The Burundian Government has worked
actively to preserve national peace and stability and
to promote economic and social development. It has
formulated a national development plan and cooperated
with neighbouring countries to facilitate the voluntary
return of Burundian refugees. China welcomes those
positive developments. Burundi is an important country
in the Great Lakes region of Africa. The stability
and development of Burundi contribute to peace and
stability in the region. The international community
should fully recognize the efforts of the Burundian
Government in maintaining peace and stability and
should actively provide constructive assistance to the
Government and the people of Burundi to meet their
needs. China would like to emphasize the following
three points.

First, there must be proper respect for Burundi's
national ownership, sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity. The international community
should consider the current situation in Burundi
comprehensively and objectively and should play a
constructive role with a view to ensuring the long-term
stability and development of the country and the region.

Secondly, there must be continued support
for Burundi's political process. China appreciates
the positive efforts by regional and subregional
organizations such as the African Union, the East
African Community (EAC) and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region in exercising
their good offices with regard to the issue of Burundi.
We support the EAC in taking the lead in that regard.

Thirdly, our priority should be to increase
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and to support its
economic and social development. China welcomes the
Burundian Government's recent active cooperation
with neighbouring countries in their response to
refugees and other humanitarian issues. China urges
the relevant international agencies and organizations
to resume economic cooperation with and development
assistance to Burundi as soon as possible.

The Chinese Government supports the Burundi
peace process and has actively provided assistance for
the country's nation-building. China is ready to continue
to play a constructive role in achieving stability and
development in Burundi.

