Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish first to thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's open meeting. The Chinese delegation also
thanks the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Annabi, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Tomorrow is an important day in the history of
East Timor. One year ago tomorrow, a popular
consultation took place in East Timor under United
Nations auspices, which set East Timor on the road of
nation-building. Over the past year, with the support of
the international community, the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
has made tangible progress in reviving the economy,
rebuilding homes and other infrastructure, maintaining
public order and security, formulating legislation,
creating jobs and training local people. Moreover, it
has set up a joint Cabinet with East Timorese members,
which has enabled local people to have greater and
expedited participation in the transition process. This
meets with our satisfaction.

We appreciate and are grateful for the great
quantity of work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and his staff. They have made all this
progress in very difficult working conditions: an
admirable achievement. It is our belief that the Security
Council will continue to support the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
De Mello.

The task of UNTAET in East Timor is to build a
new country from scratch, which is an unprecedented
challenge for the United Nations. I want to stress that
in formulating relevant criteria and standards for the
independence of East Timor, attention must always be
paid to the need to respect the traditions and the culture
of East Timor, and the will and the choices of the local
people.

We are very concerned at the security situation in
East Timor. The fact that a number of violent incidents
have taken place in the border areas is particularly
disquieting. We condemn the violent attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers, and we hope that those acts of
violence and those incidents will be thoroughly
investigated. We expect the Indonesian Government to
continue to cooperate with UNTAET and to take steps
to guarantee safety and security in the East Timor
border areas. We welcome the Indonesian
Government's decision to close refugee camps in West
Timor, which we hope will lead to a final solution of
the problem of the refugees remaining in West Timor.
An appropriate solution requires help from the
international community and cooperation from the
Indonesian Government. We believe that the
Indonesian Government will honour its commitments
and will continue its good cooperation with UNTAET.

