Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to extend our
greetings to you, Sir, as you assume your duties as
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations as well as in the presidency of the Council for
the month of March. I thank you for the initiative of
convening this timely debate, which is of great interest
to all of us. I appreciate the presence of and the
statements made by the Secretary-General, Minister
Dlamini Zuma and Mr. Lamamra, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union. This high-
level attendance only confirms the importance of the
matter before us today.

I wish to express my appreciation to Mr. Romano
Prodi for his leadership in conducting the work of the
panel on modalities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in support of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We appreciate the
extensive consultations with Member States, which
added to the already sharp perception of the panel. We
believe that the panel's report (S/2008/813) is a
powerful instrument for building a shared strategic
vision on an enhanced partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union.

In recent years, the United Nations has faced an
increasing number of challenges in the field of peace
and security. Peacekeeping operations have become
more complex. African countries and regional
organizations have repeatedly stepped forward and
expressed their willingness to shoulder increased
responsibility in our common effort to keep peace.
Such was the case in Darfur, Somalia and Cote
d'Ivoire, among other places. That commendable
attitude must be met with an equal willingness on the
part of the United Nations to provide the necessary
support.

The importance of cooperation with the African
Union and with African subregional organizations was
reaffirmed at the level of heads of State and
Government when the Council met last April under the
South African presidency (see S/PV.5868) and adopted
resolution 1809 (2008). Before that, at the 2005 World
Summit, the heads of State and Government of the
entire membership of the Organization had supported
the idea of enhanced cooperation. The report before us
gives concrete form to that common objective.

09-2716]

The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is an expression of the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter, as recognized in the
panel's report. The principles and purposes of the
founding document of the Organization, as well as the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, are the
premises of such cooperation.

We fully endorse the view of the panel that
sustainable peace cannot be achieved through the
deployment of military forces alone. The cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
should focus not only on peace, but also on sustainable
development. The inclusion of a peacebuilding
dimension in the early stages of peacekeeping is most
relevant. The promotion of security goes hand in hand
with the consolidation of national institutions and the
creation of conditions conducive to sustained
development.

Brazil takes note with interest of the panel's
proposal that a United Nations mechanism be
established to help fund African Union peacekeeping
missions. We believe that that important proposal
deserves thorough consideration not only in the
Security Council, but also in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and in the General Assembly.
Brazil concurs with the panel and the African Union
that one cannot expect peacekeeping missions to be
deployed in uncertain scenarios without the necessary
means. We agree with the analysis that in the absence
of the necessary capabilities, such an approach entails
not only the risk of failure, but also the risk of raising
expectations that will not be fulfilled, with serious
consequences for the credibility of the Organization.

The African Union is uniquely positioned to
provide expertise and ownership in the process of
resolving conflicts on the continent. We must draw on
its resources and knowledge, but we should also take an
active role in contributing to its success. Subregional
organizations - the Southern African Development
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and the Economic Community of West
African States, to name but a few - often go the extra
mile to ensure peace and act on behalf of the Council.
They need to be supported in such efforts.

Brazil is a traditional contributor of troops to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We currently
have military and police in several missions in Africa -
those in Western Sahara, Cote d'Ivoire, the Sudan and
Liberia - and in the special political missions in
Guinea-Bissau and West Africa. In the past, we sent
troops to Angola and Mozambique in peacekeeping
operations that were essential for those fellow
Portuguese-speaking countries.

Our contribution to African peacekeeping is
focused less on financial resources and more on training
and the transfer of expertise. This modality of South-
South cooperation is based on a shared perspective
regarding conflict resolution as a holistic experience
resting on the three pillars of security, political
reconciliation and development. At this juncture, Brazil
is examining various ways to improve our cooperation
in the area of peacekeeping both with the African Union
and with individual African countries, taking into
account our budgetary limitations and the ability to
produce a significant impact on the ground.

Peacekeeping is a global responsibility as well as
a global asset. Cooperation with the African Union
represents an additional path to ensure peace and
security. It does not, however, diminish the duties of
the United Nations. Brazil is ready to participate in the
discussions following up on the recommendations of
the panel.
