Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the presence at
this Security Council meeting of His Excellency
Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, as well as that of the
President of Poland, the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and
the Minister of State for Asia and the Pacific of the
United Kingdom. The presence of such leaders confers
particular prominence to our work. I would like to
thank Kazakhstan for organizing this briefing on such a
crucial subject. My delegation also extends its gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his briefing and vision on
this question, which has preoccupied the Organization
and Council for many years.

Aware of the threat posed to humankind by the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations established a series of instruments and
multilateral mechanisms very early on, with the aim of
reducing or eliminating all or part of those weapons
in the long-term. Those instruments include the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and various Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 1540 (2004) as well as subsequent
resolutions. Despite such existing mechanisms, the
relevance of which is well established, it is clear that
much remains to be done in the area of non-proliferation
and the elimination of all such weapons.

Various recent issues - namely, the Iran nuclear
deal, the North Korean nuclear and ballistic tests and
the alleged use of chemical weapons by Islamic State
terrorists - pose a challenge to the non-proliferation
regime and require special attention and vigilance on
the part of the Council. We must therefore go further
collectively in the adoption of binding regimes for
the prohibition of weapons of mass destruction and in
strengthening dialogue among States.

We must realize that, despite the signing of the
Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, that
category ofweapons ofmass destruction is increasingly
a growing threat. That is due to the fact that the major
nuclear Powers have shied away from the Treaty and,
in addition, have opposed the establishment of binding
legal instruments, as called for by all other countries.
The nuclear Powers must rally to the international
consensus on the eventual elimination of nuclear
weapons and strengthen dialogue with other countries
in the context of collective security guarantees. In that
regard, Cote d'Ivoire calls for a further reduction of all
nuclear arsenals in order to discourage countries that
are tempted to join the group of nuclear Powers.

In that context, nuclear-armed countries and other
concerned countries must create the conditions for the
entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty in order to prevent the development of new
nuclear weapons and the production of large quantities
of fissile material and other nuclear waste. Beyond
the agreements, the nuclear countries must provide
the necessary guarantees with respect to the handling
and storage of those materials, which constitute a real
danger for the countries of the South, and also provide
safety and nuclear security guarantees.

My country, which has made peace its guiding
principle, certainly is in favour of a firm position, but
we are not closed to ongoing dialogue on those issues.
We also attach the highest importance to Africa
remaining a nuclear-weapon-free zone. We also call on
the nuclear Powers and the African countries to combat
the pollution of the continent by nuclear materials.

It is therefore important that the international
community mobilize in support of the Iranian nuclear
agreement, in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015),
as the safest guarantee for preventing an arms race in
the Middle East, with the clear threat of proliferation.

Similarly, the thaw in the relations between the
two Koreas, following the tensions arising from the
nuclear and ballistic tests by North Korea, is to be
welcomed and encouraged through the opening of a
comprehensive dialogue that includes all stakeholders
in the crisis on the Korean peninsula. That thaw augurs
well for the Olympic Winter Games in South Korea. It
should be welcomed and encouraged in order to achieve
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

Finally, allegations of the use of chemical weapons
by terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria, if proved, would
constitute a serious violation of the non-proliferation
regime and a challenge to our collective security. The
Council must reach agreement on that issue in order to
allow for an investigation of the facts, in particular in
Syria, and to bring to justice those found responsible.

True to its tradition of peace, care d'Ivoire has
always advocated the settlement of all disputes through
dialogue. It therefore follows that we ratified the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on
6 March 1973 and, on 20 July 2017, signed the Treaty
on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, adopted by the
General Assembly on 7 July 2017. The latter instrument
is crucial to building a safer world and to guaranteeing
the future of humankind, since the risk of a nuclear
confrontation is no longer an academic theory.

Cote d'Ivoire will therefore continue to support
global efforts to eradicate nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery from the face of the Earth by helping
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime and to expand
its scope, on the one hand, and by ensuring the strict
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), in particular
with regard to non-State actors, on the other hand.
Our efforts to implement a global non-proliferation
architecture would be in vain if they were not part
of a comprehensive approach to strengthening
cooperation and assistance among States, on the one
hand, and between States and subregional, regional and
international organizations, on the other.

That reasoning leads my country to recall the two
pillars on which the Council's activities in that area are
based, namely, the responsibility to establish a system
for the regulation of armaments, as provided for in
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations, and the
pursuit of a number of objectives, ranging from respect
for the prohibition of the use of biological and chemical
weapons to the prevention of the acquisition of such
weapons by non-State actors, in accordance with the
primary responsibility of the United Nations to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security.

In that perspective, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) could support States
that so wish in strengthening their national capacities for
sharing experiences and good practices. Strengthening
national and regional capacities is all the more necessary
given recent technological developments, including
the miniaturization of weapons of mass destruction
and their delivery systems, which increase the risk of
proliferation and the acquisition of such weapons by
terrorist groups.

Like Kazakhstan, your country, Mr. President,
whose commitment to building a world free of weapons
of mass destruction is to be welcomed, the Ivorian
delegation would like to reiterate the willingness of
cote d'Ivoire to fully implement the disarmament
and non-proliferation regimes for weapons of mass
destruction with a view to achieving a safer world free
of nuclear weapons. We express our full support for
your country's appeal to the permanent members of
the Security Council to work to build of a nuclear-free
world by 2045, which coincides with the centenary of
the Organization.

cote d'Ivoire also supports the call for nuclear
States to refrain from the first use nuclear weapons in
the case of conflict.

Finally, my country welcomes the holding in May
of the United Nations high-level conference on nuclear
disarmament, which is clearly a key step in the process
of establishing a global non-proliferation regime and
completely eliminating nuclear weapons.

