Mr. Saleh Azzam (Lebanon): Allow me at the
outset to express my delegation's appreciation for the
remarkable efforts made by the Peruvian presidency,
and your able leadership of the Council, Sir, throughout
the month of April. I also thank you for convening
this important open debate, your team for the concept
note (S/2018/324, annex), and the briefers for their
pertinent presentations.

This debate is of particular importance not
only to Lebanon, but to the Arab region as a whole.
Approximately 60 per cent of the population of our
region is under 25 years of age, thereby making it one
of the most youthful regions in the world. Yet, quite
unfortunately, it is also a region where optimism
and zeal are waning among young people. Mounting
political frustration, lack of economic opportunities
and diverse social challenges are, regrettably, depriving
youth of the spark of hope.

In Lebanon, despite the Government's dedicated
efforts to address pressing economic challenges, the
overall impact of the lack of economic opportunities on
youth is tangible. These have also been exacerbated by
the economic repercussions of the Syrian displacement
situation. As of August 2017, the unemployment rate
stood at 25 per cent, with unemployment among young
people - those under 25 years of age - at 37 per cent.
Although approximately 35,000 young people graduate
from universities annually, only 5,000 jobs are found.
That is only one job for every seven graduates.
The numbers are telling and reflect certain social
repercussions of that economic challenge, particularly
in the increasing figures of migration to other countries
to seek jobs.

Among youth, the lack of opportunity and hope
can be a recipe for disaster. One expectable, albeit
worrisome by-product of economic, social and political
frustrations is the desperate resort to radical ideas and
beliefs, which are, in certain cases, conducive to violent
extremism. We therefore wonder what factors could
promote and support young people's active involvement
in building peace, thereby preventing violence and
contributing to positive social cohesion.

To begin with, national Governments should
uphold their share ofthe responsibility. The central role
of youth in peacebuilding and sustainable development
needs to be recognized and integrated into relevant
policymaking. With regard to Lebanon, I am glad
to highlight the National Youth Policy, which was
endorsed by the Lebanese Government in 2012. That
policy was a key milestone in our national efforts to
empower youth and address their concerns. The final
outcome was the fruit of the joint efforts of young
women and men from civil society organizations,
political parties, universities and high schools, and of
relevant ministries, in particular the Ministry of Youth
and Sports, as well as United Nations agencies.

Adjacently, civil society shoulders a considerable
responsibility with regard to youth empowerment and
its ultimate contribution to peace and security. Social
media also offer youth a platform to express its hopes,
fears and political, economic and social grievances. In
that respect, Lebanon boasts a vibrant and powerful
civil society and an open press and social media space
in which youth-led communities are particularly active.
These are opening doors for youth to have a growing
and impactful presence in the public sphere. The
ongoing parliamentary electoral process testifies
to that impactful presence as we are witnessing an
unprecedented level of participation and involvement
of young men and women, including civil society
activists, in various aspects of the process.

Terrorism and the violent extremism conducive to
it are among the most alarming threats to international
peace and security today. Young women and men are
present on the different sides of this global challenge.
They are not only victims and perpetrators, but also
solution providers. It is imperative that youth become the
centre both of national counter-terrorism and preventing
violent extremism strategies, but also of international
endeavours on those two interrelated subjects.

During the negotiations over the biennial resolution
on the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy in June 2016, Lebanon was one of the leading
countries seeking to include in the text references to
the decisive role of youth in the prevention of terrorism,
in particular through education. Education is without a
doubt a tool of immense importance. It becomes even
more so when it instils the values of openness and
tolerance, and promotes critical thinking.

I wish to conclude by taking this opportunity to
inform the Council that, on 27 March, the Lebanese
Government officially endorsed Lebanon's national
strategy for preventing violent extremism. Youth
empowerment is one of the nine core pillars of
the strategy.

The late United States President Herbert Hoover
famously said: "Older men declare war. But it is youth
that must fight and die". If young people are enabled to
play their well-deserved role in decision-making, ifthey
are provided the chance to have their say on matters of
peace and security, a safer, more peaceful world is more
likely to emerge, ascend and prosper.

