Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation has
noted the comprehensive report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2000/738. Having
participated in the meeting of the Council on 27 June
2000 concerning the situation in East Timor, we will
confine our intervention to the developments that have
taken place over the last month.

As affirmed in that report, the Government of
Indonesia has established a satisfactory level of
cooperation with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) since the
inception of its mandate by the Security Council.
Significant developments reflective of Indonesia's
sincere cooperation and support for the development of
East Timor have included, among others, the visit of
President Abdurrahman Wahid to Dili on 29 February
2000 and the signing of a joint communique on issues
that need to be resolved in order to establish friendly
and mutually beneficial relations between Indonesia
and East Timor. The two sides are committed to taking
measures that include the promotion of trade and
communication; the provision of legal cooperation; the
establishment of representative offices in Jakarta, Dili
and Kupang; and the continued access by East
Timorese to Indonesian educational institutions.

As a result of intensive discussions that took
place in Jakarta on legal matters on 6 April 2000, the
Government of Indonesia and UNTAET concluded a
Memorandum of Understanding on cooperation in
legal, judicial and human rights matters. In the context
of implementing the understanding, the Indonesian
authorities have continued to extend every form of
assistance to bringing the perpetrators of alleged
human rights violations to justice. In this regard, a
team from the Indonesian Attorney-General's Office
arrived in Dili on 19 July for a 10-day mission, the
purpose of which is to collect evidence and testimony
in connection with the five priority criminal cases to be
presented by Indonesia. During this visit the
Indonesian team met with officials from the UNTAET
Serious Crimes Unit, the Political Office and the
Human Rights Office.

As is acknowledged in paragraph 52 of the report,
the security situation has been "generally stable". In
line with the Memorandum of Understanding regarding
tactical coordination in the border area to enhance
cooperation, signed between the Commander of East
Nusa Tengarra and UNTAET's Force Commander on
11 April 2000, the Indonesian Armed Forces, in
fulfilling their responsibility for security on their side
of the border, deployed additional battalions on the
border to assure security and stability. These renewed
efforts have resulted in an even quieter situation.

Indonesia's cooperation is further evidenced by
the number of agreements reached with UNTAET
during three rounds of negotiations. Following the third
round of negotiations in Surabaya early this month, the
two sides agreed inter alia to establish a joint border
committee, which will be entrusted with the task of
establishing a border regime, including the demarcation
of the borders between East Nusa Tenggara and East
Timor, and the delineation of the maritime boundary
between Indonesia and East Timor. This committee, to
be comprised of officials from the Indonesian
Government and representatives of UNTAET, is
expected to work in the near future to initially establish
a regime for cross-border traffic and visits of
Indonesians and East Timorese. In addition, the
Government of Indonesia and UNTAET are currently
working on arrangements regarding transit between the
Oecussi enclave and the rest of East Timor. The
question of pensions of former East Timorese
employees living in East Timor is also being addressed
by the two sides.

My delegation deems it pertinent to reiterate that
there are no easy solutions to the multifaceted problem
of the refugees in East Nusa Tenggara. From the outset,
the Indonesian Government has spared no effort in
extending its cooperation to UNTAET, the UNHCR and
other relevant international humanitarian organizations
to expedite the repatriation of refugees. Over the past
few months 167,000 refugees have been reintegrated
into East Timorese society. Paragraph 13 of the report
depicts this process as "generally smooth".

Despite these endeavours, the repatriation of the
remaining refugees in East Nusa Tenggara would be
greatly facilitated by adequate guarantees being given
to them concerning basic necessities, including food,
shelter and security in East Timor. A successful
resolution of this problem requires the much needed
assistance of the international community. At the same
time, the responsibility for the refugees is a collective
one, and hence the United Nations has an important
role to play in addressing the refugees' concerns.

My delegation regrets the decision of UNHCR to
temporarily close its office in Betun, due to security
concerns, while conducting the registration exercise of
refugees. We have noted, however, that the UNHCR
will continue to carry out its activities from Atambua.
To address these concerns, as well as to expedite the
repatriation of refugees, a meeting of various East
Timorese factions, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Force
Commander and the Commander of Udayana Military
Command was held in Denpasar, Bali, on 26-27 July.
We are hopeful that this meeting will lead to a
productive outcome. During this meeting the concerned
parties expressed their initial agreement on expediting
the return of the refugees and hoped that this plan
could be implemented in the near future.

In this connection, while we underscore the
imperative need to promote reconciliation among the
East Timorese of all political persuasions, my
delegation is pleased to inform the Council that such an
undertaking recently began, on the margins of the said
Bali meeting. We believe that this constitutes an
encouraging development in the context of establishing
a solid foundation upon which a harmonious East
Timorese society can be built.

It has been the consistent policy of Indonesia to
strongly condemn all acts of violence, including the
tragic incident that took place in Suai, East Timor, on
24 July. The killing of a United Nations peacekeeper
from New Zealand is deeply deplorable to my
delegation. On this solemn occasion my delegation
joins other speakers in extending our heartfelt
condolences to the bereaved family in this hour of
sorrow. In spite of the untiring efforts of the Indonesian
Government to provide security, it is impossible under
such uncertain and tenuous circumstances to control
the actions of each and every individual in the refugee
camps. The incident occurred after strenuous efforts
had been made by the Government of Indonesia to
prevent such acts of violence from occurring. Such acts
have been depicted by UNTAET as isolated incidents.

The Indonesian Government has, however,
swiftly responded to this tragic incident by extending
its full cooperation to the ongoing investigation. Its
exemplary cooperation is reflected by Indonesia's
invitation to the Government of New Zealand to jointly
investigate this incident involving its national. Even
though this is the first combat-related death of a United
Nations peacekeeper in East Timor, my delegation
earnestly believes that this loss of life is one too many
and hence warrants our urgent attention.

It may be recalled that, in order to avoid the
occurrence of unfortunate incidents, the Indonesian
authorities earlier proposed to UNTAET that there was
a need to maintain joint patrols and joint border posts
and to exchange military liaison officers. But,
unfortunately, these proposals were rejected by
UNTAET on the basis that the parties concerned had to
be responsible for providing security on their
respective sides of the border.

Finally, as the Secretary-General states, the best
assurance for a secure future for East Timor

"lies in healthy relations with the countries in the
region, particularly Indonesia, its closest
neighbour". (S/2000/738, para. 67)

Indeed, the attainment of this noble objective will
facilitate the inauguration of a new era of amity and
friendship, to the mutual benefit of the two peoples.
Towards this end, Indonesia will continue to extend its
cooperation and support. We would also like to take
this opportunity to express our gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other
concerned parties for their efforts in bringing this
complex and challenging task to a successful
conclusion.

