Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council as we
begin a new year. I reiterate our great confidence in
your wisdom and experience.

I should also like to take this opportunity, as I
make my first statement on behalf of Lebanon as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, to
reaffirm my country's commitment to work to promote
the principles and provisions of international law and
mutual respect and equality among States. I also
reaffirm that, thanks to its unique experience, Lebanon
is fully aware of the importance of the values of
diversity, tolerance and solidarity. Through our
presence in the Council, we hope to contribute to
answering the call for dialogue and understanding
among cultures and civilizations and for a more
democratic and just world.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2009/674), as well as for his presence among us
today. I would like also to thank Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his efforts and his comprehensive
briefing today. I also thank him for the important
conclusions he has drawn, and in particular for his
focus on the central importance of the political process.
I wish him every success in his future endeavours.

Lebanon would like to underscore the
fundamental role played by the United Nations in
Afghanistan in helping that country to secure the basis
for its sovereignty, independence and national unity.

Lebanon welcomes the pivotal role UNAMA
played in coordinating international efforts aiming to
allow the Afghan people to progressively become the
masters of their destiny. The holding of presidential
elections in Afghanistan was a test and a challenge for
the international community and for Afghanistan's
constitutional institutions. This issue was a subject of
great controversy and revealed flaws that must be
corrected. However, the process did lead to results that
could be developed in order to consolidate the
principles of democracy and the rule of law.

Lebanon welcomes the ratification by the Afghan
parliament of a number of laws with respect to human
rights and to combating terrorism. Moreover, the
adoption of the draft law on the elimination of violence
against women will be an additional step forward.
However, the delays in forming the Afghan
Government have had a negative impact on developing
governmental programmes and the delivery and
distribution of aid. Lebanon is very concerned by the
deterioration of the security situation during the period
covered by the report, due to the fact that there were
1,244 incidents, on average, per month, not to mention
that there is not much hope of improvement of the
security situation now, at the beginning of the year.

Lebanon condemns terrorist attacks against
international forces and Afghan forces and civilians, in
particular the 28 October attack on United Nations
officials. We are also concerned by the continuing
growing of opium poppies in a number of regions,
according to the report, which is due to instability and
lack of security. It is particularly alarming, because the
danger of illicit drug trafficking is being exacerbated
by its close links with the financing of terrorist acts.
The implications of that are tragic for Afghanistan and
for the outside world.

We are encouraged by the determination of the
United Nations, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General, to continue its mission in Afghanistan without
being deterred by terrorist acts. We also welcome the
measures taken by the Afghan Government and its
partners, which are noted in the report, with a view to
minimizing the impact of military operations on
civilians.

Lebanon calls for continuing reinforcement of the
Afghan army and National Police and intensifying
local and international efforts to train and to expand
the staff of those forces, while giving them the
necessary equipment and material to develop their
capacity to maintain security and law and order.
Lebanon also favours the International Conference on
Afghanistan to be held in London in January to
reinforce efforts to improve security and to establish
civilian institutions and to focus on economic
development.

Lebanon would like to emphasize the importance
of an integrated approach to the security situation in
Afghanistan, as provided for in resolution 1868 (2009),
particularly because of the close links between security
and stability on the one hand, and the implementation
of prosperity and sustainable development, on the
other. Military and security operations will not be
sufficient in themselves to yield the desired results.
Lebanon reaffirms the need to confront the underlying
causes of the crisis in Afghanistan and to work towards
national reconciliation and to integrate broader
categories of the Afghan population into the political
process, which, in our View, is central and of utmost
priority and importance.

