Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I wish to welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who
unfailingly makes himself available, both in the field
and in the Security Council, to keep it informed of the
progress achieved by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) in carrying
out its mandate in East Timor. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his exhaustive report.
My thanks also go to Mr. Mark Malloch Brown,
Mr. Klaus Rohland, Mr. Luis Valdivieso, Mr. Harri
Holkeri, President of the General Assembly, and
Mr. Ramos-Horta, member of the Transitional Cabinet
of East Timor, for having given us their assessments of
the situation in East Timor.

Our meeting today is being held in a forward-
looking spirit with regard to East Timor. We have
reached a very important stage in the process that
started more than one year ago and that, more than ever
before, requires the unconditional and renewed support
of all the parties. What is at stake is the future of East
Timor, which we would all like to see secure, and the
stability ofthe region as a whole.

Since it was set up more than a year ago,
UNTAET has succeeded in discharging its mandate in a
number of areas, despite the difficult circumstances
under which the Transitional Administration is doing
its work. We note with satisfaction that the situation on
the ground has improved. To date, concrete results have
been achieved in various areas, such as education,
health, justice, public security and infrastructure.

Likewise, the information sector has also
registered definite progress, thanks in particular to
Radio UNTAET and to the bimonthly Timorese
newspaper, which enables refugees to be better
informed about the situation in East Timor and thus
encourages them to take a decision as to whether to
return.

We welcome these achievements, which confirm
the assessments made by the members of the Council
during their visit to East Timor. It is also an
opportunity for us to reiterate once again our full
support for Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for the effective
manner in which he has been carrying out work that,
only a short time ago, seemed difficult to imagine.

Undoubtedly, there are still obstacles to
overcome, and we consider that at this stage,
cooperation with the Indonesian Government is very
important in order to succeed in this endeavour and to
contribute to a calming of the situation in general. The
proven and affirmed will with which the Indonesian
authorities have dealt with the various issues that have
come up - such as those relating to the arrest of, and
the start of court proceedings against, suspects; the
collection and destruction of weapons; the disarmament
of the militias; the commitment to put a stop to their
activities; and the return of refugees - attests to their
commitment to resolve issues that are still outstanding.
We believe also that the international community
should continue to lend substantial support to East
Timor in all areas.

UNTAET is a test case for the United Nations.
The positive results it has achieved thus far are an
inducement for us to make an additional effort to
enable East Timor's successful transition to
independence, thereby ensuring a smooth transition to
lasting peace in that country A a peace that we must
now build.

However, as was pointed out by the Secretary-
General, East Timor, after independence, will still need
very substantial international aid, which will have to go
far beyond the type of aid normally given to
developing countries.

I should like to take this opportunity of the
presence among us of Mr. Harri Holkeri, President of
the General Assembly, to reiterate to him the Security
Council's request that he consider authorizing a more
flexible use of the resources provided for under
assessed budgets in the case of complex peacekeeping
operations, such as UNTAET.

We are duty-bound to succeed in this transition
process, which is paving the way, in a satisfactory
manner, for the longed-for independence of the East
Timorese people. In this respect, the two-stage political
timetable presented by the National Council of
Timorese Resistance is an important element that we
should fully support, in order to give concrete
embodiment to the political will of the Timorese
people.

We are convinced that UNTAET's presence is
necessary to prepare for the upcoming peace-building
stage through the establishment of an integrated
mission, to be led by a special representative of the
Secretary-General. In this regard, it is necessary to
begin a thoroughgoing process of reflection on the way
in which this integrated mission will be managed in
order for it to obtain the expected results.

We believe it is important to lend our support to
the Secretary-General's request for an extension of
UNTAET's mandate until 31 December 2001, so that
the Transitional Administration can achieve its goals.

Before I conclude, may I, on behalf of my
country, convey condolences to the peoples of India
and Pakistan on the loss of life occasioned by the
earthquake that has just struck these two friendly
countries.

