Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, on behalf of the Cuban delegation, allow
me to commend you, Sir, on the work you and your
team have been carrying out in the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I would also like very
much to welcome the presence at this meeting of
Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We thank him for his
valuable statement he made this morning. We also
welcome the presence and statement of Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste.
The situation in Timor-Leste is the result of the
structural underdevelopment of that Asian nation and
one of the most telling cases of the nefarious
consequences of colonialism and of the unjust and
exclusive current international order. When it comes to
the situation in Timor-Leste and other third world
countries, attention in the United Nations is almost
always focused exclusively on security issues. In
practice, little or no attention is given to the urgent and
serious structural, economic and social problems
afflicting those countries. The eradication of poverty
and underdevelopment is a key prerequisite in the
maintenance of international peace and security. There
can be no peace without development or development
without peace.

With regard to security issues, the efforts of the
international community in Timor-Leste, as in any
other country, should fully respect the sovereignty and
independence of that State. The Government of Timor-
Leste has clearly stated its position as to the form that
the presence of international actors in the country
should take under a United Nations mandate. Cuba
believes that the wishes and interests expressed in that
regard by the Government and people of Timor-Leste
should be duly taken into account by the Security
Council.

The challenges to be overcome by the people and
Government of Timor-Leste in the coming years
require enormous resources that are far beyond the
capacities of a State with limited resources. Genuine
international cooperation with that country, based on
respect for its sovereignty, will be one of the main
ways to prevent conflict and strengthen peace. The
international community has a moral obligation to help
Timor-Leste to build a future of political stability and
sustainable socio-economic development. It must
undertake a serious commitment to assist Timor-
Leste's Government in training human resources and
establishing the infrastructure that this Asian country
so urgently needs.

Cuba, a small country that has for more than 45
years been subject to the most brutal and merciless
economic, financial and commercial blockade ever
suffered by any country, has continued its modest
cooperation with Timor-Leste. Cuba's cooperation with
that country extends to various sectors, but primarily to
the area of health care. Cuba's medical assistance has
included treating 440,849 patients, assisting in 3,620
births, carrying out 2,198 surgical operations,
administering vaccinations to 7,496 persons and saving
over 6,000 lives.

Despite the situation experienced by that country,
Cuban aid workers, who are strictly committed to the
principle of non-interference in Timor-Leste's internal
affairs, have remained at their posts. In particular,
Cuba's medical brigade - which is made up of 274
health workers, of whom 206 are medical doctors -
has been a model of selfless cooperation, saving lives
under the most difficult conditions. In addition to
providing basic and specialized health services, that
team is holding classes and running the recently
opened school of medicine, which began classes in
December 2005 with 60 students. Moreover, 40 clinical
laboratory technicians are finishing their studies and 22
x-ray technicians are currently being trained. As a
complement to that effort, 470 young people from
Timor-Leste are studying in Cuba, most of them
preparing to begin their medical studies in our country
and others to enrol in other specialties.

We are not here to lecture. What Cuba is doing
today for Timor-Leste is just a modest example of how
much more could be achieved in that country through
international cooperation and solidarity, mainly by
those States with larger economic and financial
resources. We are certain that more could also be done
for Timor-Leste in the context of the United Nations.
We hope that this Security Council debate will
contribute to defining short-term strategies that are in
line with the real needs of the people of Timor-Leste.

Lastly, my delegation would like to reiterate that
the people of Timor-Leste can always count on Cuba's
unwavering determination to continue to strengthen its
assistance and solidarity. In so doing, we will be
meeting a duty and honouring a debt of gratitude to the
peoples of the third world - in this case to the people
of Timor-Leste, who have always demonstrated their
resolute and constant friendship and solidarity with my
country.

