Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would first like to thank the United
Kingdom for having the initiative to hold this open
debate on such a relevant and complex topic within the
realm of international relations and the maintenance of
international peace and security, namely the
consolidation of peace in countries emerging from
conflict.

Although efforts to avoid the recurrence of
conflict in some countries emerging from violence
continue to be insufficient, the international
community has now adopted new and improved tools
to identify the fundamental issues that must be
addressed once armed conflict has ceased.

My delegation believes that it is crucial that the
international community take coordinated, urgent and
effective measures in the weeks immediately following
the cessation of hostilities, taking advantage of the
momentum created by the signing of peace agreements,
in the knowledge that this is a phase in which all
concerned actors show sufficient political will to
implement the agreed commitments.

The United Nations must play a pivotal role in
the coordination of efforts to re-establish stability and
the rule of law, through the innovative tools that make
up the Organization's new peacebuilding architecture.
The priorities upon which national and international
efforts must focus must be immediately identified
through the articulation of an integrated strategy that
addresses the issues of security, justice, reconstruction
and development.

Determining the priorities that must be addressed
by the United Nations system and its national and
international partners is a very complex exercise.
Every issue is a priority, and each national context is
unique. It is therefore crucial that the national
Government concerned define such priorities while
ensuring national ownership of the process. The
priorities identified by the Government and supported
by the Organization should have as a first goal the
stabilization of the country and the creation of the
conditions necessary for its recovery, with the support
of all concerned actors. Ensuring peace dividends for
the local population should be a top concern when
deciding such priorities.

In the same vein, in the formulation of strategies
and action plans, programmes and policies should aim
at including gender equality and justice in the process
of peacebuilding, recovery and reconstruction.
Women's role as the centre of the family and society
must be highlighted from the very beginning of the
process.

Mexico believes that the creation of solid
foundations for the sustainable development of the
country receiving assistance should also be a goal of
utmost importance. The country's self-sufficiency will
greatly depend on such foundations. In that sense,
Mexico gives special priority to international
cooperation, primarily that of developed countries, and
to economic support from international financial
institutions and regional and subregional organizations.

My delegation notes that security sector reform is
a vital component in any integrated post-conflict
strategy and recognizes its importance in assuring the
transition from peacekeeping to long-term
reconstruction, stabilization and development. We
therefore believe that special attention should be given,
beginning in the early phases of the process, to security
sector reform and that it should include a transitional
judicial system that strengthens the rule of law and
promotes the protection of human rights and the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants.
08-34772

We welcome the fact that the mandates of some
peacekeeping missions already include security sector
reform and highlight the increasingly relevant role of
their civilian components. Moreover, three missions
already have support units to address the issue: the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, the
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi and the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For those reasons,
my delegation considers it important that security
sector reform coordination mechanisms be established
among the various entities of the United Nations
system, both at Headquarters and in the field, in the
framework of peacekeeping operations and in
post-conflict situations. My delegation would like to
particularly emphasize the necessity of enhancing the
Peacebuilding Commission's competencies in that area.

Mexico believes that Member States and the
Organization should focus efforts and resources on
supporting the existing structures of the still-young
peacebuilding architecture. Mexico acknowledges the
work undertaken in that area by the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations,
which have proved to be inclusive forums for
discussion and effective agreements on the formulation
of integrated strategies to confront the enormous
challenges faced by the countries on its agenda.

Although Mexico is not a member of the
Organizational Committee, my Government has
decided to participate in the Guinea-Bissau country-
specific configuration, in order to contribute to
multilateral efforts to achieve stabilization, self-
sufficiency and sustainable development in that
country. Mexico is ready to share its experience in such
fields as combating drug trafficking, social
development, electoral processes, institution-building,
the promotion of a culture of peace and civic
education, which are fundamental issues in countries
emerging from conflict.

In the same vein, in 2007, Mexico contributed to
the Peacebuilding Fund, thus reaffirming once again its
commitment to the United Nations institutions
responsible for promoting and strengthening
peacebuilding processes. We encourage the
Peacebuilding Commission to continue to make
progress and we assure it of the complete support of
the Government of Mexico.
13
