The President (spoke in Spanish): I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and unity of Haiti and
emphasizes that the Government and people of
Haiti bear the primary responsibility for the
attainment of peace and stability and for the
recovery efforts in Haiti. The Council
acknowledges the contribution the international
community is making to support the stabilization
process in Haiti, including the strengthening of its
legislative, judicial and executive institutions.

"The Security Council recognizes the
interconnected nature of the challenges in Haiti
and reaffirms that sustainable progress on
security, institutional capacity-building, including
rule of law, as well as consolidation of national
Government structures, democracy, the
promotion and protection of human rights and
development, are mutually reinforcing. The
Council appreciates the efforts made by the
Haitian Government and the international
community to address these challenges.
"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing electoral process in Haiti and stresses the
importance of its completion in a peaceful,
credible and legitimate way which will contribute
to the consolidation of democracy, allow for the
completion of constitutional reform and provide a
strong basis for the continuing reconstruction
efforts. The Council recognizes the important
contribution of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the
Organization of American States and other
international, regional and subregional

organizations in supporting the political process.

"The Security Council underlines that
security and development are closely interlinked
and mutually reinforcing and reiterates the need
for security to be accompanied by social and
economic development. In this context, the
Security Council acknowledges that rapid and
tangible progress in the recovery and
reconstruction of Haiti is fundamental to
achieving lasting stability.

"The Security Council recognizes the
various challenges in Haiti and stresses
MINUSTAH's fundamental role in supporting the
Haitian authorities in creating a secure and stable
environment conducive to economic recovery,
including by implementing labour intensive
projects and the provision of basic services in
Haiti.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the situation of vulnerable groups, including
internally displaced persons and children as
victims of trafficking, and the increase of sexual
and gender-based violence. In this regard, the
Security Council encourages MINUSTAH and the
United Nations country team to continue assisting
the Government of Haiti in providing adequate
protection to the civilian population, with
particular attention to the needs of internally
displaced persons and other vulnerable groups,
especially women and children.

"The Security Council stresses that there
can be no genuine stability or sustainable
development in Haiti without strengthening its
democratic institutions. In this regard, the
Council emphasizes the importance of promoting
the rule of law in strengthening the Haitian
institutions. The Council further reaffirms the
responsibility of MINUSTAH in supporting the
Haitian State in the fields of rule of law, good
governance, extension of State authority and the
promotion and protection of human rights, in
accordance with its mandate.

"The Security Council stresses the crucial
importance of strengthening the Haitian National
Police to ensure its ability to maintain law and
order and to tackle violent crime, particularly
sexual and gender-based violence, as well as gang
violence and transnational organized crime. In
this regard, the Council welcomes the continued
support of the United Nations and the
international community to the Haitian authorities
and calls for MINUSTAH continued support in
the vetting, mentoring and training of the Haitian
National Police and corrections personnel and
intensification of cooperation to face this
challenge, including assistance in counter-
narcotic efforts and training in human rights.

"The Security Council recognizes Haiti's
long-term recovery challenge and calls upon the
international community to continue to support
Haitian authorities in order to ensure that the
most vulnerable segments of the population have
access to basic social services and justice.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
efforts of the donor community and calls upon
them to fulfil without delay all pledges, including
those made at the International Donors'
Conference towards a New Future for Haiti, held
on 31 March 2010. The Council welcomes the
work of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission
in focusing donor efforts on the top priority areas
for recovery and encourages all reconstruction
donors, non-governmental and international
organizations to continue to channel their efforts
through the Commission.

"The Council reiterates the need for
Member States and other stakeholders to continue
to support the Haitian authorities in strengthening
Haiti's core governance structures, implementing
the Government of Haiti's national action plan for
recovery and development as an efficient and
coherent framework.

"While acknowledging the willingness of
the international community to continue to
partner with the Government of Haiti in
establishing future long-term security and
development strategies that are mindful of a
cohesive framework, the Security Council
stresses the importance of consistent coordination
and joint efforts among the Government of Haiti,
the United Nations, the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission and other stakeholders with a view
to producing sustainable results.

"The Security Council welcomes the
willingness of regional and subregional
organizations to contribute to the ongoing process
of stabilization, reconstruction and further
consolidation of democracy in Haiti. In this
respect, the Council calls on MINUSTAH to
continue to work closely with such organizations,
as well as international financial institutions and
other stakeholders, among them the Organization
of American States, the European Union, the
Caribbean Community, the Union of South
American Nations and the Inter-American
Development Bank.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Member States that support
the recovery and stabilization process in Haiti,
including the troop- and police-contributing
countries of MINUSTAH. The Council expresses
its gratitude to the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for Haiti, former United States President
William J. Clinton, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General
Ambassador Edmond Mulet and the personnel of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and personal
involvement in the ongoing stabilization and
recovery efforts in Haiti in accordance with their
respective mandates and in strong coordination
with all United Nations entities and Member
States."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/7.
I now give the floor to the representative of Cuba.

