Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency of the Security Council
for convening this public meeting on intercommunal
violence and preventing violent extremism in West
Africa, a region severely affected by evolving security
challenges that affect the stability and the very existence
of the States in the region.

I commend His Excellency Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui,
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
and Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), for
their excellent briefings and the relevance of their
recommendations. Their analyses expose the extreme
seriousness of intercommunal violence and violent
extremism - two scourges that unfortunately push
vulnerable populations, including young people and
entire communities, towards terrorist armed groups
and cross-border criminal networks.

At this point I would like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the brave Malian, Nigerien and Burkinabe'
soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice for the noble
cause of peace and security in their countries and our
region. Once again 71 Nigerien soldiers were taken
from their countries, families and friends yesterday.
They died for their country, and we hope the blood they
shed will fertilize the seeds of a peace that we all want
to see as soon as possible and that their sacrifice will
not be in vain.

I am very pleased to be following our eminent briefers
in taking the floor on behalf of the African countries
elected to the Security Council - Equatorial Guinea,
South Africa and my own country, Cote d'Ivoire - in
order to share our common vision of peace and security
issues which, though they may be particularly acute in
West Africa, are just as much a common denominator
in many parts of Africa. Our vision resonates perfectly
with the Bamako declaration on access to natural
resources and conflict between communities, adopted
at the ministerial meeting held in Bamako on 28 and
29 November at the initiative of the African Union and
with the support of the United Nations and the regional
African economic communities.

From a security and humanitarian point of view,
2019 will undoubtedly remain one of the darkest years
that West Africa and the Sahel have experienced, due to
the intercommunal violence and terrorist attacks, which
have resulted in several hundred deaths and the internal
displacement of thousands more. They have also led to
the closure of many schools, depriving thousands of
children of their fundamental right to education. In
addition, terrorist groups and transnational criminal
networks are gradually getting a foothold in many
regions that suffer from weak or virtually absent
State institutions. In areas where the State's sovereign
authority should prevail, such deleterious groups
provide security and social alternatives by exploiting
intercommunal tensions to their advantage. Among
many other things, the feelings in some communities
of marginalization, their desire for protection, tensions
over the control of water resources, arable land and
pastures, the lack of basic social infrastructure and the
endemic unemployment of young people are all reasons
for the intercommunal violence and violent extremism.

In the face of these threats to security in the entire
region and far beyond, we have a duty to act urgently
and decisively, while supporting current initiatives
through responses that take into account the internal,
transnational and external causes of intercommunal
violence and violent extremism. To that end, the African
countries elected to the Security Council endorse the
briefers' recommendations and believe that responses to
the current security and humanitarian issues should be
developed within the framework of a multidimensional
approach based on the promotion of a constructive and
inclusive national dialogue.

Because they have a sovereign responsibility
to provide for the security and social needs of their
peoples, the States of the region need the necessary
capacities to respond to their people's concerns. It is
therefore important for States to address their current
weaknesses in the areas of security and defence, the early
warning and management of intercommunal violence
and the fight against poverty and unemployment, which
fuel violent extremism. In that regard, the three African
members of the Security Council would like to take the
opportunity offered by this debate to reiterate their call
for increased support to the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission,
in order to further operationalize the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force and the Multinational Joint Task Force, and also
to support development initiatives, which will promote
the economic and social recovery of the areas affected
by intercommunal violence.

However, we must keep in mind that strengthening
States' capacities on the security and social fronts
will not be productive unless it is accompanied by
initiatives that can counter community mistrust of
the public authorities and security and defence forces.
That is why we firmly believe that promoting bold and
inclusive dialogue with marginalized communities
would help to ensure that their needs are taken into
account when public policies are formulated, and would
eliminate the spiral of intercommunal violence that
reflects a deep need for dialogue. In that process, civil
society and the media should also play a decisive role
in preventing intercommunal violence and extremism.
It is civil society's multifaceted nature that enables it to
bring together community leaders, women and young
people as well as civil-society organizations, and that
can make it a crucible in which to develop consensus
solutions to the security and social challenges facing
States and local communities.

For their part, the media, including social networks
and community radio, are essential for educating and
raising awareness about all forms of violence, as well
as spreading messages of peace, tolerance and social
cohesion. They are also communication tools that
make it possible to demolish the radical ideology and
rhetoric of terrorist groups. In short, through dialogue
and concerted initiatives to alleviate community
tensions, the public authorities, civil society and local
communities can work for strong local ownership
in the fight against intercommunal violence and
violent extremism.

The African countries of the Security Council also
believe that the transnational and transregional nature
of intercommunal violence and violent extremism
requires enhanced cooperation in security, defence
and economic and social development. It is essential
to ensure the coherence and coordination of initiatives
at the regional and transregional levels, promote
the sharing of experiences and good practices and
strengthen cooperation in the areas of intelligence and
legal assistance.

We salute the heroic efforts of Mali and Burkina
Faso to combat intercommunal violence and violent
extremism, despite particularly difficult economic
circumstances. They are the last defence against the
spread of jihadi groups to the coastal countries of West
Africa. If that defence were breached it would provide
the terrorist surge with a perfect opportunity to realize
its dreadful ambitions of controlling the subregion's
ports and enormous economic potential and installing
an Islamic caliphate. West Africa and the Sahel would
then become the centre of a terrorist cancer that could
metastasize to other parts of the world.

The challenges of combating intercommunal
violence and extremism therefore extend well beyond
the geographic area of West Africa and the Sahel.
We are facing a regional and international security
emergency that is more acute than ever and deserves our
full attention. The three African countries elected to
the Council therefore urge the international community
and development partners to increase their various
contributions to the ongoing development initiatives in
the region.

Finally, we reiterate our plea for the Security
Council's decisive involvement in the quest for a
lasting solution to the conflict in Libya, which is a
true Pandora's box whose opening has exacerbated
insecurity and instability in West Africa and the Sahel
and created conditions conducive to the establishment
of terrorist groups. Despite the current grave security
threats, the willingness of States ofthe region to engage
in a relentless fight against intercommunal violence,
violent extremism and terrorism has never been
stronger, as evidenced by the commitments undertaken
on 14 September in Ouagadougou by the Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States and by the West African Economic and
Monetary Union in Dakar on 1 December. They very
much hope that the Security Council will do its part in
this key period, when regional and international peace
and stability are at stake.

