Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The Council
has just unanimously adopted a new resolution on
humanitarian access in Syria (resolution 2165 (2014)).
I thank Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg for their
efforts in preparing that text.

The adoption of a new resolution was needed
because the provisions of presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/15 of 2 October 2013 and the provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014) have not been implemented
by the Syrian regime, as the successive reports of the
Secretary-General have noted. It was needed because
the tragedy continues in Syria, with a record that has
progressively deteriorated for more than three years,
claiming more than 170,000 victims, and causing more
than 10 million Syrians to flee the violence or to require
assistance. It was needed because the United Nations
humanitarian agencies and their implementing partners
could do more and better if the Syrian regime did not
arbitrarily close its borders, set up an ever-increasing
number of bureaucratic obstacles to the distribution
of humanitarian aid, or restrict the flow of assistance
to prevent it from reaching areas controlled by the
opposition.

Resolution 2165 (2014) will allow for all of that to
change, concretely, at least for some of those who do not
receive the assistance they could and should receive. It
reiterates some fundamental principles of humanitarian
action, including the principle that assistance must be
distributed without prejudice and without political
motivation. It reiterates one of the main demands
contained in resolution 2139 (2014), which is that
assistance must be delivered by the most direct routes,

be it through the front lines or across borders from
neighbouring countries.

But the resolution goes further. It opens four
border crossing points from neighbouring countries
that have been closed until now. That provision, based
on the requests of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, could be decisive in reaching
nearly 2 million additional people. Finally, the
resolution innovates by introducing a convoy inspection
mechanism so that the Syrian regime will no longer be
able to object to the work of humanitarian actors on its
territory.

The resolution is a further step in the efforts of
the Council to improve the conditions and efficiency
of the work of humanitarian actors. That being said,
it does not complement or replace resolution 2139
(2014), all of whose requirements remain valid. In
that regard, we recall that the Syrian authorities are
using barrel bombs on a mass scale, which is a direct
and indisputable violation of resolution 2139 (2014).
The resolution has the practical, short-term goal of
improving humanitarian work, but also emphasizes that
the political transition that should allow for a response
to the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people has
still not taken place.

Finally, the resolution welcomes the appointment
of a new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, whom France will support in
his efforts to promote a solution based on the Geneva
communique' (S/2012/522, annex).

