Mr. Cordeiro (Brazil): The situation in Afghanistan
has long been of concern to the international community.
The United Nations has been deeply involved in the process
of restoring peace and normalcy in that country. Today, the
Security Council will adopt a new resolution that Brazil
will support. Soon the General Assembly will also pass its
annual resolution dealing with the situation in that country.

Since Brazil joined the Council, my delegation has
been closely following events in Afghanistan. In the first
half of this year, there was hope that a ceasefire would be
attained and that a negotiated settlement of the internal
political situation could be reached through a dialogue to be
conducted by Islamic scholars and religious leaders.

Soon, however, the Taliban militia abandoned the
peace talks and resorted to military means. Their offensive
led to the conquest of most of the remaining territory under
the control of the United Front. During that process, the
civilian population in Afghanistan was continuously
subjected to acts of violence and measures aimed at
curtailing its rights.

There have been, indeed, serious complaints of
persecution based upon religious affiliation, ethnic origin
and gender. The situation of girls and women in
Afghanistan is particularly worrisome.

After 20 years of war, the situation in Afghanistan is
a bleak one. On August 6, though a presidential statement,
the Council condemned the killing of two Afghan staff
members - of the World Food Programme and of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
Jalalabad - and deplored the measures taken by the
Taliban that made it impossible for all international
humanitarian organizations to operate in the country and
provide much-needed assistance.

Some days later, on 21 August, two United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan officials were attacked. This
act resulted in the death of Lieutenant-Colonel Carmine
Calo of Italy. The continued fighting and the events
following the fall of Mazar-e-Sharif led to the adoption of
resolution 1193 (1998). At that time the Security Council
then expressed its grave concern with the capture of the
Iranian Consulate General in the city of Mazar-e-Sharif
and condemned the assassination of Colonel Calo.
The Council issued another presidential statement on
15 September by which it condemned the murder of
Iranian diplomats and a journalist by Taliban troops and
called on all parties to show restraint. As the situation
between Iran and the Taliban deteriorated, the Secretary-
General sent his Special Envoy, Ambassador Lakhdar
Brahimi, to the region. This initiative contributed to
averting an open international conflict. The Council
expressed its support for Ambassador Brahimi's new
mission in a statement to the press on 16 October.

The Council has been dealing with and giving its
full attention to the situation in Afghanistan.

The lasting peace which that country needs can be
brought about only through dialogue. Internally, this
means the establishment of a democratic and participatory
process that would include all ethnic and cultural groups
that form the Afghan people. Externally, the involvement
of all neighbouring countries is essential. The "six plus
two" process seems to be a useful forum which should
engage the various Afghan parties in the peace
negotiations.

Brazil hopes that the preparations for the talks to be
held in Tashkent will be speedy. The Taliban should not
impose preconditions for attending the meeting.

Brazil considers that the draft resolution on the
situation in Afghanistan that we are to adopt is a balanced
one. It addresses in an appropriate way the plethora of
problems that afflict the Afghan people and supports the
suggestions made by the Secretary-General, especially the
establishment of a small civil observer unit charged with
the prevention of gross violations of both humanitarian
law and human rights. It also provides for United Nations
cooperation in the investigations of the alleged massacres
and the murder of the Iranian personnel.

Afghanistan and its people deserve to have a
participatory democracy, to be free from foreign
interference, from the scourge of drugs and terrorism. A
legitimate Afghan Government has to base its power on
the will of its people, provide safety to its minorities and
follow some minimum standards of international
behaviour.

It is high time for the Afghan factions to genuinely
engage in the search for peace. The inability to do so will
 

result in more suffering and destruction inside Afghanistan
and delay the moment in which the international community
can contribute constructively to the welfare of its people.

