Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank the
Security Council for the opportunity to share my views
and assessments on the work carried out by the three
subsidiary bodies that I have had the honour to chair in
the course of my country's membership of the Council,
and for bearing with me. Regarding the sanctions
regimes in general, Ijoin previous speakers in pointing
out that sanctions are obviously not an end in themselves
and are there to support a political objective. They
should not exacerbate people's suffering and should be
regularly reviewed. We also support the extension of the
Ombudsperson's mandate to all the sanctions regimes.

I will start by addressing the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) during
the past two years. As Chair, I have always worked on
the basis of continuing and inclusive engagement with
all members in an effort to build consensus on fulfilling
the Committee's mandate. To strive for consensus is
not always an easy task; however, reaching such a level
of agreement is actually the only way to make solid
progress in a sanctions committee context. That is why
we have focused very much on compromise and settling
potential differences when addressing the challenges
that have come our way.

Secondly, although it has had its complexities and
difficulties, the 1718 Committee has shown that in
general it has had the capacity to effectively address
the situations faced during our tenure. Early this year,
as mandated by the Council, the Committee agreed on
new designations and updated the lists of individuals,
entities and items related to the nuclear and missile

programmes of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The annual work plan was also updated, giving
the Committee a comprehensive and clear approach
based on compliance, investigation, outreach, dialogue,
assistance and cooperation. It is against that background
that I want to commend the excellent work and valuable
assistance that the 1718 Committee consistently got
from the Panel of Experts.

Also very significantly, I think that the Committee
has developed a certain sense of convergence that has
allowed us to agree on some important principles:
first, the general understanding that implementation
assistance notices represent an important and valuable
tool in providing guidance to Member States on a
number of technical and practical issues; secondly,
the importance of regularly reviewing the concrete
parameters of the sanctions regime; and thirdly, the
importance of taking advantage of existing synergies,
informally and in a very pragmatic way, between
various committees and panels of experts.

Lastly, sustained effort within the Committee to
improve the implementation of sanctions is always a
work in progress, and I very much hope that the next
Committee Chair will continue to benefit from the
cooperation and constructive support I have received
during these past two years in helping to implement the
important mandate conferred by the Council.

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which I have
chaired since its establishment in February, the first
observation I would like to make is that its sanctions
regime seems likely to have been the most rapidly
evolving such United Nations regime of recent years. It
has certainly been characterized by the need to adjust
itself with efficacy to rapid changes in the political
context in Libya, and in consequence to respond to a
very significant workload, related to a diverse set of
areas prompted by the evolving situation on the ground.

Just as an illustration, I would like to point out that
within a period of 21 months the Committee received
362 official communications and issued 568 letters or
notes and a significant number of addenda, totalling
more than 1,500 official communications. Within
the same period, the Council adopted six resolutions
on the matter, resulting in various modifications and
adaptations of the sanctions regime that the Committee
has had to address.

My second observation is that while the core
objective of the sanctions was initially to prevent further
attacks on the civilian population in Libya and ensure
that the former regime leaders had no access to funds
outside Libya, the measures were later modified to
address the changing situation on the ground, in support
of the Libyan-led transition and rebuilding process, as
well as regional security. In that transition process the
Committee had an important role to play by constantly
adjusting to the new challenges and responding to the
needs, in line with the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council.

On the asset freeze in particular, the Committee
played a specific role in responding promptly to those
needs and devising ways to help funds become quickly
and readily available to the Libyan people. I would like
to make two observations, if I may, prompted by our
experience, that may serve as useful guidance for the
future. First, resolutions establishing sanctions regimes
cannot disregard their humanitarian impact and should
thus consider the early inclusion of humanitarian
exemptions to help populations affected by the freezing
of national assets and funds.

Secondly, those resolutions should clearly
determine whether or not subsidiaries of listed entities
are subject to the sanctions. I believe that those early
clarifications would be very useful for a more efficient
implementation of an assets freeze, while at the
same time helping to prevent unintended impact on
populations and third States more affected.

As of today, the assets freeze applies only to
two remaining listed entities: the Libyan Investment
Authority and the Libyan Africa Investment Portfolio.
It is my understanding that as soon as the Libyan
authorities deem it appropriate, the Council or the
Committee will consider the delisting to ensure that the
correspondent assets are made available to and for the
benefit of the people of Libya.

In relation to the arms embargo and the proliferation

of Libyan arms and related materiel in the region, we must
recognize that they continue to raise serious challenges
for the Committee. The continued cooperation of States
with the Committee, with the invaluable assistance of
its Panel of Experts, is fundamental to overcome those
challenges. In that regard, it is crucial to continue and
strengthen the good practice that has been followed
of putting together the efforts and contributions from
different United Nations bodies - the Panel of Experts,
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the International Civil Aviation Organization and
the Office for Disarmament Affairs - in order to
consistently assess and address the challenges posed
by the proliferation of arms and military materiel from
Libya to the region.

Finally, the complexity of this sanctions regime
and the rapid change of its normative framework
required an important effort of assistance to United
Nations delegations. We tried our best to provide
information and possible guidance to our colleagues
in many delegations who approached us with questions
concerning the implementation of the regime. We view
that as part of transparency, for which we advocate
strongly. But we also view that as very useful to the
overall efficacy of the sanctions regimes. Naturally, I
wish also to highlight the role of the secretariat of the
Subsidiary Organs Branch, and to express my gratitude
for its invaluable assistance, as well as that of Panel of
Experts: they have been truly indispensable. Last but not
least, I want to thank all members of the Committee for
their constructive commitment and spirit of cooperation
and creativity, which were fundamental in helping the
Committee address the number and complexity of
submissions. Without it, it would have been impossible
to carry out such a complex and important task.

Let me turn now to the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
which I have had the honour and pleasure to Chair
since January. To chair a working group, more than
helping build consensus, is to try to develop an agenda
by seeking to lead the efforts of its members towards
achieving major goals shared in general within the
working group.

The case of the Working Group on working
methods is a special one, where Council members
can share their views on ways to improve the Council
working methods and have the opportunity to make a
difference in the way the Council works in the future. It
is never easy to get away from routine, which is always
more comfortable than change; so it is a difficult
task to generate interest in new measures, to discuss
their usefulness and practicability, and to adopt them.

Ultimately, more difficult is to persuade all of the need
to change. I must say that the experience I have had
was very positive. I counted on the active contribution
of all members in the many discussions we held during
the last year, at a pace of one, sometimes two, meetings
per month.

To improve the working methods, we must start
by improving the way the Council does its internal
work. A significant part of the Council's work is done
in consultations. While there has been an effort by the
Council to meet more often in public, consultations are
indeed useful to help the Council prepare its decisions.
However, questions of transparency and inclusiveness
remain important within the Council for Council
members. We worked on that during the first part of
the year.

Following consultations organized by the Council
in March, during the United Kingdom presidency, a
discussion was held on further measures to improve
interactivity, better planning of work and better use of
conference resources. Those same aspects were further
developed in the Working Group and later condensed
in a note by the President in June (S/2012/402). The
underlying idea is to stress the informal aspects of
consultations, better organization of resources to allow
more space for subsidiary bodies to meet, more use
of video conferences to avoid the costly presence of
briefers, and better planning of work by readjusting
mandates and reporting cycles with a view to even up
the workload throughout the year, leaving more time
for the Council to prepare decisions and for prevention
activities.

Another aspect relevant to the internal work is
the practice related to the work of penholders and the
process of appointing Chairs of subsidiary bodies. The
Working Group is now concluding the consideration of
this question, through a draft note that deals with issues
of enhanced participation, inclusiveness and exchange
of information among Council members. These are
crucial elements to enhance the Council's efficiency
and, ultimately, help promote the necessary consensus
building within the Council. I hope, indeed I trust, that
with the support and flexibility of all members in the
Working Group, to conclude the work very soon.

On the external aspects of Security Council work,
the Working Group is considering further measures to
improve transparency and interaction with the wider
membership. A draft note is being discussed now
on ways to improve open debates: by enhancing the
interactivity, by ensuring a better follow up of open
debates and by improving their efficacy. We are also
considering measures to improve the annual report:
by reinforcing aspects related to the interaction with
non-Council members and providing more substantive
information in the report and in its presentation to the
General Assembly. Monthly assessments by Council
presidencies can be particularly useful instruments
to elucidate on the work done. Also very useful in
that regard are informal briefings to the general
membership by Council Presidents once they finish
their presidencies, which could be done as a matter of
practice, adding to the briefing that is already done at
the start of each presidency.

These are all aspects that have been discussed in
the Working Group this year and are being considered
through a draft note we expect to be adopted in the
coming days.

I am conscious that this is a work in progress. The
Council has done much recently on this matter, as a
result of efforts by Council members and especially
of the previous Chairs of this Working Group, whom
I salute, which resulted on the adoption of presidential
note 507 (S/2010/507). But we all know that there is
always room for improvement, and note 507 is the point
of departure not an end in itself.

I am confident that the next Chair who will carry
on from here will bring renewed energy and ideas to
further the work. I am sure that he or she will have the
full support and encouragement that I surely benefited
from.

Finally, I wish to express my gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their support and
active contributions to the work of the Committees and
Working Group I had the honour to chair. I also thank
the experts and the Secretariat for their cooperation and
diligence, as well as the interpreters for their valuable
assistance and constant patience.

