Mr. Pascoe: The most important event since my
last briefing on Georgia, on 11 August, was the
agreement to six principles sponsored by the
presidency of the European Union (EU), which led to
the end of the military hostilities. While the members
of the Council are fully aware of those principles, I
would like to reiterate them for the record.

The first is the commitment by all parties to
renounce the use of force. The second is the immediate
and definitive cessation of hostilities. The third is free
access to humanitarian aid. The fourth is the
withdrawal of Georgian forces to their places of
permanent deployment. The fifth is the withdrawal of
Russian forces to their lines of deployment prior to
7August 2008. That includes the additional provision
that "pending the definition of an international
mechanism, the Russian peacekeeping forces may
implement additional security measures". The sixth is
the convening of international discussions on lasting
security and stability arrangements for Abkhazia,
Georgia, and South Ossetia, Georgia.

Discussions on the implementation of those
principles are continuing. The Secretary-General has
been engaged in consultations with all concerned
parties. In those consultations he has called for the
cessation of all military acts and for unimpeded
humanitarian access to all those in need in all of the
affected areas. While welcoming the fact that the
ceasefire plan has now been signed by both the Russian
Federation and Georgia, the Secretary-General stressed
the need for it to be implemented and for all forces to
immediately withdraw as required. With all of his
interlocutors the Secretary-General has reiterated the
importance of respecting the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Georgia. The Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, who is on the ground
in Georgia, is in close contact with parties there. The
Secretary-General has also dispatched Mr. Johan
Verbeke to Brussels as his representative. Mr. Verbeke
took part in a coordination meeting with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the EU. Close cooperation between all the
08-46619
relevant institutions is clearly important in the efforts
to solve the present crisis.

The Permanent Council of the OSCE took an
important decision today in Vienna to deploy
immediately 20 additional military monitoring officers
to Georgia. That will bring the total number of such
officers to 28. The request of the OSCE is to eventually
raise that number to 100. The deployment of additional
military monitoring officers is subject to further
decisions. The de facto South Ossetian authorities have
stated that they would only accept Russian
peacekeeping forces and that international observers
would not be welcomed on their side of the ceasefire
line. Yesterday, they asked the Russian Federation to
establish a permanent military base in South Ossetia.

With regard to the situation on the ground,
Mr. Mulet will again brief the Council on the
developments in and around Abkhazia. I shall limit
myself to sharing available information on South
Ossetia and Georgia proper. As I mentioned before, the
United Nations has a limited presence in the area and
must therefore largely rely on secondary sources.

The Russian leadership announced that it would
start withdrawing its troops on Monday, 18 August.
Press reports make it clear that that has yet to get under
way on a significant scale. As of today, the Russian
troops remain in and around Gori in Georgia, although
there are some reports indicating that a convoy of
armoured vehicles and tanks left Gori for South
Ossetia early today. Foreign Minister Lavrov indicated
that the withdrawal of troops would take three to four
days. Russian military authorities explained that Russia
started the withdrawal of rear units and troops of the
third echelon. The vanguard troops now in Georgia will
be the last to withdraw. The Russian General Staff
indicated that the withdrawal would intensify after
22 August. At the same time, the Russian military has
stated that Georgia has not returned all of its troops to
their bases.

The de facto president of South Ossetia dismissed
his Government on 17 August and declared a month-
long emergency to cope with the aftermath of recent
hostilities. He has criticized his cabinet for the slow
response to the needs of displaced and affected people.
The South Ossetian de facto authorities reported over
2,100 dead as a result of the conflict. Georgia disputes
those figures, while humanitarian agencies on the
ground cannot independently verify that information.
08-46619
The investigative committee of the Russian Federation,
which is conducting an investigation of events at
Tskhinvali, had recovered 60 civilian bodies by
17 August. Russian peacekeepers in South Ossetia lost
74 men, according to official sources.

On the Georgian side, officials reported 215
military and 69 civilians killed during the hostilities.
Seventy military personnel are missing in action. An
exchange of Russian and Georgian prisoners of war
took place today near the village of Igoeti, south of
Gori.

Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch
have reported serious human rights abuses. There have
been reports of looting in South Ossetia, the town of
Gori and other surrounding villages in Georgia. The
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
has dispatched an officer to Georgia to provide human
rights support and advice to the United Nations country
team, as well as to conduct a preliminary assessment of
the human rights situation there.

As a result of the recent hostilities, 158,600
people have been displaced. That figure includes
98,600 displaced within Georgia, about 30,000
displaced within South Ossetia and another 30,000
displaced in other parts of the area. The overall
planning figure for IDPs remains at 128,600, including
30,000 displaced to Russia from South Ossetia, on the
basis of data obtained from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The number of those in need of immediate assistance,
including people fleeing from the Upper Kodori area of
Abkhazia, from South Ossetia and from the town of
Gori, has risen to 89,000. From the currently available
data, it appears that approximately 50 per cent of the
IDP population has been registered.

Today and tomorrow, UNHCR is sending two
planeloads consisting of 30.4 tons of non-food items to
Vladikavkaz in North Ossetia, Russia, following the
acceptance by Russian authorities of an aid offer from
the High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio
Guterres. The High Commissioner is visiting Georgia
today. He will then travel to Moscow for high-level
meetings and to Vladikavkaz. He is also planning to
visit South Ossetia, Georgia.

The President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross visited Vladikavkaz yesterday but was
unable to enter South Ossetia. Several
non- governmental organizations (NGOs) have
complained of difficulties in gaining access to South
Ossetia, where Russia's Emergencies Ministry has been
coordinating a major relief effort. United Nations
agencies continue to appeal to all parties for the
opening of a humanitarian corridor.

As of 18 August, a number of locations, including
the town of Gori, are accessible for the first time since
the conflict began. Given the opening of the
humanitarian corridor allowing east-west access in
Georgia, the distribution of humanitarian relief is
gaining momentum beyond Gori and as far west as
Poti. United Nations humanitarian agencies were in
Gori for a short visit and were able to bring some
essential water and hygiene supplies. The town
appeared deserted, save for the presence of the elderly
and persons who were too sick to move. Water and
electricity lines have been reconnected. There is no
cooking-gas supply. Some apartment buildings have
clearly suffered damage.

On 18 August, an interagency flash appeal for
Georgia was issued. Ten United Nations agencies and
15 NGOs participated in the appeal. The flash appeal
was also launched today in Tbilisi by the Resident
Coordinator and by the Prime Minister of Georgia. The
flash appeal is requesting approximately $56 million
for six months of assistance to those affected by the
crisis. As of 18 August, more than $24 million in
contributions has been registered on the Financial
Tracking Service of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, with an additional pledge of
$3 million having been made.

The Secretary-General's position on Georgia has
been clearly reflected in his various public statements
on this issue. Full implementation of the six principles
would allow for the provision of humanitarian
assistance to those affected, defuse the situation and
offer hope that a political solution to the problems can
be found. The United Nations stands ready to facilitate
international discussions in that regard and to take part
in any concrete arrangements for a settlement.

