Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its point of view on the
situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question, particularly during these important times,
which require the Security Council to address the
situation. I would like to begin by thanking you,
Madam, for having convened this debate. My country
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Government of Ecuador respects the norms
and principles of international law, in particular in the
context of the pacific settlement of disputes, and
expresses its concern over the Council's prolonged
management of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In our
desire to support stability in the region, my delegation
has recognized Palestine as a State.

Over the past months, relevant events, such as the
historic speech of President Mahmoud Abbas before the
General Assembly on 23 September 2011 (see A/66/PV.19), as well as the support of 132 States
Members of the United Nations in recognizing
Palestine as a State, have strengthened the conviction
that the Palestinian Authority is able to govern a State.
It is therefore time to seek mechanisms to actively
support progress in the efforts for peace and to
strengthen the capacity of the Palestinian Authority to
meet the current and future security needs of the
Palestinian people.

Despite the reports of the Quartet and its call for
dialogue and cooperation between the parties in order to
facilitate social and economic development in Area C,
the latter has been undermined by 124 illegal Israeli
settlements that prevent the establishment of a viable
Palestinian State within pre-1967 borders. Area C
comprises 62 per cent of the West Bank and includes
the most fertile, resource-rich land, which the future
Palestinian State and its people could make use of in
living a life of dignity.
Palestinian construction is permitted on only
1 per cent of Area C, most of which has already been
developed. In that regard, my delegation calls on the
Council to demand that Israel halt its demolition of
homes and structures that were built without permits,
some 4,800 of which have been destroyed since 2000,
and instead to support Palestine with a programme to
construct schools and hospitals and provide water,
sanitation and other infrastructure projects.

The possibility of finding a solution to the
establishment of two States has diminished as a result
of Israeli settlement expansion, in addition to the
military separation wall, obstacles to free movement,
the denial of access to vital natural resources, and the
erosion of Palestinian ownership in the West Bank,
upon which the hopes of a Palestinian State are based.

There is no norm of international law that would
allow Israel to imprison a Palestinian suspect for an
indefinite period without informing the detainee of the
charges against him or her or providing any evidence.
The protest by 1,600 Palestinian prisoners who have
united on an indefinite hunger strike is part of their
broader struggle to attain an independent State.

The international community must continue to
pressure Israel to end its occupation and its violations
of human rights. It is Israel's responsibility to promote
negotiations that will lead to a two-State solution in
accordance with all relevant United Nations resolutions.

To conclude, I consider it timely to remind the
Security Council once again of its responsibility in this
matter, which impedes peace and security in the
Middle East and, accordingly, the tranquillity of all
States Members of the United Nations. My delegation
calls for dialogue between the parties in order to ensure
that the two States, Israel and Palestine, can finally live
side by side in the region within safe and recognized
borders.

