Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing. I also
wish to thank the Permanent Representative of Timor-
Leste, Ambassador Santos, for his statement.

China strongly condemns the recent attacks by
the rebels on President Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Gusmao of Timor-Leste. We wish President
Ramos-Horta a speedy recovery. We also hope that the
Timorese people will keep calm, exercise restraint and
do all they can to maintain stability in the country.

Over the past few months, the United Nations has
closely followed the situation in Timor-Leste. The
Security Council mission and the Secretary-General
visited Timor-Leste. The Security Council has also
held many in-depth discussions on the situation in that
country. Following the attacks, the Security Council
immediately issued a presidential statement. All of this
fully demonstrates the support of the international
community to the process of peacebuilding and
reconstruction in Timor-Leste.

During last December's open debate (see S/PV.5801), China stated its position on the situation in
Timor-Leste in a comprehensive manner. Here, I wish
to emphasize the following points.

First, the leaders of the various Timorese factions
should achieve reconciliation through dialogue and
address the security problem. The recent attacks have
shown that the security situation in the country remains
fragile. Apart from the problem of the Military Police
Commander, Reinado, the problems of the internally
displaced persons and the petitioners pose a threat to
the peace and stability in Timor-Leste.

Effectively coping with the security problem,
especially in these trying times, requires that the
Government, with all its factions, especially
FRETILIN, should put behind their past grievances and
cooperate fully with each other. China appreciates the
fact that, following the attacks, FRETILIN swiftly
issued a statement condemning them and calling on the
Timorese people to remain calm. We hope that the
various Timorese factions will put national stability
and the people's interests first and, through dialogue
and exchanges of view, increase their mutual trust,
overcome their differences, help their people to view
the common situation rationally, and seek to address all
differences peacefully. The United Nations should
continue to play a constructive role in promoting the
reconciliation process in the country.

Secondly, maintaining peace and stability in
Timor-Leste also requires the joint efforts of the armed
forces, the police, the international security forces and
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). China appreciates the efforts of the
international security forces and UNMIT to maintain
security in Timor-Leste, but the recent attacks have
sounded an alarm for the international community. We
have seen that gaps remain in the security and
protection work being done in Timor-Leste.

China supports the Security Council's extension
of UNMIT's mandate. In the next phase, the security
forces of Timor-Leste, the international security forces
and UNMIT should remain highly vigilant and, while
maintaining public security, also strengthen protection
for the country's prominent figures. At the same time,
those three forces should also keep communications
open between them and cooperate with each other so as
to optimize their respective advantages.

Thirdly, the long-term stability of Timor-Leste
requires the implementation of the Government's
working plan and a significant contribution to the
development of the country's economy. The
Government of Timor-Leste has already formulated
this year's budget, as well as a work plan. We hope to
see their gradual implementation and, through
economic development, the continued improvement of
the livelihoods of the people and a reduction in
poverty, especially through increased job opportunities,
particularly among young people, so as to eliminate the
root causes of social instability. In improving the
people's livelihoods and standards of living, attention
must be paid to promoting development in the various
social sectors and to fostering and increasing the
people's self-confidence. The international community
should provide every possible assistance in support of
the efforts of the Timorese Government.

Fourthly, we should take the future tasks and
composition of UNMIT into consideration in an
integrated manner. As a large portion of the Timorese
police are still in the identification, verification and
reappointment phase, the peacekeeping personnel of
the United Nations remain on the front line of
enforcement in some areas. It is clear both from the
Security Council's mission and from the Secretary-
General's report that certain Government officials and
other people remain concerned in that regard.

It is imperative for a variety of reasons gradually
to transfer policing responsibilities to the national
police of Timor-Leste. While continuing to undertake
its policing responsibilities and tasks to ensure public
security in Timor-Leste, the United Nations should also
help the national police to strengthen its policing
capabilities. The United Nations police may wish as a
next step to consider refocusing its work on training
and sharing its experience with the national police.

Following a comprehensive consideration of the
rational allocation of United Nations peacekeeping
resources, the composition of UNMIT may also be
adjusted accordingly.

As a member of the Asia-Pacific family, China
has closely followed the situation in Timor-Leste and
sincerely hopes that, with the full assistance of the
international community, Timor-Leste will maintain its
peace and stability and start down the road to
development and national prosperity. China will, to the
extent possible, maintain its assistance to Timor-Leste.

