Mr. Negroponte (United States of America): The
lifting of sanctions marks a momentous event for the
people of Iraq. It is the turning of a historical page that
should brighten the future of a people and a region.
The threatening actions and defiance of Saddam
Hussain's brutal regime prolonged the imposition of
sanctions for nearly 13 years. Those sanctions have
now been lifted.

The liberation of Iraq has cleared the path for
today's action. We all witnessed an Iraqi State under
Saddam Hussain that was unwilling adequately to feed
its people - a State in which critical infrastructure
projects were left to languish while luxurious palaces
were built, and a State in which free political
expression was cruelly repressed and punished.
Together, the Council has taken decisive action to help
the Iraqi people.

My Government called for this vote this morning
because we firmly believed that each additional day of
debate over the language of this important text would
further hinder recovery. The gas lines are long despite
blessedly little damage to Iraq's residual infrastructure.
After more than a decade of being frozen out of the
world economy, it is time for the Iraqi people to benefit
from their natural resources.

President Bush and Prime Minister Blair said last
month at Hillsborough that the United Nations should
play a vital role in rebuilding Iraq. In passing this
resolution we have achieved much for the people of
Iraq. By recognizing the fluidity of the political
situation and that decisions will be made on the

* At the 4762nd (resumed) meeting, in the afternoon of 22
May, the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic took
the floor in connection with this vote, explaining that the
Syrian Arab Republic would have voted in favour of this
resolution had it been granted the additional time before
the voting that it had requested on more than one
occasion. The text of his statement is in the official record
of the 4762nd (resumed) meeting.

ground, the Security Council has provided a flexible
framework under Chapter VII for the coalition
provisional Authority, Member States, the United
Nations and others in the international community to
participate in the administration and reconstruction of
Iraq and to assist the Iraqi people in determining their
political future, establishing new institutions and
restoring economic prosperity to the country.

The resolution affirms our commitment to the
development of an internationally recognized
representative Government of Iraq. It creates a robust
mandate for a Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, including to work with the people of Iraq, the
Authority and others concerned - including
neighbouring States - to help make this vision a
reality. The resolution establishes a framework for an
orderly phase-out of the oil-for-food programme,
thereby preserving, for a transitional period, what has
become an important safety net for the people of Iraq.
The resolution establishes transparency in all
processes, and United Nations participation in
monitoring the sale of Iraqi oil resources and
expenditures of oil proceeds. In that context, I am
pleased to announce the creation of the Development
Fund for Iraq in the Central Bank of Iraq. As the
resolution underlines, the Authority will disburse the
funds only for the purposes it determines to benefit the
Iraqi people.

The resolution lifts export restrictions to Iraq,
with the exception of trade in arms and related materiel
not required by the coalition provisional Authority.
Aviation restrictions are also lifted. But Iraq's
disarmament obligations remain, and Member States
remain barred from assisting Iraq in acquiring weapons
of mass destruction and proscribed missile systems or
proceeding with civil nuclear activities so long as those
restrictions remain in effect.

The resolution provides Iraq with adequate time
to recover capacity eroded during the sanctions years,
yet it preserves its obligations to Kuwait and others
who suffered from Saddam Hussain's aggression dating
from 1990. It addresses Iraq's sovereign debt, the
protection of Iraqi antiquities and accountability for
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law by the previous regime. It also
directs Member States to act quickly to seize and return
to the Iraqi people money stolen by Saddam Hussain's
regime.

But we cannot be complacent. Now that we have
adopted this resolution the work must begin on
implementing it. The Secretariat and the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General must prepare
for their work on the urgent humanitarian,
reconstruction and political tasks to which it will
contribute. Member States must work to fulfil the
obligations and provisions contained in the resolution.
For our part, in addition to our responsibilities in Iraq
as leaders of the coalition provisional Authority, we
will undertake to inform the Council on a quarterly
basis of progress in implementing the resolution, in the
spirit of paragraph 24.

The United States is appreciative of the
constructive spirit with which the Council has
considered and strengthened the provisions of the text
we put forward with our co-sponsors. We look forward
to working closely with all members to implement this
important decision.

