Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): On behalf of Russia, I would first like to
express our condolences to the nearest and dearest of
our colleague and friend Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue,
the Permanent Representative of cote d'Ivoire, on
his untimely passing. We will greatly miss his sense
of humour, constructive attitude, professionalism and
enthusiasm for the issues on the Council's agenda. He
has done a great deal for his country and for the people
of Cote d'Ivoire. We share their pain and sorrow. This
is a severe blow to the United Nations diplomatic corps.
May his soul rest in peace.

To return to this morning's topic, I want to welcome
Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President ofColombia, and
Maria Angela Holguin Cuellar, Colombia's Minister for
Foreign Affairs, to our meeting.

We are here today to discuss the situation in
Colombia since the holding of parliamentary elections
on 11 March. That was an important and significant
event, considering that the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) took part in the elections for the first
time, after decades in opposition. Despite the modest
results, that political force will represent the interests
of its supporters. We congratulate Colombia and the
Colombians on that achievement. Thanks to the sense
of national responsibility they have demonstrated, the
country has been able to take another very important
step towards a sustainable peace.

We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/279). Both the
briefing and the report confirm that a lot of work
remains to be done. We should have no illusions about
that. Despite the fact that the country's situation has
changed for the better by comparison to the war years,
some chronic problems contain to present obstacles
to strengthening sustainable peace, which is why we
wholeheartedly endorse the support that the United
Nations presence provides to Colombians under the
leadership of Mr. Arnault. It was the support of the first
special political mission, which completed its work last
September, that helped Colombians to secure major
gains in the peace process. In the wake of the ceasefire
ending many years of conflict and the signing of the
Final Peace Agreement at the end of 2016, the United
Nations Mission in Colombia ensured the completion
of the surrender of weapons by FARC-EP. Former
combatants began to arrive in the reintegration zones,
in spite of some problems with setting them up, as the
Head of the Mission reported.

These successes enabled the Council to start
discussing the shift to the second phase, that of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Issued six months after the start of the Verification
Mission's work, the Secretary-General's report has
pointed to a number of serious problems, particularly
the bureaucratic obstacles that the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) encountered during
a crucial stage of its electoral campaign. Unfortunately,
the number of murders of former combatants and
communal leaders has also increased exponentially.
Against that backdrop, illegal armed groups have taken
control of lands that had previously been liberated by
FARC-EP, despite the announcement of the Horus plan,
which is meant to ensure Government control in such
areas. Furthermore, another topic that has provoked a
significant reaction in Colombian society was missing
from the report - the arrest on 9 April of Jesus Santrich,
one of the negotiators of the Final Peace Agreement
and a member of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun party who, as we know, was supposed to
take up his parliamentary seat. We were pleased with
Mr. Arnault's information that the key agreements of
the parties remain in force. Together with the United
Nations Mission, we will carefully monitor the process
and the applicability, in this situation, of Colombia's
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, a key component of
the Final Peace Agreement and therefore a guarantee
of peace.

All of these issues will require careful attention
from the Government, the United Nations Mission
and the international community, which rightly see
Colombia as an example ofpost-conflict rebuilding. Not
to mention how attentively the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional is watching the development of events.

All of that places a special responsibility on the
Verification Mission, which should be fully mobilized
and focused on fulfilling its mandate on schedule.
That is especially important in the run-up to the
presidential elections.

We believe that all parties must continue to adhere
strictly to the outcome of the Peace Agreement in its
current form by all parties, regardless of whatever
changes await the country's Government. In that context,
we will be paying close attention to the statements of
the candidates. It is important to remember that the
authority of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General is invested in the success of the peace process.

For our part, we once again affirm our readiness
to continue to support the people and the Government
of Colombia in building lasting peace and sustainable
post-conflict development.

