Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has maintained stability and achieved
positive progress in economic development and the rule
oflaw, which China welcomes. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is an important Balkan country. Maintaining peace and
stability, promoting economic and social development
and ensuring the harmonious coexistence of all ethnic
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the common
interests of the countries of the region and the entire
international community.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The
international community should seize this opportunity
to encourage the various ethnic groups in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to continue to consolidate their
achievements in nation-building and to comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement so as to achieve
greater progress in nation-building, allowing all ethnic
groups to enjoy the peace dividend. China welcomes the
efforts of the High Representative Inzko in advancing
the Bosnian political process. We hope that he will act
in accordance with his mandate and continue to play
a positive role in promoting the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and believes that it should
independently choose its own development path and
foreign policy. The international community should
respect and support the choices made by the Government
and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for their own
State, and make a commitment to promoting the
country's national unity and achievement of economic
and social sustainable development, as well as lasting
peace and stability.

China welcomes the adoption of resolution
2247 (2015), extending the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation
Althea. We hope that EUFOR will continue to
cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
play a constructive role in maintaining the peace and
security of the country. China is ready to work with the
rest of the international community to continue to make
a real contribution to the realization of lasting peace,
stability and development in the country.
