Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her fifth report on the
implementation of resolution 1970 (2011) and for the
additional information she has provided today.

Rwanda, as co-Chair of the Group of Friends of the
Responsibility to Protect, would like to stress that the
international community has a responsibility to protect
civilians targeted by their own Governments and a duty
to ensure that the perpetrators of mass atrocities are
brought to justice. That is why we supported resolutions
1970 (2011) and 1973 (2011), on Libya, and called for
swift justice for the victims.

Looking forward, we are encouraged by the
achievements of the new Libyan Government
in rebuilding its institutions with the support of
the international community. We are fully aware
of - indeed, concerned about - the daunting
challenges that the country continues to face,
particularly the proliferation of weapons, uncontrolled
militias, terrorist activities and political uncertainty,
all of which are undermining the State authority of
a democratically elected Government. However, we
believe the overall trend is positive and that the Libyan
Government should be supported and encouraged in its
post-conflict efforts aimed atjustice, reconciliation and
recovery.

To achieve that goal, it is important that the judicial
process be carried out by Libyans themselves, with the
support of the international community. From our own
humble experience, we know that it is indeed important
that justice be done close to the victims. In that regard,
we take note of Libya's continued cooperation with
the ICC and welcome the decision of the Office of the
Prosecutor to support the inadmissibility of the case of
Abdullah Al-Senussi on the basis of materials provided
by the Libyan Government. We also hope that the
case of Al-Senussi, together with that of Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi, will eventually be handled by Libyan
courts.

We would like to take this opportunity to call on
the ICC and the wider international community to
ensure that the remaining suspects of war crimes and
crimes against humanity in Libya, including those
living abroad, are brought before Libyan jurisdictions.
It is important in that regard that the international
community support and provide assistance to improve
Libya's capacity to deal with past crimes and promote
the rule of law. We also believe that the sanctions
regime in Libya is of paramount importance in building
sustainable peace there. During the past two years, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, which I currently chair,
has contributed to giving new hope to Libyans in the
aftermath of the conflict.

I would now like to speak in broader terms about the
role of the ICC and the importance ofa genuine system
of international criminal justice. Rwanda has always
believed that combating impunity must be at the core
of the Security Council's mission. We also believe that
a robust system of international criminal justice, which
must complement national jurisdictions, is essential
to ending impunity for the most serious crimes and
to promoting reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
However, to achieve that goal, such justice must be
independent of political interference and uphold the
principle ofthe sovereign equality of States. Needless to
say, Rwanda, like many other United Nations Member
States, does not believe that the ICC has lived up to
those aspirations. In fact, it has been selective in its
methods for investigating and prosecuting perpetrators
of serious international crimes, since it has failed to
prosecute similar crimes committed in other parts of
the world with impunity. Furthermore, as has been
stated on many occasions, it is difficult to understand
how equal justice can be served if the Security Council
can refer cases to the Court while the Council's
permanent members have discretionary power to block
any prosecution of their own nationals or allies.

In that regard, even signatories to the Rome Statute
have recently expressed concerns about the Court.
I would like to cite the note verbale dated Thursday,
2 May 2013, addressed by the Kenyan delegation to
the Security Council, which contains a compelling
case against the methods of work of the Office of the
Prosecutor on the Kenya cases. That was also pointed
out by a judge of the ICC who recently resigned. Why?
In that regard, Rwanda hopes that the Security Council
will soon schedule a decision on the issue raised by
Member States for its programme of work, with a view
to addressing the growing concerns of Member States,
including signatories to the Rome Statute.

In conclusion, I would once again like to call on
the international community to support the Libyan
authorities in their efforts to achieve justice and
reconciliation through a strengthened judicial system.
We also call on the Council and the wider international
justice system to engage in a serious discussion of the
current status of international criminal justice, with the
ultimate goal of establishing an independent judicial
system that respects the principle of the sovereign
equality of States, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

