Mr. Butagira (Uganda): I thank you,
Mr. President, and, through you, the members of the
Security Council for organizing an open debate on this
important topic. Such a dialogue with non-members of
the Security Council augurs well for good cooperation
among various organs of the United Nations and is to
be encouraged.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict goes
to the root of why the United Nations is there in the
first place: to advance respect for the rule of law,
including humanitarian law, and for human rights. The
obligation to protect, therefore, is not an option; it must
be carried out. Otherwise, the need for existence of the
United Nations becomes irrelevant.

I must commend the Secretary-General for his
excellent report on this subject (S/2004/43l); it
highlights the problems and charts a way forward. I
also thank Mr. Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing this morning,
which calls for urgent action on the part of States and
the international community to protect civilians in
armed conflict.

The fate suffered by civilians caught in armed
conflict is well known. Young girls and women have
been raped and, in some cases, infected with AIDS;
homes and properties have been destroyed; and entire
populations have been displaced. In Uganda, the so-
called Lord's Resistance Army - a rebel group led by
the diabolical Kony - has wreaked havoc in northern
Uganda, killing, maiming, abducting and raping
women and girls. Rather than indulging in
lamentations, it is time that we take concrete actions
against those bandits.

First of all, the terrorist groups that have
committed such atrocities should not go unpunished.
Uganda is pleased that the Security Council, in a
presidential statement dated 16 April 2004, emphasized
that the crimes - such as abduction, sexual violence
and sexual exploitation - committed by those
terrorists should not go unpunished. We applaud the
suggestion made by the Secretary-General in his report
to the effect that amnesty should not be extended to
those who have committed serious violations of
international humanitarian law and criminal law.

The international community, however, should
not be apologetic. To refrain from calling these bandits
"terrorists" for fear that that would have an adverse
impact on opportunities for humanitarian negotiations
would be to give legitimacy to such groups. Terrorists
should be ostracized, denied sanctuary and hunted
down by the international community. All States should
cooperate in that endeavour. Notwithstanding our stand
on hunting down the terrorists in our country and
eliminating them militarily, Uganda has extended an
offer to Kony and his band of terrorists to engage in
peace talks. To date, there has been no response from
them. In the meantime, the Government of Uganda has
put into place measures to protect civilians both within
and outside displaced persons' camps in northern
Uganda by having a robust presence of Ugandan armed
forces personnel in the area. Humanitarian access is
also being ensured.

We welcome the measures undertaken by the
United Nations to build into peacekeeping mandates
mechanisms for protecting civilians in armed conflict.
The international community should respond
positively, equally and in a timely fashion to appeals
for humanitarian assistance. As the Secretary-General
has pointed out, some conflicts have been forgotten,
whereas other, high-profile conflicts have elicited a
quick response from the international community. I
should like to place on record our thanks to
humanitarian agencies and the international
community, which have provided assistance to the
people of northern Uganda who are caught in armed
conflict.

There is a question regarding failed States or
States that are unwilling to protect their citizens from
the scourge of conflict. The question is, should the
international community watch as civilians are
butchered, maimed and brutalized? There should be an
obligation on the part of the international community to
intervene and protect those people. The right to protect
should transcend the notion of sovereignty. In that
respect, we commend the African Union, which has
enshrined in its charter the right to intervene in certain
circumstances, notwithstanding the issue of
sovereignty.

There is also a need to establish good rapport
with the Governments of countries where conflicts
happen to be found. Everything possible, for instance,
should be done to avoid the suspicion that the persons
writing reports on those conflicts have some hidden
agenda, political or otherwise. For instance, reports on
children in conflict in Uganda have lacked some
objectivity, as pointed out by us in various
communications to the Council. Contrary to the
assertion, for instance, that the Uganda People's
Defence Forces (UPDF) recruit child soldiers, the truth
of the matter is that UPDF does not recruit children
into the army. Besides cooperating with Governments,
the relevant United Nations bodies should extend help
to regional and subregional organizations dealing with
conflicts, such as the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the East African Community, and
others.

Lastly, the United Nations, through the Security
Council and in cooperation with the various actors,
should formulate and put in place measures, such as
early warning mechanisms, poverty eradication and
good governance, that would prevent conflicts from
occurring in the first place.

