Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting on this highly important
issue at the request of the United States delegation. I
also appreciate the substantive briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu.

For years the international community has
been working persistently to establish a rules-based
international order "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war" - a phrase we all know
too well. A whole range of international instruments
were elaborated to that end, especially in the area of
non-proliferation. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has become a key fundamental
element of the system of collective security. Was it a
major achievement? Definitely, yes. As of today, 191
States have adhered to the Treaty. Is it an ultimate
success? Here I am not so sure. Almost 50 years after
its entry into force, the possible use of nuclear weapons
remains a threat. Furthermore, some States still aspirte
to develope their own nuclear-weapon capabilities. In
addition, the Chemical Weapons Convention has been
blatantly trampled - in Syria - for the first time in
many years. I cannot fail to mention the growing risk of
the most dangerous materials falling into the hands of
non-State actors, whether intentionally or as a result of
neglect or oversight.

The mere fact that today we must again discuss
how to enforce Security Council resolutions aimed at
preventing the spread of weapons of mass destructions
clearly proves that the existing system of established
norms and principles has been eroded. This is not just
about proliferation, but is an indication of the broader
problem of insufficient implementation of international
law and of systematic violations thereof. The current
state of affairs can suit only those who seek to undermine
the very foundations of the international order. A lack
of real accountability for defying international norms
only encourages further breaches.

North Korea is probably the most appalling case.
Despite numerous decisions by this organ, the regime
continues its nuclear and missile programme, keeping
the entire region and its own people hostage. It seems
that North Korea's leaders are prepared to sacrifice
their own people, starving them to death, just to satisfy
their rampant ambitions. Unfortunately, we know how
it feels from our own history when Soviet rulers created
famine in Ukraine, selling grain for gold, using slave
labour in camps to build up military capacity, and
testing nuclear weapons on their own troops just to
see how they worked. The nuclear ambitions of North
Korea and its recent actions in defiance of Security
Council decisions is an open challenge to the entire
international community.

In the Middle East, the use of chemical
weapons - something that was considered unthinkable
less than a decade ago - now represents a very clear
danger. The task is therefore to reverse this precarious
trend and prevent the world from sliding into a state
of lawlessness. We must stand united to achieve a
universal adherence to rules that we ourselves created.

How do we ensure the implementation of Council
resolutions to prevent the spread of the most dangerous
and destructive weapons? Indeed, the unconditional
and faithful implementation of the relevant resolutions
is a key prerequisite to reduce the level of threat and to
prevent any kind of new provocation. Yet the Council
is not always united and staunch in taking necessary
measures for an effective, rather than formal, response.
Breaches of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, as
well as the use of other weapons of mass destruction,
such as chemical weapons, should be treated by the
international community as a clear danger. That is why
I urge Council members to put aside differences and
use every tool available to ensure full compliance with
the relevant decisions.

In the absence of the political will to do so, the
situation can spiral out of control. There should
be unavoidable accountability for each and every
violation. The risks in this area arise not only from
gaps in national legislation, but also from the rapid
developments in science and technology, as well as
e-commerce, along with the lack of awareness among
academia, industry and civil society. Strengthening
cooperation in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is therefore fundamental and
absolutely essential.

No part of the globe is immune to the risk of
proliferation. In the 1990s, Ukraine voluntarily
dismantled the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal. I
remember that time quite well, as my father was flying
Soviet nuclear bombers and I started my diplomatic
career on nuclear disarmament. We Ukrainians did
that being convinced of the supremacy of fundamental
international principles, such as the inviolability
of international borders, territorial integrity and
sovereignty. We believed that those principles were
sacred to everyone. Two decades later we still hold those
principles dear. Yet we came to realize, unfortunately all
too well, that they are not sacred to everyone. I want to
stress, in that regard, that violations of international law,
including in the sphere of non-proliferation, constitute
the single most significant threat to international peace
and security.

As members of the Council know, Ukraine is
confronting aggression by a nuclear-weapon State,
Russia. Brutal violations of international obligations,
including under the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, by
Russia, which acceded to assurances of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, undermine the
whole United Nations security system, based on the
principles of international law. One could also recall,
in that regard, the obligation of the nuclear-weapons
States set out in the final document of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:

"to fully respect their existing commitments with
regard to security assurances".

More than three years ago, Russia not only
carried an act of military aggression against Ukraine
but, by violating the Budapest Memorandum, it also
demonstrated that the solemn promise of a nuclear
Power to respect the independence and sovereignty
of Ukraine, to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of Ukraine and to ensure that none of their weapons
ever be used against Ukraine, except in self-defence or
otherwise in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, is now worth nothing.

The Russian narrative that it did not breach the
Budapest Memorandum since nuclear weapons were
not used against my country is yet another cynical
manipulation. Just think of the impression it made in
the eyes of States seeking to bolster their deterrent
potential. Just think of the impact to the global
non-proliferation infrastructure.

The recent drill on launching a massive nuclear-
missile strike, which was conducted during the Zapad
2017 exercise, does not inspire any confidence in
Russia. It can hardly be considered as contributing
to strengthening international security in general,
or the non-proliferation regime in particular. That
is why we are convinced that the issue of providing
non-nuclear-weapon States with effective negative
security guarantees is not a platitude. The global
non-proliferation regime will benefit immensely
from enforceable security guarantees. Let us all be
absolutely frank on this issue: empty proclamations do
not convince anyone anymore.

The international community has a collective
responsibility to restore respect for international law
and find lasting solutions to the most urgent threats
to global peace and security. It is therefore ultimately
the responsibility of the Security Council to spare no
effort to achieve the overarching goal and prove that the
non-proliferation system works effectively. Otherwise,
the world map will be redrawn by newly emerged
nuclear-weapon actors. It is the Council that has to
remain determined and precise in preventing such a
scenario from becoming tomorrow's reality.

