Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Sir, in your role as
President of this Council, for taking the initiative to
organize this open debate on the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution, in particular in Africa - a
region that, as you know, is particularly close to our
hearts. We welcomed the participation of the Secretary-
General at the beginning of our debate, and we
welcome now the presence of the Deputy Secretary-
General, who is with us for the continuation of this
very important work.

Belgium fully adheres to the statement to be
made shortly by our Portuguese colleague in the name
of the European Union. It especially aligns itself with
the comments on the role of the International Criminal
Court in the prevention of the use of force, as well as
on the importance of the role of women in both the
prevention and resolution of conflicts.
We welcome the increased attention given to
conflict prevention in the different organs of the United
Nations, particularly in the Security Council. It is the
responsibility of all parts of the United Nations to
reflect on how to reinforce this culture of prevention,
referred to by the Secretary-General in his report last
year (A/60/891).

We welcome the continuation by the Security
Council of the work begun by resolution 1631 (2005).
That resolution emphasized the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations on one hand,
and regional and subregional organizations on the
other, in all phases of crisis management. During the
open debate last March on this topic (5649th meeting),
we said that cooperation, coordination and capacity are
the three key concepts determining the success of any
joint effort between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations.

Belgium advocates a pragmatic and empirical
approach in this sphere. In this context, we welcome
the publication of a joint communique by the Security
Council and the African Union during the joint meeting
on 16 June in Addis Ababa. We would particularly like
to highlight the decision to hold a meeting at least once
per year between the Security Council and the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union.

As my Peruvian colleague has already pointed
out, continuing and expanding the discussion begun
during the public debate held this past June on the
subject of natural resources and conflict should be
another element of the Security Council's efforts in the
area of conflict prevention. In the presidential
statement adopted by the Council on that occasion, the
Council took note of the role that natural resources can
play in armed conflict and post-conflict situations. As
we are all aware, natural resources can act as a
destabilizing factor. There is, therefore, a need for
sound management of natural resources, not only in
terms of development but also of peace and security
and the prevention of conflict.

What can, and should, the Security Council do?
The Council should, of course, not seek to exercise
some sort of stewardship over existing initiatives, such
as the Kimberly Process and the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative, which are not directly under
the Council's purview. However, those initiatives do
have an impact upon international peace and security,
which are the primary responsibilities of the Security
Council. The efforts already being carried out by the
Council with regard to natural resources - through the
sanctions committees, among other ways - should be
strengthened and made more coherent. In its
management of conflicts, the Council should consider

at an earlier stage whether it is appropriate for it to
address the natural resources aspect. The group of
experts mechanism could be strengthened through the
establishment of a standing expertise centre within the
Secretariat - without, however, placing a further
burden on existing structures.

