Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, and Turkey on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of June, and I
assure you of our delegation's full cooperation and
support. I also wish to thank Ambassador Churkin and
the Russian delegation for ably steering the work of the
Council during the month of May.

We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
Tribunals for their briefings. Uganda welcomes the
Secretary-General's report on the administrative and
budgetary aspects of the options for possible locations
for the archives of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the seat of
the residual mechanisms for the Tribunals.

My delegation appreciates the tremendous work
that has been carried out so far by the Tribunals in
fulfilment of the relevant Council resolutions. We
attach great importance to the work of the Tribunals in
the delivery of justice and the fight against impunity
for heinous crimes against humanity, including
genocide.

Uganda welcomes the progress made by the
Tribunals in spite of the challenges they have faced.
From the Secretary-General's report, we have observed
that some of the challenges include trial of contempt
cases and the protection of victims and witnesses,
which require the judicial capacity to sanction any
violations of the Tribunals' orders.

Uganda welcomes the recommendation of the
Secretary-General that, as part of the completion
strategy, the residual functions be transferred to
residual mechanisms which would be adequately
supported by a structure that can facilitate the
fulfilment of the completion strategy. In that regard,
my delegation supports the recommendation that the
Tribunals refer further cases to national jurisdictions,
while strengthening national capacities.

In order to activate the residual mechanisms, it
will be necessary to adopt and use the roster of former
Tribunal judges, legal officers, prosecution and defence
counsel, and other relevant staff. This undertaking will
provide support for the institutional knowledge that is
essential to the ends of justice and the completion
strategy.

Uganda welcomes the recommendation for the
location of the residual mechanisms and archives both
in Europe and Africa, the regions where the crimes
were committed. The basis for this suggestion is that
the residual mechanisms will require access to the
regional records for each Tribunal, as well as new
records that will become available.

Both Tribunals have requested the extension of
the mandate of the permanent and ad litem judges, the
expansion of their Appeals and Trial Chambers, and
redeployment of trial judges. It is understood that a
number of cases have yet to be completed, some of the
judges have their terms coming to an end, and the
status of ad litem judges has raised issues that require
urgent attention. Since there is still-unfinished
business, Uganda supports these requests for extension.

The ad litem judges have made an invaluable
contribution to the functioning of the Tribunals and to
the completion strategy. They have been assigned
multiple cases and have of necessity been forced to
take up permanent residence at the sites of the
Tribunals. Their tasks and competencies are identical
to those of the permanent judges, and nearly half the
judges at the ICTR have served for more than six
years. Accordingly, Uganda calls for a review of their
terms and conditions of service.

Finally, I would like to thank the Presidents,
Prosecutors, judges, ad litem judges and the staff
members of the Tribunals for their work. and call on
the Council to render the necessary support to ensure
the early, smooth and orderly conclusion of the work of
both Tribunals.

