Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the organization of this informative
briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/ll75) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
We commend Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of UNOWAS, for the quality of his briefing, which
enlightened our Council on the regional political and
economic dynamics and the security threats impacting
peace and stability.
Cote d'Ivoire notes with great interest the
assessments and recommendations of the Secretary-
General with regard to the current situation in West
Africa and the Sahel. We note with satisfaction that
the political situation overall remains stable. The West
African subregion overall is also enjoying a favourable
socioeconomic situation, with an expected economic
growth of 2.9 per cent in 2019.

The current economic and social trends give
reason for hope and are part of an irreversible process
of profound transformation in the societies of West
Africa and the Sahel, despite the ongoing obstacles to
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals.
My country believes that the dividends ofthis generally
encouraging subregional economic situation should
lead to a redistribution of the fruits of growth through
the creation of employment for young people, the
promotion of wealth-generating activities and quick-
impact projects for women.

With regard to trends in the area of political
governance and democracy, my country is happy to note
political stability in the subregion, which nevertheless
does not obviate the need to strengthen ongoing efforts
to bolster democracy and good governance. In that
regard, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the outstanding work
that has been done by Mr. Chambas as part of his
mediation and good offices mission. Those missions,
which were carried out in perfect cooperation with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and civil society partners, are fully in
accordance with the principles of preventive diplomacy
advocated by the Council.

With regard to the important electoral dates
planned for 2019 and the ongoing political tensions in
certain countries of the subregion, my country warmly
encourages the Head of UNOWAS to intensify his
mediation and good offices missions in the countries
concerned with regard to ECOWAS. That subregional
institution has fully demonstrated its ability to prevent
and manage internal crises during its successive
interventions in Guinea Bissau, Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Gambia. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on
UNOWAS to further support the efforts deployed by
ECOWAS, which has a comparative advantage in
monitoring and supporting the political processes
with a View to overcoming crises. We also call on it
to strengthen regional conflict-resilience capacities,
which are indispensable to building peace and stability
in the region.

With regard to security, my delegation notes with
concern the ongoing threats to subregional peace and
security caused by the increase in terrorism and Violent
extremism. In that regard, the report of the Secretary-
General notes an increase in the level of activism by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region and the
spike in the number of terrorist attacks in countries,
such as Burkina Faso and the Niger. The terrorist
groups that are active in the region increasingly exploit
local vulnerabilities, in particular tensions among
pastoralists and farmers and intercommunal conflicts,
especially in areas where States find it difficult to fully
exercise their authority. In the light of that situation,
C6te d'Ivoire believes that combating terrorism, violent
extremism and transnational organized crime in
West Africa and the Sahel must be part of a holistic,
coordinated approach that is focused on strengthening
the response to subregional security and support for
development initiatives that allow for the root causes
of instability, such as poverty and unemployment, to
be addressed.

With respect to security responses, Cote d'Ivoire
calls for increased financial and logistical support
from the international community to the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and
the Multinational Joint Task Force, which is a model
that illustrates how countries of the region have taken
ownership of their collective security. In addition, we
recall the need for coordination among the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force, the Multinational Joint Task Force and other
missions on the ground, namely, the Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
Operation Barkhane force. Furthermore, Cote d'Ivoire
believes that predictable and sustainable funding from
United Nations mandatory contributions will have a
positive impact on the sustainability and effectiveness
of the forces I mentioned.

For my country, the current security response
should be complemented by development strategies
aimed at determining the structural causes of conflict
and at responding to the pressing social needs of
the people. In that regard, my country calls on the
international community to support inclusive economic
and social development programmes, in particular in
the region of the Sahel, where young people who have
fallen prey to poverty and unemployment are becoming
increasingly vulnerable to the radical rhetoric of and
recruitment offers from armed groups. Cote d'Ivoire
underscores its support for the Alliance for the Sahel
and the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme for
the period 2019 to 2021, for which a total of€2.4 billion
was raised during the round table held in Nouakchott
on 6 December 2018. My country also welcomes the
implementation of the United Nations Support Plan for
the Sahel, whose aim is to better support States of the
region in their efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to ensure shared prosperity
and a secure environment in the Sahel.

At this stage, let me underscore that Cote d'Ivoire
and Equatorial Guinea are working to organize a
possible Visit of the Security Council to Guinea-Bissau
and Cote d'Ivoire in order to look into the situation in
the region and support UNOWAS efforts. My country
remains convinced that, despite the complexity of the
challenge, UNOWAS remains an important conflict
prevention tool in West Africa and the Sahel.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel to continue his efforts to promote peace, stability
and development in West Africa and the Sahel.

