Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to commend your initiative, Madam
President, to convene an open debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I

would also like to welcome the briefing by the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

From the beginning, the situation in the Middle East
has been of particular concern for Peru. With respect to
the question of Palestine, my country has consistently
maintained a clear position in accordance with the
rules and principles of international law, in particular
peoples' right to self-determination. Therefore, my
country recognizes the need to implement the relevant
General Assembly resolutions, which are the basis for
the creation of two States in the territory of Palestine,
one Arab and one Jewish, coexisting side by side as
neighbours within secure and mutually recognized
borders, in peace and security and free from the threat
or use of force.

Therefore, conscious of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to establish themselves as an
independent State, and convinced that the creation of
a Palestinian State is a key element in the peaceful and
definitive resolution ofthe conflict, Peru has recognized
Palestine as a State and supported the relevant United
Nations resolutions, including through our sponsorship
of historic General Assembly resolution 67/19, of
29 November 2012, in accordance with which Palestine
was granted the status of non-member observer State.

The attacks against densely populated urban areas in
the Gaza Strip carried out by Israel last summer were the
subject of vigorous condemnation by my Government.
In the same vein, Peru condemned the firing of rockets
from Gaza towards Israeli civilian populations. Of
course, Peru deplored the disproportionate use of
military force during the conflict, which resulted in
the deaths of more than 1,400 people in the Gaza Strip,
mostly Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, some of whom were seeking shelter in United
Nations facilities.

Therefore, consistent with our ongoing call for the
parties to act with strict respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law and to take measures
to protect the civilian population, Peru voted in favour
of Human Rights Council resolution S-21/l through
which, in addition the attacks being condemned,
Israel was asked to cease its settlement activities and
end the blockade of the Gaza Strip. While my country
recognizes the inalienable right of Israel to preserve
its own existence and security, including by exercising
its right to legitimate self-defence, we note that the
exercise of this right must be carried out in accordance
with international law and international humanitarian
law, in particular the principles of proportionality
and lawfulness, within defined and internationally
recognized borders.
On that last point, my delegation reiterates that
the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible
in the light of international law, which is why any
action by Israel to impose its laws, jurisdiction and
administration are null and void. In that regard, we
reiterate our call on Israel to immediately cease the
practice of the construction of settlements, house
demolitions and evictions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with
the provisions ofvarious General Assembly resolutions.

In accordance with our traditional and unchanging
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes, my
delegation reaffirms its full support and calls for the
search for a lasting peace in the Middle East, which
can only be achieved as a result of negotiations with
the participation of parties, and on the basis of full
implementation by all parties of their obligations under
the Madrid terms of reference, the Quartet Road Map
and other agreements and full respect for international
law, including Security Council resolutions on the
subject. My delegation therefore hopes that the ceasefire
agreement signed in August will pave the way for the
parties to resume the peace process on the Middle
East, in order to achieve a viable and lasting solution
that ends the status quo and allows Palestinians and
Israelis to live in peace, in two States, within secure
and internationally recognized borders.

I would like to turn to a growing threat to the
peace and security of the entire Middle East region,
namely, the terrorist organization that calls itself the
Islamic State, whose terrible acts and crimes cannot
be tolerated. In that regard, Peru reiterates its strong
condemnation and rejection of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, reaffirming its commitment
to the fight against that scourge. In that context, Peru
welcomes the recently adopted resolution 2178 (2014),
which seeks to combat the spread of terrorism, in
particular by reducing the threat posed by so-called
foreign terrorist fighters given that their presence may
increase the intensity and duration of conflicts. In
addition, it represents a serious threat to their States of
origin, transit States and the States to which they travel.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Peru's commitment to
taking all necessary measures to combat terrorism
at the international and the national levels, while
always bearing in mind the four pillars of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in strict
accordance with international law, including the norms
and principles of international human rights law,
international humanitarian law and refugee law.
