Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Lithuania for having organized
this meeting, and you, Mr. Minister, for your presence,
which gives it particular prominence.

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement. I
also wish to welcome to the Council Baroness Catherine
Ashton, High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. Their statements
confirmed that the European Union has demonstrated
that it is a long-term partner of the United Nations at
the service of the values and objectives that the two
organizations share - respect for human rights, equal
rights between men and women, the sovereign equality
of all Member States and the rejection of war as a means
of resolving conflicts. Thanks to the instruments it has
developed in the areas of security, maintaining and
building peace, humanitarian action and development,
the European Union is particularly well placed to assist
the United Nations in responding to the complex crises
affecting the world.

We commend the close cooperation between the
Secretariat and the European External Action Service.
The support on the part of the European Union and
its member States for United Nations activities is also
demonstrated in their financial contributions, which
make up more than one third of the contributions of the
United Nations regular budget and the peacekeeping
budget.

For the first time, thanks to Lithuania's initiative,
the Security Council has adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/20l4/4, which recognizes the cooperation
between the United Nations and the European Union
in the service of international peace and security for
its true value. As a founding member, both of the
United Nations and the European Union, we can only
be pleased by this.

Since the last statement of the High Representative
to the Council (see S/PV.6919), almost a year ago to
the day, European diplomacy, as was recalled this
morning, has been able to achieve tangible results
on two sensitive issues, which are also on the agenda
of the Security Council. The first issue concerns
Kosovo. I congratulate the High Representative for
the skill and effectiveness with which she continues to
facilitate the high-level dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. Her efforts led to the conclusion, on 19 April
2013, of the First Agreement of Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between Serbia and
Kosovo. Since then, the implementation of that historic
Agreement has continued at a good rate with the support
of the European Union on the ground. We fully support
the efforts to sustainably regularize relations between
the two countries from the viewpoint of their shared
European future.

The second issue I wanted to bring up is the Iranian
nuclear programme. In that regard, we also commend
the energy and the work of the High Representative,
whose role in conducting negotiations between Iran
and the E3+3 Governments was central to reaching
the joint plan of action, agreed upon on 24 November
2013 in Geneva. We welcome the beginning of
the implementation of the plan, which began on
20 January. It is a first step on the path, and as the
High Representative said, an "important step", which
should lead to the reestablishment of international
community's confidence in the exclusively civilian and
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
European Union is particularly developed in Africa,
where it is carried out in partnership with the African
Union, subregional organizations and the countries
involved. Let me raise two examples: the Central African
Republic and Mali. In the Central African Republic, the
European Union actively contributes to the efforts of the
international community to settle the severe security
and humanitarian crisis. After the authorization
provided by the Council in resolution 2134 (2014), the
European Union decided, on 10 February, to establish
a military operation in the Central African Republic,
which will act in close cooperation with the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the French Sangaris Operation. We fully
share the Secretary-General's views with regard to the
urgent necessity for the Council and, by extension, the
entire international community to redouble its efforts to
put an end to the violence and atrocities perpetrated in
the Central African Republic and assist that suffering
country and its entire population.

In Mali, the European Union continues its
efforts, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, to support the new authorities of that country.
It has decided to extend its European Union training
mission in Mali for two years, which will make it
possible for Malians to have the means to eventually
ensure their own security.

As the High Representative stated, the European
Union is also preparing a civilian support mission for
the internal security forces in Mali. Those efforts are
part of the broader framework of support provided by
the European Union in its integrated strategy for the
Sahel. While the United Nations has developed its own
integrated strategy for the region, we now have a unique
opportunity to strengthen the partnership between the
international community and the countries of the Sahel.

We share the deep concern expressed by the High
Representative about the tragaic situation in Syria.
Nearly 10 million Syrians, half of whom are children,
need urgent humanitarian assistance. We welcome the
commitment shown by the European Union and its States
members in their pledge of an additional €550 million
at the donor conference held in Kuwait on 15 January.
Australia, Jordan and Luxembourg have taken the
initiative to submit a draft resolution calling on the
parties to the Syrian conflict to improve humanitarian
access and stop the violations of international
humanitarian law, including the use of starvation and
siege as weapons of war against civilians. We hope that
the Security Council will soon be in a position to adopt
a humanitarian resolution that will also have positive
impact on the negotiations currently taking place in
Geneva. We are convinced that it can.

Before concluding, I would like to address the
long-standing commitment of the European Union to
protecting children in the time of armed conflict. We
welcome the Union's decision to donate the cash award
ofits Nobel Peace Prize to projects to help children who
have been victims of conflict through the European
Union's Children of Peace initiative, which served some
28,000 children last year. In December, Luxembourg
became the first country to join the initiative, with a
contribution of €500,000.

In the same context, I would also like to mention
the campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF called "Children - Not Soldiers", which will
be launched on 6 March in New York in the presence
of the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
Luxembourg. That will be an opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to all to protecting children affected
by armed conflict. On that issue as well as others, the
Council can count on the support of Luxembourg for
the development of cooperation between the European
Union and the United Nations in the service of effective
multilateralism.

