Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Antonio Guterres, and His Excellency Dato Lim Jock Hoi for the important information they have provided today. No region is immune to the increasing large-scale challenges that we are currently facing. Inequality, social tension, conflict and vulnerability to disasters and climate shocks are among the most pressing challenges, with very unfavourable repercussions for civilians and the achievement of an inclusive sustainable development that leads to peace. Hence there is an increasingly urgent need to seek solutions to these common challenges. Multilateralism and international cooperation play a decisive role in this process. We acknowledge the fundamental role of the United Nations as a catalyst for solutions that meet the specific needs of each context. Therefore, close cooperation with regional organizations such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) make possible a stronger and more effective multilateral international system based on diversity, mutual cooperation and shared international principles. We are pleased to see such cooperation taking the form of tangible initiatives to bring about peace, development and human security. An example is the contributions made by thousands of ASEAN personnel to peacekeeping operations, which include an increasing number of women. As we have noted, climate change is one of the main conflict multipliers of our times and has a major impact on that region of the world, where four of the 10 countries most vulnerable to climate change are located. Our own region, the Caribbean, is also affected by that reality, and we can therefore identify with the efforts being deployed by ASEAN to build local capacities in the areas of the mitigation of, preparation for and response to natural disasters, particularly in urban areas. ASEAN-United Nations cooperation in building more resilient communities is an important example of multinational cooperation in that area. Given the climate crisis, there is a need to continue fostering complementary regional and multilateral strategies to avert greater adverse effects. Joint action is the only way to do so. Another important area of cooperation is the signing of the memorandum of understanding between ASEAN and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the ASEAN-FAO agriculture programme. Both of these initiatives are aimed at promoting a more resistant, sustainable and inclusive food sector. We also stress the work being done in sensitive areas such as respect for human rights, particularly the rights of women and children. ASEAN's initiatives to promote the women and peace and security agenda by providing an increasing number of women peacekeepers should be highlighted and replicated. We also wish to underline the technical support provided by the United Nations to ASEAN strategies to combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism, with the participation of women, young people and civil society. We wish to acknowledge ASEAN's humanitarian assistance and cooperation in the repatriation process of Rohingya refugees. We reiterate our call for such regional actions to be replicated to benefit those people, who have already suffered enough, and for the ASEAN- United Nations leaderships to join forces to bring an end to the crisis. Although Myanmar's primary responsibility to resolve this serious situation is clear, we as a region and the international community as a whole have the duty to continue working to ensure a climate of dialogue and cooperation that will allow for the safe, voluntary and dignified of Rohingya refugees to their territory. We are hopeful that this comprehensive partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations will continue to strengthen and remain firmly committed to implementing shared strategies for peace that are inclusive and people-centred.Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to congratulate your delegation, Mr. President, for its excellent work at the helm of the Council for this month of January.
