Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

I express my appreciation to the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for convening this
open debate.

I will deliver a shortened version of my statement
on behalf of NAM. The full version will be submitted
for the record.

NAM. member States express grave concern over
the threat posed to humankind by existing weapons of
mass destruction, particularly nuclear weapons, and
underline the need for their total elimination. NAM
further calls upon all States to support international
efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction. Noting the adoption of the relevant
resolutions by the Security Council, NAM. underlines
the need to ensure that any action by the Council does
not undermine the Charter of the United Nations,
existing multilateral treaties on weapons of mass
destruction, international organizations established
for that purpose, and the role of the General Assembly.
NAM. further cautions against the continuing practice
of the Security Council to utilize its authority to
define the legislative requirements for Member States
in implementing Security Council decisions. In that
regard, the Movement stresses the importance of
having the issue of non-State actors acquiring weapons
of mass destruction addressed in an inclusive manner
by the General Assembly, taking into account the views
of all Member States.

Reaffirming that nuclear disarmament remains
its highest priority, the Movement stresses the
importance of ensuring that efforts aimed at nuclear
non-proliferation are carried out in parallel with
simultaneous efforts aimed at nuclear disarmament,
which, as a multilateral legal obligation, should also not
be made conditional on confidence-building measures
or other disarmament efforts.

NAM. expresses deep concern about the slow pace
of progress towards nuclear disarmament and the lack
of progress shown by the nuclear-weapon States in
accomplishing the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals in accordance with their relevant multilateral
legal obligations. Accordingly, the Movement
calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to fulfil their
multilateral legal obligations on nuclear disarmament
and to implement the unequivocal undertaking that they
provided in 2000 and further reiterated in 2010, so as
to accomplish the total elimination of nuclear weapons.

Concerned at the improvements made in existing
nuclear weapons and the development of new types of
nuclear weapons under the military doctrines of some
nuclear-weapon States and at the strategic defence
doctrines of the nuclear-weapon States, including the
NATO Alliance Strategic Concept, which has not only
set out rationales for the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons, but also maintains unjustifiable concepts
on international security based on promoting and
developing military alliances and nuclear-deterrence
policies, NAM. strongly calls upon them to exclude
completely the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons
from their military and security doctrines. In that
context, NAM. also stresses the need for effective
measures to prevent the emergence of new types of
weapons of mass destruction, as reaffirmed by General
Assembly resolution 69/27, on the prohibition of the
development and manufacture of new types of weapons
of mass destruction and new systems of such weapons.

Reaffirming the absolute validity of multilateral
diplomacy in the field of disarmament and
non-proliferation, NAM. reiterates its determination
to promote multilateralism as the core principle
of negotiations in the area of disarmament and
non-proliferation.

NAM. highlights the importance of focusing
international public attention on the dangers of nuclear
weapons and the advantages of nuclear disarmament
for development, as well as for international peace
and security. Welcoming United Nations meetings
and activities for the commemoration of 26 September
as the International Day for the Total Elimination of
Nuclear Weapons, NAM. invites Member States, the
United Nations system and civil society, including
non-governmental organizations, academia,
parliamentarians, the mass media and individuals, to
commemorate and promote that International Day
through all types of educational and public awareness-
raising activities.

The Movement reaffirms that the total elimination
of nuclear weapons is the only absolute guarantee
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons.
Highlighting the role of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
NAM. calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to ratify the
related protocols to all treaties establishing nuclear-
weapon-free zones, withdraw any reservations or
interpretative declarations incompatible with the
object and purpose of those zones and respect the
denuclearized status of the zones.

In that context, member States of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterate their full support for the
establishment in the Middle East ofa zone free ofnuclear
weapons and all other weapons of mass destruction and
as a priority step to that end and reaffirm the need for
the speedy establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
in the Middle East. Pending its establishment, they
demand that Israel, the only country in the region that
has not joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) nor declared its intention to do
so, renounce its possession of nuclear weapons, accede
to the NPT without preconditions or further delay, place
all ofits nuclear facilities promptly under the full-scope
safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
in accordance with resolution 487 (1981), and conduct

its nuclear-related activities in conformity with the
non-proliferation regime.

NAM. States party to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production and
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin
Weapons and on Their Destruction emphasize its
important role in the international legal architecture
related to weapons of mass destruction and, in
particular, in the total prohibition of all biological and
toxin weapons, and reaffirm that the possibility of any
use of bacteriological agents and toxins as weapons
should be completely excluded, and the conviction
that such use would be repugnant to the conscience of
humankind.

Moreover, NAM. States party to the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction reaffirm the effective contribution
of that Convention to international and regional peace
and security, which can be enhanced through its full
implementation. They express their serious concern
that certain possessor States parties have not met
their obligations regarding the deadlines for the total
elimination of chemical weapons, and therefore urge all
possessor States parties to take every necessary measure
to ensure their compliance with their detailed plans for
the destruction of chemical weapons remaining after
the final extended destruction deadline of 29 April
2012 in the shortest time possible, in order to uphold
the credibility and integrity of the Convention.

Finally, NAM. member States condemn the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic, which
reinforces the absolute necessity of eliminating all
chemical weapons. In that regard, they acknowledge
the accession of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Convention and its commitment to implementing
its obligations. Furthermore, they encourage the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to honour
its commitment to eliminating the country's chemical
weapons programme.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
willingness of the Movement to cooperate with other
partners in addressing the threats posed to humankind
by the existing weapons of mass destruction, in
particular nuclear weapons.

