Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like to respond
to the accusation that we are applying double standards
and to say that we are very consistent in our policy
here. As my French colleague said earlier, we were not
against the agenda item, we just wanted to postpone it.
Why did we want to postpone it? Because today is the
day on which President Zelensky assumes office. But
Russia insisted on holding it today.

To come back to what I said about consistency,
Russia is very consistent. It is very consistent, because
right after President Zelensky won the election, as a
first welcoming step Russia announced its new decree
on passport procedures and, in a cynical move, saw
it signed by the President on the day on which the
United Nations celebrated the International Day of
Multilateralism and Diplomacy for Peace. So having this
debate today, and insisting on having it today, is again
consistent with Russian policy, which is to welcome the
new Ukrainian President with an act of intimidation.

I should point out that as my Russian colleague
said, it is not a Russian-Ukrainian conflict but an
internal Ukrainian conflict. However, I also want to
remind members that four years and two months ago,
when the Minsk agreements were signed - and today
Russia has been invoking the Minsk agreements and
their implementation - a ceasefire was agreed to, but
it was Russian forces that violated that agreement on
the very first day by attacking the town of Debaltseve
and fighting until it was taken. So it was violated from
the very beginning, and to this very day the Russian
troops and their allies have not respected the ceasefire.
To this very day there has been no withdrawal of heavy
weapons, and we know where those heavy weapons
come from. To this very day - and we heard this last
time, when Mr. Apakan, the head of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission, briefed the Council (see S/PV.8516) - Russia's allies in Luhansk and Donetsk
are making the lives of the OSCE observers very
difficult by obstructing their work.

So instead of appealing here for Minsk to be
implemented, I think that Russia should focus on itself
and ensure that its allies actually implement what is
contained in the Minsk agreements - establishing a
ceasefire, withdrawing heavy weapons and allowing the
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to actually do itsjob.

There is perhaps one point on which we can agree, which
is to return to the Minsk agreements and to Normandy
format meetings and to make real, substantive progress.
But that progress can be achieved only if Russia and
its allies actually respect the ceasefire, withdraw heavy
weapons from where they are supposed be withdrawn,
and allow the OSCE Mission to do its work.

