Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this public meeting. I also wish to thank
Mr. Hasegawa for his briefing.

First of all, I would like to make it clear that the
Government of Japan supports the recommendation of
the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) for an additional six months. At the same
time, I wish to stress that this is going to be a very
important period for the successful conclusion of the
tasks assigned to the peacekeeping operation in Timor-
Leste. Japan will continue to extend its utmost support
so as to ensure that the peace is firmly established and
UNMISET is able to complete its mandate
successfully. We believe it has become our particular
duty to do so because the final phase of the activities of
UNMISET coincides with the period in which Japan
takes up its duties as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.

There is no question that Timor-Leste continues
to need assistance for its nation-building. In view of
the forthcoming completion of the tasks of UNMISET,
therefore, it is essential to make sure that those nation-
building-related tasks which have also been carried out
by UNMISET are taken over by bilateral assistance
schemes or international development institutions. In
this connection, we welcome the fact that UNMISET
has established eight working groups with a view to
facilitating a smooth transition from a peacekeeping
and peace-building operation to more traditional
institution-building and sustainable development
assistance. We also hold in high regard the initiatives
by the leadership of Timor-Leste to properly address
the grievances of veterans, which are a clear
expression, in our view, of a sense of ownership on the
part of Timor-Leste.

Although there are still a number of tasks that
have to be undertaken in the field of nation-building,
the Government of Japan is confident that further
progress towards the consolidation of peace will be
made through the continuing efforts of the people of
Timor-Leste, with assistance from the United Nations
and the international community. We welcome the
convening of the donors' conference in March of next
year, at which the international community will discuss
issues regarding nation-building following the
completion of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Needless to say, in concluding the peacekeeping
activities of the United Nations, it is particularly
important to ensure the peace and security of Timor-
Leste. It is regrettable that the delineation of the land
boundary between Timor-Leste and Indonesia has yet
to be finalized. We do hope that both countries will
continue to make their best efforts to resolve this
matter at an early opportunity. My Government
recognizes that the resolution of the issue of serious
crimes will be critical for the future stability and
development of Timor-Leste. We plan to continue to
work with the people of Timor-Leste and other
countries concerned regarding what sort of steps would
be the most desirable in dealing with this issue and for
the future success of Timor-Leste.

Japan has been actively assisting in the building
of a sustainable Timor-Leste and is determined to
continue its contribution in that regard. My
Government has pledged assistance in the amount of
$60 million over the first three years following
independence, and has been steadily implementing that
aid with a focus on peace-building and reconstruction
in the three key areas: agriculture, infrastructure and
human resources development. We have already
invested $57 million in infrastructure projects such as
roads, electricity and water supply in the Dili district.
Japan is also dispatching so-called civil power, that is,
groups composed of veterans of our Self-Defence
Forces engineering group, as well as non-military
engineering specialists, to train Timor-Leste
Government staff to operate, maintain and manage the
equipment and materiel which our engineering group
donated after the completion of its mission. We hope
such support will be helpful in improving the life of the
people, which is the basis of the nation-building that is
now underway in Timor-Leste.

We also believe the United Nations Development
Programme's Recovery, Employment and Stability
Programme for Ex-Combatants and Communities in
Timor-Leste, which Japan has been supporting, has
been very useful for the nation-building of Timor-
Leste. We wish to call upon United Nations Member
States to extend their valuable support to similar
projects in Timor-Leste.

Finally, I wish to underscore once again how
important this final period will be for Timor-Leste.
Japan is convinced that, through the efforts of
UNMISET, headed by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Hasegawa, and the people
of Timor-Leste, acting under the guidance of their wise
leaders, stability and the foundations for the
development of Timor-Leste will be strengthened, and
the United Nations peacekeeping operation will
successfully complete its mission.

