Mr. Alimov (Tajikistan) (interpretation from Russian ): The Republic of Tajikistan expresses profound
gratitude to you, Sir, and to the Security Council for
having taken the initiative of holding an open meeting to
discuss a new, extremely dangerous development in the
situation in Afghanistan and, more importantly, possible
actions that the Council might take to ensure
unconditional compliance with its decisions, as well as
with the resolutions of the General Assembly.

As we have repeatedly emphasized in our statements
in United Nations forums, Tajikistan is very seriously
concerned at the situation that prevails in neighbouring
Afghanistan, because the hot breath from the Afghan
conflict is something that we feel in our immediate
vicinity and all along the 1,500-kilometre border we share
with that country.

Our concern also stems from a desire to see relations
between Tajikistan and Afghanistan - which are based
on the historical, cultural and religious communality of
our peoples - oriented not to the past so much as to the
future. We sincerely cherish these relations, and we too
suffer at what is happening now with the fraternal Afghan
people. We want, as soon as possible, to see peace and
national concord restored to Afghanistan. We would like
to see Afghanistan, which has made a unique contribution
to the development of world civilization and which was
a founding Member of the United Nations, rise up from
the ashes into which it has been turned by this totally
irrational protracted internal conflict.

We would like to see that, as soon as possible, there
be a halt to the suffering of the people living in the rich
land of Afghanistan. We would like to see families
separated by war be reunited, and to see Afghan children
go to school without any trepidation. We would like
mothers able to raise their children together with the
fathers of those children. We would like girls to feel that
they are full members of their society with some hope of
a dignified future. We would like the men to compete not
on the field of battle but in creative endeavours to
rehabilitate their country. We would like all Afghanis to
have equal access to all areas of social and political life.
We would like the achievements of the Afghan people in
the area of science and culture to become accessible to
the whole world, and finally, we would like Afghanistan
once again to appear before the international community
in all of its beautiful diversity and magnificence.

To our profound regret, the reality is still very far
from what I have described. Afghanistan continues to sink

 

deeper and deeper into the abyss of war and the destruction
of the very basis of life for its long-suffering people. Fear
and hopelessness, starvation, diseases, poverty - these
remain the grim lot of the overwhelming majority of the
Afghan population, whose living standards are practically
the lowest in the world.

Present-day realities in Afghanistan mean a regime
introduced by the Taliban, which reminds one of a
medieval obscurantist order. It means ethnic cleansing,
persecutions on the basis of ethnicity and religion, forcible
displacements, repression and other abuses against hundreds
of thousands of Afghans. It means massive, systematic and
gross violations of human rights as a whole, including the
rights of women and girls and the norms of international
humanitarian law. And, finally, it means open support for
international terrorism and the drug business, which pose a
real threat to national and regional security.

The leadership of Tajikistan is profoundly alarmed at
this turn of events in Afghanistan. We are particularly
concerned by the ideological devotion of the Taliban to
extremist, religious stereotypes and, as a consequence of
this, the fact that they have turned the regions of
Afghanistan that they control into a base to organize
subversive action against neighbouring and other States. We
reaffirm our determination, in cooperation with our close
friends, to impede the further spread of this kind of
activities.

We agree with many of the alarming assessments we
have heard at today's meeting about the situation in
Afghanistan and around it, and we believe that the blame
for this impasse - when fulfilment of resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly are being
blocked, as are international efforts to resolve the Afghan
conflict - lies exclusively with the Taliban. We call upon
the leadership of the Taliban movement immediately to give
up any hope of military victory, to halt their military action
and enter into peace negotiations. Readiness to this was
repeatedly confirmed by the United Front for the Salvation
of Afghanistan, with the ultimate goal of forming a broadly
representative Afghan Government.

We call upon the Taliban movement to heed the
demands of the international community and put an end to
their policy of the physical and moral destruction of their
own people, to put an end to their barbaric attitude to their
own historical, cultural and religious traditions and, on the
threshold of the twenty-first century, finally to give their
people some prospect of their returning to international
relations as a full participant.

We also emphasize the need to halt direct foreign
military interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,
which seeks not to develop that country on the path to
peace and prosperity but to push it further into the abyss
of total destruction.

Tajikistan is firmly convinced that the United
Nations and its Security Council should not disregard
what is now occurring in Afghanistan. We urge the
Council to give a second wind to international efforts to
promote normalization of the situation in that country and
in the region as a whole. We believe that the Council
should give an objective assessment of the action of those
who are undoing those efforts, and that it should take
concrete measures to force the initiators and the
perpetrators of the short-sighted, destructive policy on
Afghanistan to heed the clear demands in the resolutions
of the Council relating to the Afghan settlement.

We believe that the group of neighbours and friends
of Afghanistan - the so-called "six plus two" group -
should make a more important contribution. We believe
that members of this group, having departed from their
understandings achieved within the framework of that
group, and also from the obligations that were adopted at
the Tashkent meeting, are obliged to agree as soon as
possible on a specific formula for resolving the crisis in
Afghanistan, which would be most in keeping with the
aspirations of the people of that country and would not
harm the interests of other States of the region - of
course, in full compliance with the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council of the United
Nations.

Tajikistan is prepared to do everything it can to
support any international efforts under the aegis of the
United Nations to bring about a radical change in the
situation in Afghanistan. In this connection we again
reaffirm the proposal that was made earlier by the
President of the Republic of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali
Rakhmonov, regarding the need to convene an
international conference on Afghanistan, the purpose of
which would be to encourage the Afghan parties to enter
into serious talks on fundamental problems of an Afghan
settlement and to give them every possible assistance in
obtaining practical results in this respect.

