Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to begin by expressing our deepest condolences
following the tragic death yesterday of Russian aircraft
servicemen, as well as to extend our sympathy to their
loved ones.

I thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings. China appreciates their efforts to promote the
Syrian political process and alleviate the humanitarian
situation in the country.

The international community has closely followed
the situation in Idlib for quite some time. China
welcomes thejoint statement issued by the leaders ofthe
Russian Federation, Turkey and Iran on 7 September.
We applaud the meeting held between Russian and
Turkish leaders in Sochi on 17 September and the
signing of the memorandum on the supervision of the
de-escalation zone in Idlib. China supports all efforts
to ease the situation and advance the Syrian political
settlement process. Going forward, all parties with
influence should seek to work together to activate it and
ensure that the joint statement and memorandum are
fully implemented in order to facilitate the ceasefire
and the cessation of hostilities. That would in turn
foster favourable external conditions for dialogue,
peace talks and a political settlement to the situation
in Syria. The international community should forge
synergies in order to continue fighting terrorism, while
building on the counter-terrorism gains made in Syria
and preventing terrorist organizations from abducting
and coercing civilians.

A political solution is the only way to lasting
peace and stability in Syria. Last week Special
Envoy De Mistura conducted in-depth consultations
with the Syrian parties on the establishment of the
constitutional committee. The international community
should continue to support the United Nations as the
main mediation channel, as well as the role played by
the Geneva peace talks and the Astana process. It should
also push the Syrian parties to effectively implement
resolution 2254 (2015), in line with the principle of a
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led process in search ofa political
solution that responds to the realities on the ground in
Syria and accommodates the concerns of all parties
through inclusive political dialogue. All parties are
duty-bound to adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
basic norms governing international relations and to
fully respect Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity.
China is deeply concerned about the developments
in Syria and its humanitarian situation. Despite the
myriad challenges, the Syrian people are repairing
roads, restoring power and rebuilding hospitals, schools
and other infrastructure. The number of refugees and
displaced persons returning to their homes is steadily
on the rise. Only through steady progress in rebuilding
can we bring hope to the Syrian people and help secure
long-term stability and peace in Syria.

The international community should actively
support the reconstruction of Syria, including through
intensified efforts to clear explosive remnants of war,
so as to create conditions for the return of refugees and
displaced persons. The Syrian parties should proceed
by taking into account the future of the country and
the well-being of the people, abide by relevant Council
resolutions, resolve their differences through dialogue
and consultations and alleviate the humanitarian
situation without delay.

The United Nations and the international community
should strengthen communication and coordination
with the Syrian Government in providing assistance
to all areas in need in Syria. The humanitarian relief
efforts in Syria should adhere to the principles of
neutrality, impartiality and apoliticality.

In recent years, China has provided substantial
assistance to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Syria and neighbouring countries affected by the crisis.
In August, the Red Cross Society of China provided
Syria with mobile medical units, including two medical
buses and two ambulances. It also handed over to to
the host a prosthetic rehabilitation centre for Syrian
children, built with the assistance of China. China
will continue to provide assistance to Syria and its
neighbours to the best of our ability.

