Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I too wish to thank the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Guehenno, for updating
us on developments in Kosovo since the Council was
briefed last month by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and particularly for giving us his
own impressions following his recent visit to Kosovo.

When we met last month, my delegation
expressed support for the priorities outlined by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
we wish to thank Mr. Guehenno for briefing us on the
establishment of a legal framework for provisional
self-government, on the development of an effective
law enforcement and judicial system, and on economic
reconstruction.

We were pleased to learn of the results of the
discussions that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General held last week in Belgrade with
President Kostunica. Those discussions, as well as the
opening of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) office, can, we believe,
lay the basis for further dialogue and action on the
situation of missing and detained persons, on internally
displaced persons and returnees, and on organized
crime and the trafficking in persons. We hope that early
action will be taken on the establishment of a joint
commission, as we agree with Mr. Guehenno that such
a commission could be mutually beneficial and could
act as a confidence-building measure.

We note that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has agreed to take action to
determine the fate of the 3,000 persons missing in
Kosovo and has raised the question of DNA testing.
My delegation would wish to ascertain whether or not
UNMIK has the personnel required to do that testing
and, if not, whether they have sought international
assistance.

A matter of fundamental concern for my
delegation is the process leading up to elections and to
the development of institutions of self-governance
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). Other
speakers have addressed that issue and I will therefore
not repeat what they have already said. But we would
wish to underline the importance we attach to that
process, to the elections being well prepared, and to
their being held as soon as possible. We see the
decision to register internally displaced persons as
another confidence-building measure, and we hope that
this will encourage the return of Kosovo Serbs. But
that will take place only in a secure environment and in
an atmosphere of reconciliation among the different
ethnic groups.

We hope that, prior to the Kosovo-wide elections,
Kosovo Serbs can be persuaded to participate in the
municipal assemblies and in municipal government,
and we would wish to ask Mr. Guehenno whether any
steps have been taken in that regard.

We are disturbed at the report that there is
polarization in civil administration along political as
well as along ethnic lines, and we believe that this must
be firmly discouraged.

Kosovo remains a direct responsibility of the
Security Council, and in that regard my delegation
would support the proposal for another Council visit to
Kosovo at a time mutually convenient to members of
the Council and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

My delegation wishes to draw attention to a
concern that we raised at the last briefing, and that is
the proliferation of arms in Kosovo, in particular small
arms. At that time, Mr. Haekkerup responded to our
question by stating:

"Basically, I do not think that there is any great
trafficking in heavy weapons through Kosovo,
but with regard to small weapons, I think that
there is". (S/PV4296, p. 35)

We would once again request detailed reports on what
is being done inside Kosovo by UNMIK and by KFOR
to confiscate illegal weapons and to enforce the
regulation on weapons that was recently passed. We
would also be interested in hearing what is being done
by KFOR to prevent weapons entering the territory and
what steps the sanctions Committee could take to assist
in that process. We hope it will be possible for the new
Commander of KFOR to address the Council in the
near future.

I must also underline my delegation's
disappointment that the latest report on the
international security presence in Kosovo
(S/2001/333), which was transmitted by a letter dated
3 April 2001, covers the period 1 to 28 February. We
hope that in future the Council can receive reports in a
more timely fashion. The report indicates that during
that period KFOR troops uncovered and confiscated
weapons, ammunition and explosives, and that they
continued to take action to prevent the flow of supplies
from inside Kosovo.

We wish to encourage closer collaboration
between UNMIK and KFOR in these efforts and
greater vigilance in addressing illegal border activity.
We continue to call for increased surveillance of the
administrative border, in order to put an end to the
extremist activities there and to stop the traffic in
illegal weapons.

