The President: I thank the representative of the
Netherlands for his kind words to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia.

 

I should like to express my sincere appreciation to the
Deputy Secretary-General for her most illuminating
statement on the subject of our discussion this morning.
May I request the Deputy Secretary-General to convey
Malaysia's thanks to the Secretary-General for his own
support and personal commitment to our effort in the
Council to provide greater focus on this subject. I should
also like to thank members of the Council for their support
for this initiative taken by Malaysia. We are especially
grateful for their encouragement and cooperation in
crystallizing ideas relevant to the Council's discussion. We
are also very appreciative of the cooperation given to us by
the Secretariat and by Member States on this initiative.

Over the last few years the Security Council has
discussed questions specifically related to preventive
diplomacy, peacemaking, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building and has issued presidential statements on
them. Malaysia welcomes the Council's willingness to
continue with this discussion. We believe that it is
important for the Council to visit and revisit these questions
on a regular basis, while addressing itself to the immediate
and pressing problems arising from various conflict
situations occurring around the world.

Malaysia strongly believes that in exercising its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security under the Charter, the Council should
not be preoccupied mainly with the specific conflict
situations on its agenda. The Council must be able, from
time to time, to discuss thematic issues or receive
orientation briefings on cross-cutting issues which could
help the Council in making decisions that will ultimately
bring about positive results. We consider the discussion on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in a peacekeeping environment to be an
important contribution to this process. It will allow the
Council to contribute substantively to the enhancement and
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping and peace-
building activities.

The Council is already fully aware of the issues
involved. Increasingly, the United Nations has had to deal
with conflicts which are primarily internal in nature but
with some degree of international implications. They
involve warring parties and factions which engage in bitter,
and often protracted, fighting that threatens political
institutions, damages the economy and causes severe social
problems. Some of the parties resort to practices and
activities which clearly violate human rights and
international humanitarian law. In many cases, these
activities are carried out with a misguided sense of
impunity. This inevitably results in a pervasive culture of
violence and intimidation.

Thousands of innocent civilians have been internally
displaced or forced to become refugees. International
workers, including United Nations personnel, have also
become unfortunate victims in the ongoing conflicts. The
availability of arms to conflicting parties - in particular,
as mentioned by previous speakers, small arms and light
weapons - has further complicated the situation. The
alarming involvement of child soldiers has added another
dimension which requires urgent and special attention. In
the context of such an environment, the search for peace
invariably becomes a long and arduous process. While
peace can be quite elusive in these circumstances,
sustainable peace becomes harder to achieve following
any peace agreement if serious efforts are not made to
address in a very comprehensive manner the questions of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants.

One of the primary objectives of peacekeeping is to
create a safe and secure environment that will allow for
the resumption of peaceful activities and normal life in
society. Peacekeeping should also create conditions that
will allow for serious post-conflict peace-building efforts
to be carried out. Disarmament is a crucial prerequisite
for the consolidation of peace and stability in countries
emerging out of conflict. However, experience has shown
that disarmament alone cannot guarantee the achievement
of the long-term objectives of sustainable peace, stability
and development. It has to be followed up with the
effective demobilization of ex-combatants and their timely
and peaceful reintegration into society. These three
elements should be part of a continuous process that
stretches from the peacekeeping phase to that of post-
conflict peace-building.

Malaysia is fully cognizant of the complexities and
sensitivities related to the task of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, especially in the types
of conflicts with which the Council is increasingly
confronted. This task can succeed only if there exists a
will on the part of the parties involved in the conflict to
accept and abide by the terms of such an exercise. We
have noted that in recent years some measure of success
has been achieved in a number of countries where
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes have been implemented. Malaysia commends
those Governments and warring parties which have
embarked on these programmes as part of the overall
effort to bring about sustainable peace in post-conflict

 

situations. We recognize, as others do, that more needs to
be done. In this regard, there has to be substantial support
from the international community. We hope that the
Security Council can take the lead in further generating
such support which, we believe, has to be based on strong
political will to assist in resolving conflicts and to help
societies emerging out of those conflicts rebuild political,
economic and social structures ravaged by war. In this
regard, the special needs of child soldiers should be
highlighted and given serious attention as a priority matter.

As noted by previous speakers, financing continues to
be a problem in the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes. Protracted
conflict naturally puts a severe strain on the resources of a
country, especially one which, in the first place, is already
in a dire economic situation. Obviously, the question of
adequate financing needs to be addressed by all concerned.
The international community needs to adopt a coordinated
approach, taking into account the specific requirements of
the three components of this continuous process. Malaysia
believes that the various United Nations organs and bodies
can work out arrangements which would satisfy the
requirements of specific disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes in different post-conflict
situations as well as providing for their engagement in
accordance with their responsibilities under the Charter.
Clearly, we cannot ignore the development aspects of post-
conflict peace-building. Reintegration programmes in
particular will require some amount of economic assistance.

Malaysia has gained some experience in
demobilization and reintegration programmes as a result of
an internal insurgency problem that lasted almost 50 years,
ending only a decade ago. During those years, the
Government had to spend vast sums on defence, mainly for
counter-insurgency operations, while at the same time
having to focus on development. Over time, soldiers and
policemen had to be demobilized and reintegrated into
civilian society as the security situation improved. This
continuous demobilization and reintegration programme has
been incorporated into the country's development plans. Ex-
servicemen are given the opportunity to learn skills and to
participate in useful economic activity upon retirement from
active duty.

We recognize that Malaysia's experience may be
unique to the situation which we faced. However, we have
learned some very important lessons from it. We have been
able to share some of this experience with other countries.
For example, Malaysia was able to assist in the training of
Namibian ex-combatants to prepare them for reintegration
into society following Namibia's independence.

Malaysia believes that efforts to share experiences in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes should be encouraged. We look forward to
the participation of Member States which have had some
direct experience in such programmes in the Council's
present discussion on this subject. We welcome the
various seminars and conferences on this and other related
subjects. We also appreciate the efforts of the Secretary-
General, Member States and international and regional
organizations aimed at developing general principles and
guidelines for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants in a peacekeeping
environment. We also note that United Nations bodies
including the General Assembly and the Disarmament
Commission have done very useful work in this regard.

Malaysia strongly believes that the United Nations
should be given a greater role in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building, including
in the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants in a peacekeeping environment. Given the
nature of present-day conflicts, the demands on the
United Nations would be enormous. But with the
necessary political will, allocation of resources and
support from Member States and the international
community, we believe the United Nations can succeed.

Malaysia would very much welcome a willingness
on the part of the Security Council to address the issue
under discussion today on a regular basis. We propose a
further discussion of this issue by the Council on the
basis of a report which we hope the Secretary-General
could submit within six months. We feel that the Council
and States Members of the United Nations should be able
further to discuss some of the very useful work done by
the Secretariat on principles and guidelines, as well as
practices, experiences and lessons learned in respect of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants. The Council should be able to consider
practical measures to guide future United Nations
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts to ensure
sustainable peace and security in various parts of the
world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
 

There are still a number of speakers remaining on the
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, and with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15 pm.
