Mr. Beketayev (Kazakhstan): On behalf of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, I thank His Excellency
President Duda for his opening remarks.

Kazakhstan considers today's debate to be very
timely and valuable. It provides an opportunity for the
Security Council to step back from its daily work and
reflect more broadly on how it may most effectively
carry out its mission in the complex circumstances that
the world faces today. Engaging in such reflection is the
sign of a healthy institution with strong and far-sighted
leadership. In that context, it is my honour to present
some reflections on behalf of Kazakhstan.

My country's commitment to the United Nations,
as is well known, began as soon as it became an
independent State, in 1992. Twenty-five years later,
Kazakhstan was deeply honoured to be the first
Central Asian State to serve on the Security Council.
As President Nursultan Nazarbayev made clear in his
policy address following Kazakhstan's election to
the Council, our country stands ready to assist in the
maintenance of regional and international peace and
security. Today we are reflecting on how best that can
be achieved.

I would first like to turn to what Kazakhstan
considers a central policy objective for the Security
Council. Members will recall that, 25 years ago,
Kazakhstan was the first country to give up its nuclear
arsenal. In our view, there is no greater threat to
international peace and security than the continued
existence of nuclear weapons, and there could be no
greater achievement than ridding the world of that
threat to humankind.

President Nazarbayev, in his manifesto "The
World. The Twenty-first Century", presented the idea
of a comprehensive programme for humankind in order
to achieve a world without conflicts by the centenary of
the founding of the United Nations in 2045. To achieve
such a world and to save subsequent generations from
the scourge of war, the manifesto sets out the collective
measures that should be taken to prevent and eliminate
threats to peace, and the responsibility each State bears
in striving to reach that end. This is an area in which the
Security Council can and must lead the way. It will be
a test of whether new processes and ways of working,
which the Security Council develops as a result of
discussions such as the one we are having today, can
bring about real change in the world.

Secondly, Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations provides the Security Council with a variety of
tools for the peaceful settlement ofdisputes that threaten
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Those mechanisms include recourse to regional bodies,
whose role is critical for early conflict prevention. The
engagement of regional and subregional organizations
is an essential tool in the maintenance of international
peace and security. When considering this topic, we
may wish to reflect on whether the Security Council
could enhance its legitimacy and awareness of its work
if from time to time it held its meetings in other regional
centres. In that regard, I would like to highlight President
Nazarbayev's initiative in convening the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures
in Asia, which has been successfully functioning for
more than a quarter of a century, and in the context
of which 26 countries, from Egypt to the Republic of
Korea, are conducting significant work in the field of
preventive diplomacy.

Finally, we support the efforts of the United
Nations as a whole, including the Security Council,
to update and adapt its procedures to serve the world
well in these challenging times. Today's very valuable
debate should be the start of an ongoing dialogue, and
Kazakhstan stands ready to provide its own proposals
in a constructive spirit.

As history shows, States and institutions can
thrive when they maintain clear, just objectives and
an open mind about the best means to achieve them,
which include robust mechanisms for enforcement and
accountability to bridge the gap between international
law and the reality on the ground.

