Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
begin, Sir, by offering you, sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the current month. I am confident that you will carry
out your duties in the best possible manner. I would
like to express thanks to the Permanent Representative
of Singapore and to the members of his delegation for
their skilful leadership ofthe Council last month.

Since the 1948 tragedy, Iraq has been treating the
question of Palestine as a top priority of its foreign and
domestic policy. It is Iraq's national and regional duty
to address that question in all international forums, the
Security Council in particular, because the issue is not
an ordinary one. It is an extraordinary issue. It is a
question of colonialism in the twentieth and twenty-
first centuries. It is a question of territorial usurpation
and foreign occupation. Therefore, addressing this
issue is not only a sacred and legitimate act of defence;
it is also anchored in international law as a question of
national liberation, independence and self-
determination.

The Council is therefore duty-bound to accord
special attention to this long-standing and serious
question with a view to achieving a just solution, not
only by convening public meetings and listening to the
views of States - although that is, of course, of great
importance - but by adopting bold and even-handed
resolutions that are commensurate with the gravity of
events. There must also be a follow-up mechanism to
ensure that such resolutions are implemented.

We note with regret that the Council adopts a
discriminatory approach in dealing with the question of
Palestine despite the legitimacy of that question. We
note also that the Council does not deal with the
question of the right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination in the same way as it deals with issues of
a similar nature of which it is seized. In such cases it
often responds in an expeditious and innovative way.
Such behaviour is contrary to the provisions of the
Charter - in particular the principle of equality -
under which the Council operates.

Like others, we understand why the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, takes
this unbalanced stance. We also understand why the
United Nations and the Council pursue a policy of
double standards as though such a policy were a
foregone conclusion. Nevertheless, in order to place on
record the need for historical responsibility, we would
like to draw attention to this fact. World Zionism, as
represented by the Zionist entity, working in direct,
well-established and declared cooperation and
collaboration with the United States of America,
prevents this Council and other international
institutions from carrying out their functions, from
taking a just and even-handed position in dealing with
the most outrageous tragedy ever known to humankind
and from enabling the United Nations system to fulfil
its mandate as set forth in the Charter.

The Security Council's failure to deal with the
question of Palestine means that the United Nations as
a whole runs the risk of losing whatever credibility it
might still have and underscores the fact that the
United Nations has become a tool of United States and
Zionist policies. For more than 10 years, any Member
of this Organization that has tried to depart from the
line set forth by those evil Powers has subjected itself
to great risk and incalculable consequences.

Forgive me, but I truly wonder how most -
Istress the word "most" - members of the Council
can have a clear conscience and peace of mind when
they see unfolding before them, around the clock, night
and day, in the streets, in mosques and in churches,
killings and other atrocities, destruction, imprisonment,
acts of terrorism and gross violations of the inalienable
rights of an entire people.

All of these acts are being carried out under the
direct command of the Zionist Sharon Government,
which squarely embodies the concept of State-
sponsored terrorism. How can members of the Security
Council fail to make a move, to meet, or to take a
decision on the assumption that there is an alleged
initiative, or a forthcoming meeting, by the masters in
order to discuss the notion of a future Palestinian
State? The Council understands what I mean by
"masters". How can the Security Council accept this as
a situation that does not warrant consultations? Perhaps
the issue has become too familiar because it has been
going on for so many months.

What is taking place in the Security Council is
very clear, and it requires that we all stand up and say
loud and clear that the situation is intolerable and
unsustainable and that it must be brought to an end
forthwith. The members of the Security Council must
not act on the basis of a fait accompli. Rather, they
should act on the basis of their responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations. Otherwise, all of
them will be morally, if not legally, accountable before
history.
The people of Palestine and their Government,
supported by all Arab States, including my country,
Iraq, as well as by most other honourable States and
peoples of the world, call upon the Council to stand by
the side of a people subjected to the crime of
genocide- a people that legitimately claims the
establishment of an independent State in Palestine and
its right to life and to be protected from a brutal,
terrorist, colonialist Power.

It is the responsibility of the Security Council to
prevent the brutal aggressor from persisting in its
unjust practices and atrocities; it must not be allowed
to carry out acts of terrorism against a people or to hold
them hostage. The Council should work to restore to
the Palestinian people their legitimate rights.
Otherwise, the ship will run aground with all of us on
board and will be doomed.

Having said that, I am pleased to conclude my
statement on an optimistic note, since we are confident
that the rights of Palestine will never be lost so long as
there is a nation willing to make every possible
sacrifice in defence of its national honour, freedom, life
and independence and so long as honourable people
remain in this world who stand at that nation's side.

