Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports this draft resolution to
extend the current mandate of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP).
UNPREDEP has been and continues to be an
extraordinarily successful mission. During the past six
years, the United Nations presence there has helped to
guard against the spillover of the tension and conflict so
pervasive in many other parts of the Balkan region.
Despite this success, however, UNPREDEP's mission is
not over.

In nearby Kosovo, Belgrade has failed to fulfil the
calls of the international community to cease action
against the civilian population, return forces to barracks,
and begin meaningful negotiations on an enhanced status
and a substantially greater degree of autonomy for
Kosovo. This in turn has led to a deteriorating situation
in Kosovo that threatens regional stability.

The current crisis in Kosovo reinforces the need for
an increase in and extension of UNPREDEP's current
mandate. The current mandate calls for UNPREDEP to
monitor the border areas and report any developments
which could pose a threat. The mandate also provides for

 

UNPREDEP to deter by its presence such threats from any
source, as well as to help prevent clashes, thus helping to
strengthen security and confidence. Thus, UNPREDEP
under its current mandate already contributes to the
monitoring of the arms embargo imposed in resolution 1160
(1998), and it will continue to do so.

The undemarcated border with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia also presents a serious ongoing problem, and
we call on both Belgrade and Skopje to resolve this issue
as soon as possible. The Albanian situation is now more
stable, and there is good cooperation between Tirana and
Skopje. Nevertheless, UNPREDEP plays a still-important
role in helping to bolster confidence along their common
border.

Today we are not only renewing UNPREDEP's
current mandate but also increasing UNPREDEP's troop
strength by 300 troops. By restoring UNPREDEP troop
numbers to their previous levels, we are highlighting our
commitment to the mission and to stability in the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We do not exclude
consideration of a further increase if the situation in the
region requires it.

We look forward to the day when Skopje will be able
to provide completely for the defence of its national
borders. For now, however, UNPREDEP's presence under
its continued mandate remains essential.

Finally, we would like to acknowledge the
contributions of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative and head of UNPREDEP, Mr. Henryk J.
Sokalski, and the UNPREDEP Force Commander
Brigadier-General Bent Sohnemann, as well as the
dedication of the men and women of UNPREDEP.

