Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English textprovided by delegation): It is a special pleasure to address the
Council again today and to describe key developments
in Kosovo over the past three months, which owing to
to their political importance make this period much
more special.

At the outset let me express our sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his continuing
support for peace and progress in Kosovo and the
Balkans.

During the past three months we have had some
specific historic developments. The most important
event was the signing of the peace agreement and the
normalization of relations between the countries of
Kosovo and Serbia with EU facilitation. In parallel, the
institutions of the Republic of Kosovo have maintained
political and economic stability, continued to promote
and protect the rights and interests of all communities,
improved the socioeconomic situation in the country
and significantly advanced our European perspective.

After ten rounds of high-level political dialogue,
on 19 April the historic first inter-State agreement
was reached between the Republic of Kosovo and
Serbia, mediated by European Union (EU) High
Representative Baroness Catherine Ashton. That
preliminary agreement and the political dialogue had
their beginning in discussions in the General Assembly
in autumn 2010, and we are proud that we have managed
to implement it completely.

The Republic of Kosovo has consistently offered
unwavering support and commitment to political
dialogue with Serbia and the agreement by taking
all measures to ensure its political acceptance in
Kosovo and its effective implementation. The Kosovo
Parliament voted for it by a two-thirds majority. The
citizens of Kosovo have also welcomed the agreement
and expressed their hope that it will serve peace,
stability and prosperity in Kosovo. Our Kosovo Serb
partners in the ruling coalition have also been part
of the dialogue process and strongly supported the
agreement reached. It has also received broad support
from the international community.

I would also like to commend the efforts of my
counterpart, Prime Minister lvica Dacie of Serbia,
for his serious efforts and commitment to reaching
this important landmark for our two peoples and the
countries in the region. In that context, the facilitation
of the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia has led to gains for both Serbia and Kosovo; they
have gained and the region has gained.

In that respect, the facilitation of the dialogue by
EU High Representative Ashton and the agreement
reached under her leadership represent a significant
achievement for the EU's foreign policy, an important
achievement that will serve to stabilize the entire region.
The bilateral agreement between Kosovo and Serbia
is important beyond the Western Balkans, because it
has created an environment for the EU member States
that enables the full recognition of the independence of
Kosovo.

The agreement contains 15 provisions that regulate
key aspects of the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. The agreement is also in line with
the Kosovo Constitution. The agreement opens the
way for establishing stability in the north through a
fundamental transformation of the current security
situation and the political and economic conditions.
The agreement also opens the way for Kosovo to attain
full international recognition and membership in
international bodies.

One of the main aspects of the agreement is to
establish an association that will perform several
functions related to local economic development,
education, health, and urban and rural planning. We
agreed that the powers of that association will be in
accordance with the Constitution of Kosovo, the Law
on Local Self-Government and the European Charter
of Local Self-Government. The association will be an
integral part of Kosovo institutions and as such will
work closely with the central Government in exercising
its activities.

Since the beginning of the dialogue, the Republic
of Kosovo has been convinced that there can be no
normalization of the situation in the north while Serbia
operates illegal parallel structures, which it refuses to
dismantle. The agreement provides an implementation
plan specifying that by mid-July 2013 Serbia will
close all of its security premises in Kosovo and cease
providing them financial support.

The agreement provides that the Kosovo Police
will be the only legal and legitimate police authority
in northern Kosovo. A regional police commander
will be nominated by the association and selected by
the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Kosovo.
With these provisions, the rule of law will finally
be strengthened in the north of Kosovo, and law
enforcement authorities will cooperate more effectively.

The agreement confirms the unitary legal system
of the Republic of Kosovo as the sole legal authority
with jurisdiction in the country. The timely integration
of Kosovo-Serb judicial authorities within the legal
and judiciary system of Kosovo is essential, and we
believe that the composition of the judicial system will
increase community trust in Kosovo's courts, improve
inter-ethnic relations, and, above all, establish the rule
of law in the north that has been absent for the past 14
years.

Another important aspect of the agreement is the
organization of municipal elections in the north of
Kosovo in October 2013 in parallel with the Kosovo-
wide municipal elections. Those elections will be held
in cooperation with the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe and in accordance with the laws
of Kosovo and international standards. The organization
of the municipal elections and the formation of new
governing structures will strengthen the legitimacy of
the institutions of Kosovo at the local level.

Another important provision of the agreement is
the mutual agreement that neither party will block, or
encourage others to block, progress by the other party
on the path to EU integration. That mutual assurance
is a promising provision that supports the hope that
the European integration path for both countries will
be smooth and swift, based on fair conditions and
individual merits.

Prior to the agreement, Kosovo and Serbia had
signed a number of technical agreements on the
freedom of movement ofpeople and goods, on applying
integrated border management along the inter-State
border, on customs services, and on exchanging liaison
offices between capitals as the first step towards
establishing diplomatic relations. Those agreements
have undoubtedly improved the political, economic and
social conditions in Kosovo, Serbia and the broader
region.

The implementation of integrated border management
between the Republic of Kosovo and Serbia has
continued in the recent months. At the same time,
the agreement on exchanging liaison offices between
Kosovo and Serbia has led to steady progress in finding
a joint solution to the issues of representation, mandate,
composition, immunities and protection of personnel
and communication.

In that context, for the first time, the Republic
of Kosovo will be represented in Belgrade at the
ambassadorial level by a member of the Kosovo
Diplomatic Service. That step marks a historic turning
point in official communication between two countries,
given the fact that the liaison offices will have a unique
role in creating mutual trust beyond the institutional
context.

Without detracting from the historic importance
of the signing of the agreement, the implementation of
that agreement is essential for Serbia, Kosovo and the
Serbs in Kosovo. The coming months will be crucial in
that regard.

The Kosovo Government, public institutions and
political actors of all kinds in the country are committed
to implementing the agreement, which will open the
way for the integration and normalization of northern
Kosovo and for the improvement of relations with Serbia
by opening a new chapter of cooperation, dialogue and
mutual understanding. We affirm our determination to
take, as a matter of priority, all technical and political
steps needed to ensure the timely and constructive
implementation of all aspects of the agreement.
We also expect Serbia to maintain a steady course
of progress in fulfilling its obligations and working
closely with local Serbs in the north to persuade them to
accept and implement the agreement. We count on the
support of the member States of the European Union and
the wider international community in implementing the
agreement in order to attain Kosovo's full international
recognition and membership in the United Nations and

other international and regional bodies.

Over the past three months, the Republic of
Kosovo has maintained political and economic stability
and a safe environment for all its citizens; improved
institutional performance; strengthened the rule of
law; accelerated efforts and investments to protect
communities and their religious freedoms; and has
worked to enhance the socioeconomic conditions and
social inclusion of various social groups in Kosovo.

In recent months, the stream of international
recognition of Kosovo's independence and statehood
has continued. In the last few days and weeks, Kosovo
has been recognized by Tanzania, Yemen and Guyana.
We have also intensified regional participation and
membership in various European bodies, such as the
European Investment Bank.

The timely and effective implementation of the
agreement is essential to establishing security, the rule
of law and order in the north of Kosovo, as well as to
reducing the criminal activity and economic informality
that have been rife in that part of Kosovo under the
control of parallel structures for the past 14 years.

The Government of Kosovo has upheld its
commitment to protect and promote the rights of
communities by providing institutional, political,
economic and social support. Kosovo security
institutions have increased their efforts to provide
additional security to Serbian Orthodox Churches and
other heritage sites. In March 2013, the Kosovo Police
created a special task force comprising 207 police
officers, coming from all communities, who provide
24-hour security for Serb religious and cultural sites.
So far, there have been no reports of incidents against
the Serbian Orthodox heritage in Kosovo.

Moreover, during this period Kosovo has
also maintained economic stability, continued the
privatization of publicly owned enterprises and
expanded the scope of foreign direct investments.
Likewise, the Kosovo Assembly has continued its
legislative work and adopted 10 new laws regulating a
range of economic, judicial and public administration
issues.
Kosovo's path towards European Union integration
has shown steady progress. EU integration is a national
priority, representing our agenda of modernization
and political transformation. As a result of Kosovo's
constructive engagement in ongoing dialogue and in
fulfilment of European requirements, Kosovo is on
track to sign this year a Stabilization and Association
Agreement and benefit from visa liberalization.

On 22 April, the European Commission
recommended the opening of negotiations for signing
a Stabilization and Association Agreement with
Kosovo, which opens the prospects for establishing
contractual relations between the Republic of Kosovo
and the European Union. In less than two weeks, the
European Council will take a decision on approving the
negotiations for signing such an Agreement between
the EU and Kosovo.

The EU report represents the first and most
important political assessment of Kosovo's progress
in its path towards EU integration. The report
acknowledges that Kosovo has met all four short-term
priorities in the area of public administration, the rule of
law, minority protection and trade, and recommends to
the EU Parliament and Council that negotiations for the
signing of a Stabilization and Association Agreement
with Kosovo be opened.

Last but not least, following the important
developments in recent months and the overall
political, economic, social and inter-ethnic progress
in Kosovo, it is our firm conviction that it is time for
the Council to consider closing the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in the near future, which will contribute to the process
under way in Kosovo, create space for local ownership,
preserve the credibility of the United Nations and
its role in the past in Kosovo, and ultimately reduce
unnecessary financial costs, which could be used by
United Nations agencies in Kosovo for more important
socioeconomic development projects or in other crisis
situations.

The agreement between Kosovo and Serbia
represents a significant milestone and opportunity for
the Council to consider adopting a new resolution to
end the UNMIK mandate in Kosovo; show support for
the first agreement, mutually agreed upon by Kosovo
and Serbia; provide support for the EU to monitor the
implementation of the agreement, and show support
for the full functioning of both parties as independent
neighbours and responsible members of the international
community.
Let me conclude by reiterating the unwavering
dedication and perseverance of the Kosovo Government
and its people in continuing to make Kosovo successful
and prosperous, rejecting the legacy of the past and
joining the community of free and peaceful nations at
the regional and international levels. The agreement
between Kosovo and Serbia represents a crucial and
historic moment for improving the relations between
Kosovo and Serbia as two independent States with
a historic opportunity to pave the way for good-
neighbourly relations in the EU integration process.
Both sides have had to make some compromises,
which are ultimately in the best interests of the citizens
of Kosovo and their future within the unitary and
functioning State of Kosovo. However, the timely
and effective implementation of the agreement will
determine the success and normalization of inter-State
relations. Good intentions should be translated into
visible actions. Members of the Council and the wider
international community should support the effective
implementation of the agreement.

