The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Minister of State and Foreign Affairs of
Portugal.

(spoke in Portuguese; interpretation provided by the delegation)

I am grateful for the presence of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon; Ambassador Yury Fedotov,
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime; Mr. Antonio Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; and
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization. I also welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Vice-Minister from Brazil and the
Deputy Minister from Colombia.

As President, I have the privilege to speak after
hearing all the other speakers. Their important remarks
highlighted the relevance of the themes that we are
discussing today. States and international institutions
are traditionally prepared to address the classic threats
to peace and security. Such threats were the core
reasons for the establishment of our international
institutions. The requirements of contemporary
societies are ever-increasing and ever more diverse. It
is therefore important for States and international
institutions to monitor the ongoing evolution of
societies and people's lives in order to be in tune with
the driving forces of vanguard events and the spirit of
our historical moment.

The series of events of the recent past -
political, economic, social, cultural, technological and
environmental - clearly demonstrates that we are in a
new political world and a new economic reality. Many
of these changes create instability and threaten
international peace and security, but they also point to
new responsibilities for new international and regional
actors. The international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council are therefore
confronted with new challenges that they must face,
inevitably struggle with and, ideally, prevent.

Today's meeting is an unusual debate for the
Security Council. For precisely that reason, it has been
bold and innovative, and its themes connect the United
Nations with the demands of contemporary societies.
These new challenges have been identified, and it is
now up to us to contribute to the definition of an
effective collective response. Because of its
universality, only the United Nations, through its
various institutions and bodies, is in a position to
adequately respond.

Over the past year, the Council has broached such
issues as security and development, the impact of
climate change on security, the consequences of
transnational crime in situations of conflict, and the
effect of HIV/AIDS on security. The analysis and
discussion of those themes deepen and reinforce the
relationship between the Council and the other organs
of the United Nations and, without a doubt, also
strengthen their capacity to prevent conflict. It is
therefore essential to continue to develop a more
integrated and systematic approach to all of those
issues.

Organized crime is today one of the main sources
of financing of terrorism. Transnational organized
crime also facilitates the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, which in itself can often be a catalyst for
conflict in many parts of the world. Organized crime,
which often violates the arms embargoes imposed by
the Council, also has a direct impact on the Council's
ability to fulfil its mandate.

All of those types of organized crime have a
particularly serious impact on fragile States. In post-
conflict situations, criminal violence replaces political
violence and hinders efforts to re-establish and build
peace and the rule of law. The situation in West Africa,
where Portugal has actively participated in the fight
against drug trafficking and related crimes, clearly
illustrates the implications of organized crime for
regional and international security.

We therefore believe that a courageous effort to
craft regional and international instruments and
strategies in response to transnational crime is critical
to preventing conflict. On behalf of my country, I pay
tribute to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for playing a crucial role in the formulation of
such regional strategies and in providing support to
capacity-building for national institutions responsible
for fighting crime.

I will now say a few words about the issue of
climate change. We are not attempting to define

climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies, as
we all know that those issues are essentially dealt with
in other forums. Instead, we must consider the specific
aspects of that phenomenon, as it may have an impact
on the Security Council's responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security.

As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees have already mentioned, factors related to
climate change, such as hunger, drought and
desertification, can cause massive population
movements and cruelly claim the lives of children and,
in turn, adversely affect stability and the future. While
such movements are not the direct catalysts of conflict,
under some circumstances, they exacerbate existing
tensions and prolong conflict.

In that context, we must be particularly attentive
to the special situation of the most vulnerable, namely,
the small island developing States, whose populations
will be forced by rising sea levels to abandon their
lands of origin. That is not only a humanitarian
challenge, but also a challenge to the international law
that underpins the work of the United Nations and this
Council. What shall we do with those uprooted
populations? How shall we resolve problems caused by
changing borders, the creation of exclusive economic
zones, the loss of citizenship rights and the inevitable
identity crisis? I believe that it is impossible to stand
by and silently witness the plight of those populations
that risk becoming a State without a territory.

We recognize that information on the impact of
those problems on international peace and security is
still limited, but the trends that we have already
observed justify and, I would say, call for a vigilant
attitude on the part of the Security Council.

The devastating impact of the transmission of
HIV is most strongly felt in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Violence and instability exacerbate the
spread of HIV, especially among women and girls.
Some of the regions of the world with the highest rates
of infection are also conflict or post-conflict regions. It
is therefore not surprising that the Council's first-ever
debate on a health-related issue within its purview of
maintaining peace and security was on HIV and AIDS.
Integrating the fight against pandemics into the
peacebuilding strategies of post-conflict countries
having recently emerged from conflict is an essential
measure to avoid jeopardizing the gains made in the
consolidation of peace. In that regard, it is important to
strengthen international support to programmes led by
United Nations agencies to fight pandemics, in
particular the initiatives coordinated by the World
Health Organization. It is equally important for United
Nations peacekeeping missions to assist the relevant
agencies in implementing such programmes. That is
the only way in which the relevant organs of the United
Nations will be able to concerted action.

As is so often the case, the most vulnerable to
challenges are the least developed and the poorest. In a
spirit of solidarity and international unity, we call for
an effort to define our collective response. In
contemplating those new issues, we must recall the
words of a memorable figure of the Christian humanist
tradition, who said that if the rich do not deal with the
lives of the poor, the poor will eventually deal with the
lives of the rich.

Those are not issues that the Security Council can
or should deal with alone. The Council can and should,
in our opinion, develop a systematic and
comprehensive approach to new challenges to
international peace and security. Indeed, the topics
under discussion here today have been brought to the
attention of the Council with increasing frequency,
highlighting their relevance. The Council, however,
still lacks a clear strategy on the best way to monitor
those challenges on a regular basis and to identify their
similarities.

We believe that the creation of a mechanism by
which the Council could monitor those issues would be
a step forward and provide added value. An informal
working group of Council members could be set up to
review new information, including from the relevant
reports of the Secretary-General and of other United
Nations organs and agencies. That information could
serve as the foundation for better concerted,
articulated, informed and effective action of the
international community. We will continue working
with members of the Security Council to that end, and
with a View to reaching a consensus on the steps
required to set up such a mechanism.

New challenges to international peace and
security can lead to increased instability and insecurity.
It is our duty to deepen our knowledge of those
phenomena so as to ensure that they will not turn into
conflicts. As the main body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, this Council must
shoulder its responsibilities and lead that process.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Fedotov.

