Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): It is an
honour to represent the United Kingdom in this
Council and at the United Nations, and I am grateful to
you, Sir, for your kind words of welcome and for those
from the Secretary-General, whose presence is very
welcome here today.

I also wish to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your choice of conflict prevention for
this debate. We welcome the presidential statement to
be adopted which I hope will be adopted at the close of
this meeting and I also endorse the statement to be
given by the European Union presidency later in this
debate.

The Charter of the United Nations begins with an
expression of our collective determination "to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war
But in the six decades since the adoption of the

Charter, our record has been mixed.

In Western Europe, torn apart by war twice in the
first half of the last century, peace and cooperation are
now, thankfully, the norm. But Africa, the focus of our
discussion today, has experienced more conflict in
recent decades than any other continent. We have
witnessed signs of hope - the ending of some
appalling conflicts in recent years in West and Central
Africa, and the development of the African Union, as a
political and security entity, a sign of African common
purpose. But across the continent, the memories of war
and the human and material cost of conflict are all too
obvious.

In preparing to take up this job, I have been to the
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia and Tanzania. I have seen the international
effort to help countries in conflict, or deal with conflict
on their borders. A huge effort is being made, led by
the United Nations, and there are many good stories to
tell. I would commend, Mr. Secretary-General, your
words on Sudan, and warmly welcome your visit there
next week to push forward our peace efforts in that
country.

My Government welcomes the commitment of
African nations to greater efforts to prevent conflicts
breaking out in the first place, as well as to their
resolution. The solving of the long-running dispute
between Nigeria and Cameroon over the Bakassi
peninsula is a model. We need more such successes.

I would emphasize two landmarks in the last two
years, on which we need to build. The first was the
adoption of resolution 1625 (2005) by the Security
Council Summit meeting.

This ambitious text called for regular monitoring
of regions at risk of conflict and set out the range of
factors that need to be part of a comprehensive
approach: not just security and political issues, but
economic, social and humanitarian factors and issues
of governance and human rights. It stressed also the
importance of a regional approach.

The second landmark - as highlighted by our
Italian and United States colleagues - was the
agreement in June this year between this Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
setting out our joint commitment to a stronger and
more structured relationship, including on conflict
prevention.

So we have the institutional framework and we
have the declared political will to improve our efforts
on conflict prevention. I pay tribute to the work of your
delegation, Mr. President, in leading the Council's
working group on this issue.

How, practically, can we make progress with
preventing conflict? I think there are three areas of
activity.

First, we need to be engaged and active long
before problems turn into conflicts. This means the
Council being prepared to discuss regions and
countries struggling with problems and, working in
partnership with the Secretary-General, helping to
prevent them turning into armed conflict, rather than
just confronting wars once they have started, as we
tend to do today. It requires more capacity in the
Secretariat, as called for at the World Summit, for
political analysis and conflict assessment, and a more
joined-up approach across the United Nations system
so that we have early warning of a worsening problem.
It also means more regular briefings to the Council by
the Secretariat on the prevention priorities of the day.

Secondly, we need to strengthen the partnership
for prevention between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, particularly those in Africa.
We need to support African efforts as the African
Union (AU) builds its own systems and decision-
making capacity, through sharing best practice and
know-how. We should make full use of the annual
meetings between the Security Council and the AU
Peace and Security Council to discuss prevention
priorities, perhaps making conflict prevention a
standing item on their agenda. Mediation efforts by the
United Nations and the AU should be coordinated. Our
envoys should work together, as Jan Eliasson and
Salim Salim are doing in Darfur.

Thirdly, there is the wider dimension, as the
Secretary-General has eloquently set out in his
introductory remarks. We all agreed in 2005 that
development, security and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing.

For sustained peace, we need to re-energize the
world's efforts to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals, as my Prime Minister called for here on 31 July.
We need to be more effective in addressing human
rights abuses and social exclusion, which are often at
the root of conflict, and in ensuring that those who
perpetrate serious violations of international
humanitarian law are held to account. How can
countries move on from past conflicts without justice,
restitution and, ultimately, reconciliation?

And we need to encourage good governance and
fuller political participation, not just in Africa but in
the Middle East and elsewhere. Progress on all these
fronts will promote peaceful coexistence and
reconciliation, both between countries and within
them. My Government is committed to playing its part,
and I personally will do everything that I can over my
time on this Council to make progress towards these
goals.

