Mr. Ahmad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Israeli occupation of the Arab territories,
with its repercussions for peace and stability in the
region, has reached a very dangerous phase, given the
international indifference that has not sought to force
Israel to end its occupation of the Arab territories or
to end the serious violations of international legal
instruments, including the Geneva Conventions of
1949.

The international community has not halted the
excesses ofthe settlements, displacements, carnage and
continued aggression. What is taking place today in
Gaza are sporadic raids and killings of children, women
and the elderly. That is just a new chapter in the Israeli
aggression against the sons of the Palestinian people.
We hereby reaffirm that Israel could not have carried
out such excesses in its policy of aggression without the
support and protection of some well-known countries
and the pretexts and excuses they have provided for
Israel. Those States are complicit in those policies, and
they are legally responsible and accountable for the
results.

The Syrian Arab Republic condemns the carnage
and the crimes committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people, our brothers in Gaza. We condemn
the international silence in the face of this ongoing
crime, and we call upon the Council to compel Israel to
halt its barbaric acts, which threaten peace and security
in the region.

Some in this Chamber have claimed that they are
committed to supporting the rights ofthe Syrian people.
Yet the hollowness of that statement and its hypocrisy
have been revealed in that they have not said anything
about that except at the end of their statements on the
Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights, as if that was
not a right of the Syrian people, as if the Golan were
not occupied Syrian territory. Every year, a number of
resolutions are adopted calling on Israel to withdraw
to the 4 June 1967 line. Where is the discussion on
human rights and international humanitarian law by
those delegations when it comes to the settlements
campaign of the Israelis and the suffering of the Syrian
people under the occupation in the Golan for more
than half a century? In the Golan, Syrian citizens have
been exposed to the worst forms of repression, racial
discrimination, arrest and torture. They are deprived
of their natural resources, including oil, gas and water.

The support by Israel ofterrorist groups working in
the occupied Golan Heights is a flagrant violation of the
1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, despite the
requests of the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF) and the international community. That
has exposed United Nations personnel to dangers and
undermines United Nations activity in the region. That
was evident in the kidnapping of UNDOF staff and
their exposure to firing, as they have been targeted by
terrorist groups supported by Israel.

On that subject we would point out that the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on UNDOF
(S/2014/401), which reaffirms that Israel has transferred
terrorist groups to Israeli hospitals through the
separation line so that they can return to the separation
zone and pursue their terrorist activities. Israel is in
communication with them, and they provide them with
closed boxes, the contents of which we are unfamiliar
with. That is in violation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement of 1974, Council resolutions and
international law.

Given the international silence with regard to
Israeli practices, Israel has again mounted further
aggression in Palestinian territories and has targeted
civilian areas more than once in recent times. The
Secretary-General's report on UNDOF, which I have
just referred to, also mentions Israeli aggression
against Syrian territories on 18 and 19 March as being
the most serious violations committed since the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement. The activities
pursued by Israel have increased tension in the region
to an unprecedented level. That may well have serious
consequences that will notjust be limited to this region.
It is for that reason that we call upon the United Nations,
including the Council, to shoulder its responsibility in
accordance with the Charter with regard to ending the
Israeli occupation, halting Israel's barbaric policies
and forcing it to respect the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, including resolution 497 (1981), on
the occupied Syrian Golan, which calls upon Israel to
withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including
the occupied Syrian Golan, to the line of4 June 1967.

Finally, we reiterate our rejection of some
delegations' attempts to disregard the main issue on the
agenda, namely, the Middle East and ending the Israeli
occupation in the occupied Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan, and to discuss the domestic issues
of other countries under the guise of discussing the
Middle East. Therefore, in order to avoid becoming
a party to such attempts, which we reject, I will not
respond to such attempts under this agenda item,
nor to the delegations that violate the Charter of the
United Nations and international law via their attempts
to provide support, housing, weapons and training
to terrorists and mercenaries, and which assist their
return to Syria through neighbouring countries and
spread extremism and terrorist destruction in Syria and
throughout the entire region.

