We thank Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing. We take this opportunity to extend our deepest condolences to the Palestinian people following the death of Mr. Saeb Erekat, who was instrumental in bringing Israel and Palestine closer in their quest for lasting two-State peace. Although that peace eluded him, we recall how, with pragmatism, determination and diplomatic skill, he was able to advance the aspirations of his people at crucial moments in the peace process. On another note, we are deeply concerned about the most recent details announced by Mr. Philippe Lazzarini, Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), with regard to the Agency's funding shortfalls and inability to pay the salaries of its staff. We commend UNRWA for its ongoing role in providing humanitarian assistance and for its efforts to promote the development of the Palestinian people. This vital work must continue. We urge donor countries to strengthen their contributions, which are now more crucial than ever. As for many, the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains of great concern to the Dominican Republic. Everyone is aware of the grave state of the health-care system in Gaza. It has been further crippled by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and its collapse is imminent. It appears that the pandemic continues to have an adverse effect on the provision of medical assistance and on the country's economy. That, along with widespread insecurity in the country, the electricity crisis, insufficient access to safe drinking water and the lack of opportunities for young people, results in a dire situation that threatens progress for communities, in particular the country's youth. The current openness and momentum fostered by agreements to normalize relations between Israel and Arab countries should be used to promote and strengthen direct dialogue between the parties - genuine dialogue that addresses the aspirations and concerns of both sides - with a view to building viable peace for the entire Middle East region. To that end, we welcome news coverage yesterday signalling the readiness of the Palestinian authorities and Israel to resume relations based on previous agreements. As members of the Security Council, we are called upon to honour and implement the mandate of the Charter of the United Nations to strive for lasting peace and sustainable development. We are therefore compelled to work hard together so that these peoples experience and live peace as the rule, and conflict as the exception. As members of the international community, we are called upon to be mediators, advisers and builders of mechanisms that help prevent escalating tensions and promote dialogue. We must neither halt nor reduce our cooperation efforts to resolve a conflict that has undermined the progress of a strong and resilient people and of a region that deserves and expects our active participation in promoting peace.
