Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for this opportunity to share the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/20lS/918) and the update on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

Despite the many challenges and repeated attempts
by spoilers to derail the process - in particular
during the outbreaks of violence in late September and
October - I believe that we are nonetheless in a position
to say that the Central African Republic is moving
ahead with the transition, in line with the revised
electoral calendar. Yesterday, as we are all aware, the
constitutional referendum was held, ushering in the
final and most sensitive phase of the electoral process.

As Council members know, the first round of
the presidential and legislative elections is scheduled
to take place in two weeks on 27 December. In that
regard, the constitutional referendum is perhaps a dry
run for the first set of national elections. Yesterday,
the constitutional referendum was held successfully
throughout most of the country, including in a number
of hotspots, such as Bambari. Some 60 per cent of
eligible voters were able to vote yesterday, and I remind
the Council that the elections continue today in certain
localities in order to complete the process.

Clearly and unfortunately, efforts were made
by certain anti-Balaka elements and members of the
ex-Sele'ka Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
centrafrique led by Nourredine Adam to disrupt the
consultations in certain parts of Bangui and in the
regions. In Bangui and in Bria in particular, the proactive
and preventive measures taken by MINUSCA allowed
the voting to proceed in most polling centres despite
localized security incidents. In the towns of Birao,
Bossangoa, Ndele and Kaga Bandoro, spoilers resorted
to violence and intimidation of voters and electoral
staff, thereby preventing the holding of the referendum
despite MINUSCA attempts to thwart them. A total of
three peacekeepers were injured in incidents in Bangui
and Bria. That is why, as I said, the voting period has
been extended today in certain locations where the
voting was unable to proceed appropriately.

It must be noted that the unprecedented registration
of nearly 2 million voters, representing 95 per cent of
the estimated electorate, demonstrates the people's
strong desire for change. The situation for refugees
is more complicated. Despite considerable efforts,
only one-third of potential voters among refugees
were able to register to vote. We must not allow the
actions of a few to disrupt the hopes and aspirations
of the many for a successful electoral process that
will return their country to constitutional order. We
must ensure that Central Africans - whether inside
or outside the country - can cast a vote to elect their
future Government, free from intimidation. MINUSCA
and the wider United Nations system will continue to
lend their full technical, logistical and security support
to enable the Transitional Authority to achieve these
objectives.

I welcome the signing of the electoral code of
conduct by the presidential candidates on 9 December.
Further to yesterday's launch of the electoral campaign,
I appeal to all candidates to campaign peacefully. I note
the decision of the Constitutional Court approving the
final list of 30 presidential candidates, including one
woman, whereas 14 candidates were deemed ineligible.
I call on the supporters of those applicants not approved
by the Constitutional Court to respect the decision
and to avoid doing anything that could complicate or
jeopardize the electoral process.

The continued support of the countries of the
subregion, the wider international community and
the Council is absolutely essential at this moment. In
that regard, I welcome the communique issued by the
Economic Community of Central African States on
25 November endorsing a final technical extension
to allow for the completion of the transition, in line
with the revised electoral calendar. I also thank all
donors that have supported the electoral process, and
welcome in particular the recent pledges by Gabon and
Equatorial Guinea to close the remaining funding gap
for the elections. Pledges are one thing, however, and
honouring them is another. I would strongly encourage
all countries that have not transferred their funds to
disburse them now without delay, because the process is
under way and expenses must be covered immediately.

The timely visit of His Holiness Pope Francis to
Bangui on 29 and 30 November brought new hope to
the Central Africans and undoubtedly helped to reduce
intercommunal tensions. The remarkable image of His
Holiness' visit to a mosque in the PK5 neighbourhood
of Bangui demonstrated once again that religion is not
at the heart of the difficulties facing the Central African
Republic. We must continue to promote the dialogue
between all communities by every means available and
support the Central Africans in further advancing the
reconciliation process at all levels.

Although the security situation naturally remains
fragile and pockets of insecurity persist throughout
the country - including in Bangui and, most
importantly, along the main road to the border
with Cameroon - MINUSCA, with the support of
Operation Sangaris, continues to adopt as robust a
posture as possible to protect civilians and create a safe
environment for the holding of free and fair elections.
The Mission has redeployed some of its forces in areas
identified as potential hot spots, and efforts have been
made to strengthen the Mission by accelerating ongoing
deployments and in redeploying, on a temporary basis,
the Senegalese rapid reaction contingent from the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire in the framework of
inter-mission cooperation. I thank the Security Council
for having approved that redeployment.

I am encouraged by the efforts being made to
support the stabilization of the security situation
and open a space for dialogue, especially before the
elections. The successful launch of the precantonment
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) process, which allowed the cantonment of
approximately 1,700 combatants without obligation to
disarm, should be considered a first step towards the
genuine DDR that we will strive to achieve with the
new Government that emerges from the elections. The
recent organization of a round table on security helped
to spur the development of a national vision for security
sector reform. Addressing the integration ofmembers of
armed groups into the security and defence forces will,
however, be essential to making sustainable progress
in DDR and security sector reform, although, as recent
events have demonstrated, that will not be enough.

We must therefore be firm and fight impunity for
perpetrators of serious violations of human rights and
humanitarian law. I urge the authorities of the Central
African Republic, with the support of MINUSCA, to
continue to prosecute the instigators and perpetrators
of serious crimes and to protect victims and witnesses.
The international community must also support the
Central African authorities in the establishment of the
special criminal court.

Three days ago, on 12 December, the central prison
in Ngaragba, Bangui, was reopened thanks to the
joint support of MINUSCA and the European Union.
Council members will recall that the reopening was
made necessary by the mass escapes that took place
during the crisis oflate September, which, I recall, were
abetted by uniformed Central African troops. More
broadly, I think we must remain committed to finding
solutions with regard to national capacities to manage
security and prison facilities, which also touches on the
security of MINUSCA prison staff.

In conclusion, the efforts we have seen on the
part of some to undermine yesterday's constitutional
referendum demonstrate that there are actors who remain
determined to derail the political process in the country.
With only two weeks until the first round of elections,
it is very important to further contain such attempts
by spoilers. The entire international community must
therefore remain united in its uncompromising message
in rejection of any attempt to derail the political process
from any quarter and to demonstrate that there will be
consequences for those who seek to do so.

Looking ahead, we must be mindful that, as
important as the elections are, they are not an end in
themselves. More than ever, we must try to address the
root causes of the crisis, for which we will need a new
Government that works in a spirit of unity, inclusivity
and reconciliation. To address all of the priorities at the
heart of the crisis, including the humanitarian situation
and the need to reinvigorate the economy, the support of
the Council and key partners will be vital. The people
of the Central African Republic, who have experienced
such tragedy for so long, deserve nothing less.

