The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Oman for the kind words he addressed
to my Ambassador.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Italy.
Let me begin by paying homage to you,
Mr. Secretary-General, for the exemplary way in which
you lead and serve our Organization.

From the moment Italy entered the United Nations,

it has dedicated its greatest political and diplomatic efforts
to the achievement of its goals. My country fully realizes
that the best way the nations of the world can be heard is
by strengthening the role of an Organization in which all
nations are represented. Today, with the tearing down of
the Berlin Wall and the end of the cold war, Italy
applauds the more dynamic role that the United Nations,
and especially the Security Council, is playing.
Italy has contributed concretely to this role of maintaining
international peace and security by frequently
participating in United Nations peace-keeping missions,
multinational forces authorized by the Security Council
and operations conducted by regional organizations at the
request of the Security Council.

As this Organization prepares to chart the course of
its second half-century of life, it must draw on the
courage it so often summons for international emergencies
to address instead its own internal situation. If we are to
pay homage to the principles enshrined in the San
Francisco Charter, we must reform our Organization to
bring it into step with changes both in the world and in
the increased membership of the United Nations.
Moreover, the final goal of the reform identified by the
General Assembly - a more equitable and representative
United Nations - must be reflected in the process by
which we deliberate, choose and effect reform.

 

In this context, Italy has presented an original proposal
for the reform of the Security Council inspired by the
principles of democracy, transparency and equitable
geographical representation of all Member States while
preserving its efficiency and effectiveness, a proposal which
is aimed at satisfying and reconciling the aspirations of all
Member States.

At this critical juncture in time, we must meet,
undivided, the challenges of the present and the future.
Together, we must continue our efforts to shape a better
world for all nations and all peoples.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the

following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has met on 26 September
1995, at the level of Foreign Ministers, to
commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the United
Nations and to exchange views on the challenges
which the Security Council faces.

"Since its establishment the Security Council has
played a crucial role in the maintenance of
international peace and security on which development
and cooperation among nations are based. The past
few years in particular have been ones of momentous
change, bringing fresh hope and new challenges.
Operations mandated by the Council have assisted in
the restoration of peace and stability to countries long-
plagued by war. Although such operations have
largely been successful, there are areas where success
has not been achieved. The Council must continue to
spare no effort in working for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and build upon its
experience of past and existing operations.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
challenges facing the international community demand
a resolute response, based on the principles and
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations. The
members of the Security Council consider that the
United Nations must be strengthened and revitalized
to help meet these challenges. They take note of the
conclusions of the Working Group of the General
Assembly on the Question of Equitable Representation
on and Increase in the Membership of the Security
Council and other Matters Related to the Security
Council, inter alia, that the Council should be
expanded, and that its working methods should
continue to be reviewed, in a way that further
strengthens its capacity and effectiveness, enhances
its representative character and improves its working
efficiency and transparency; and that important
differences on key issues continue to exist. The
Council also believes that effective use should be
made of instruments for preventive action, and the
Organization's capacity to conduct effective peace-
keeping operations should continue to be improved.
The Council will continue to attach utmost
importance to the safety and security of all who
serve under the United Nations flag in the field.

"The members of the Security Council reaffirm
their commitment to the collective security system of
the Charter. On the solemn occasion of the fiftieth
anniversary of the United Nations, the Council,
along with other United Nations bodies,
commemorates what has been achieved so far, but
also commits itself once again to the maintenance of
international peace and security for which it has
primary responsibility, and to working to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/48.

The Security Council has thus concluded its business
for this commemorative meeting.

The meeting rose at 1.55 pm.
