Mr. Keegel (Sri Lanka): Permit me at the outset
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. We also extend our
felicitations to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria on their election to the Council.
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs for his briefing. My delegation appreciates the
opportunity given to us to once again to focus on the
situation in the Middle East, particularly the Palestinian
question.

Sri Lanka has consistently supported a peaceful
settlement to the Palestinian issue and has called on all
sides to fully implement the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and on the
realization of the two-State solution. Our hope is that
the day will soon come when Israel, Palestine and their
neighbours can coexist in peace and harmony.

We remain deeply concerned about the daily
widespread suffering and hardships the Palestinian
people continue to endure due to the economic blockade
and the ensuing grave situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. While we note the relaxation of
some restrictions by the Israeli Government and the
intention to suspend new settlement construction, we
call for the removal of all restrictions. The Palestinian
people have suffered for too long and continue to live
under occupation.

The denial of their fundamental right to statehood
due to continued Israeli occupation has seriously
affected the socio-economic well-being of the
population in Gaza and the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. In this context, my delegation believes that
for peace to be viable and sustainable in the Palestinian
territory, Israel must withdraw from all of the
Palestinian territories back to the 1967 borders. It must
end the economic blockade. The illegal expansion of
settlements, construction of the separation wall and
changes to the demographic character of the Palestinian
territory will only increase tension and animosity
throughout the Middle East region.

The Palestinian Authority needs to continue the
implementation of its security plan and make every
effort at its disposal to improve law and order and to
ensure that its territory is not used for illegal attacks on
Israeli civilians. Both sides must do everything
possible to ensure the safety and security of civilians.
32

Sri Lanka reiterates its support for the Palestinian
National Authority under the leadership of President
Mahmoud Abbas. We stress the need to preserve and
protect the national and democratic institutions which
are vital for a future independent Palestinian State. We
therefore urge the Palestinian groups to act speedily to
reconcile and reunite within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian National Authority. Unity among
the Palestinian people is their strength.

My delegation supports international efforts for
the early resumption of negotiations and believes that
unity of the Palestinian people is essential to ensure
proper conditions for the resumption of dialogue by
Israel and Palestine at an early stage. We also urge both
sides to ensure a climate conducive to the resumption
of negotiations. We also hope that the Egyptian and
regional initiatives will be supported by all groups in
Palestine to enable elections to be held early.

In conclusion, Sri Lanka reiterates its support for
a lasting peace in the Middle East, including the
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian issue.

