Mr. Mahmassani (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to associate myself
with the statement made by the Chairman of the Group
of Arab States, the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.

I congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
commend your wise leadership of the Council's
proceedings. I also pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Italy, for his distinguished
leadership of the Council last month. I also thank you
deeply, Sir, for responding promptly to the Arab
request to convene this meeting.

The dangerous and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially the Gaza
Strip, requires the Security Council - the principal
body tasked with the maintenance of international
peace and security - to take immediate action to put
an end to the Israeli aggression, particularly in the
Gaza Strip, and to compel Israel to lift the siege of
Gaza and open the border crossing points to allow for
the entry of humanitarian and relief supplies, protect
civilians and guarantee their rights under international
law. The Council must also request the Secretary-
General to submit an urgent report to the Security
Council on Israeli practices that are violations of all
international laws and norms with respect to the
residents of the occupied Palestinian territories.

We further ask the Security Council to conduct an
international investigation into Israel's inhuman crimes
in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza,
and to declare the Gaza Strip a disaster area, which
would trigger an urgent call on the international
community to extend support and assistance to the
besieged Palestinian people. Moreover, we ask the
Council to consider Israel's decision to declare the
Gaza Strip a hostile entity to be illegal and illegitimate.

The League of Arab States expresses its deep
concern over the deteriorating economic and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories as a result of the ongoing and grave Israeli
violations against Palestinian citizens. The Palestinian
economy is at the point of total collapse due to the
noose-tightening practiced by Israel, the occupying
Power, forcing many Palestinian families to live hand
to mouth, barely surviving and deprived of the
minimum necessities of a dignified life and of
infrastructure, education and health services.

The Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, the Gaza Strip in particular, is the cause of
increasing social and economic suffering among
Palestinians because the continuous military operations
of the occupier against the occupied territories rely
also on the weapons of forcible land seizure, the
demolition of homes, the razing of agricultural lands,
the imposition of harsh restrictions on transportation
and movement, and the policy of closures, which is
deemed to be the principal cause of the poverty and
humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Israel has thereby completely flouted all
international and humanitarian laws, norms and values,
human rights and the Fourth Geneva Convention on the
protection of civilians in time of war.

The situation has reached the point at which even
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is unable to deliver
humanitarian and relief assistance to the Gaza Strip
because of the comprehensive Israeli closures of all
entry points. That will precipitate an unprecedented,
Israeli-made humanitarian disaster in the region that
will have severe consequences.

Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories, especially the Gaza Strip, are jeopardizing
the prospects of peace in the region and threatening the
outcomes of the Annapolis conference. Israel's
continued occupation of Palestinian territories is the
principal cause of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the
settlement of which can be achieved only through
negotiations between the parties to end the occupation
and enable the Palestinian people to establish their own
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis of
resolutions of international legitimacy, international
law and the Arab peace initiative.

