Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin by expressing my thanks to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting on the important issue of
Afghanistan. My delegation is pleased to participate,
under your presidency, in a debate of the Council on
this issue. I thank Mr. Haile Menkerios, Chairman of
the Committee of Experts, and his colleagues for the
commendable, accurate and comprehensive report they
have presented on how to monitor the arms embargo
and the closure of training terrorist camps in the
Taliban-held areas of Afghanistan. This report reflects,
among other things, the dedicated efforts of the
Chairman and the members of the Committee to
contribute to a viable and lasting political settlement of
the Afghan crisis.

I also thank Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso for
his introduction of the report and for his commendable
leadership of the sanctions Committee.

It is very unfortunate that the continual efforts of
the international community in recent years have not
yet brought about any practical change in the bellicose
and intransigent policy pursued by the Taliban on the
ground. Based on their war-oriented policy and their
total contempt for international opinion and demands,
the Taliban leadership, with a view to rendering
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000) ineffective by
conquering more ground, even broke with the pattern
set over the years and continued its military activities
during the past winter. Recent reports from
Afghanistan are also indicative of a new round of
offensives launched by the Taliban.

The decision by the Taliban to interrupt the
process of dialogue under the auspices of the United
Nations, which they explicitly undertook last
November not to abandon, is unacceptable and further
testimony to the wide disparity between their words
and commitment and their actions and practice.

The current increase in the military activity of the
Taliban comes at a time when war and drought are
plunging the country into a humanitarian crisis. As the
United Nations recently warned, the number of
Afghans made homeless by war and drought in 2001-
2002 could more than double to over 1.6 million
people. On the other hand, according to the officials of
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Taliban leadership has
recently embarked on increased harassment and threats
against aid workers, making the provision of
international assistance to war- and drought-stricken
people in Afghanistan more difficult.

In view of all this, the report of the Committee of
Experts has been released at a time when the disregard
of the Taliban for the demands of the international
community - set out, inter alia, in Security Council
resolution 1333 (2000) 4 has become more evident. It
is needless to recall that they are trying to flout a
resolution that truly expresses the sentiment of the
international community and was voted for, among
others, by three Islamic States members of the Council.
Therefore, it is essential that the international
community do its best to prevent a breach of the
resolution and thereby deprive the belligerent and
intransigent party of the means it needs to further its
military objectives at the cost of the continued
suffering of the Afghan people and of instability in the
region.

We believe that the report prepared by the
Committee of Experts is an important and appropriate
step in the direction of attaining that objective. The
authors of the report are successful, to a great extent, in
exposing the ways in which the Taliban procure
military means, finance their military machine and
organize other unlawful activities, including turning
their territory into a safe haven for terrorists. The
report refers rightly to the continual supply of arms and
ammunition to the Taliban and dismisses the claim that
their military machine survives on former stocks. The
Committee, among other things, correctly notes the
importance of putting an end to illegal flights to and
from the areas controlled by the Taliban and the need
to deny the Taliban access to turbine fuel and fluids
needed for use in armoured vehicles.

As to the closure of terrorist camps in the
Taliban-controlled areas, accurate reference is made to
the reliance of the Taliban on non-Afghan elements in
their efforts to defeat the United Front. In order to help
to close these camps and to reverse the multiple harms
arising therefrom, the international community should
pay attention to the need for the repatriation of these
elements, as underlined by the Committee. To this end,
the removal of obstacles in the way of their return to
their countries of origin and the encouragement of the
officials of those countries to cooperate would be of
great help.
In order to bring the military machine of the
Taliban to a halt, it is essential to put an end to the
trade in narcotics in Afghanistan. Although we
welcome the ban on opium poppy cultivation ordered
by the Taliban leadership, we doubt that it is driven by
religious reasons, as claimed by the Taliban. The order
was issued following a few years of abundant crops.
Moreover, it does not cover the stockpiling, transit and
processing of, and trading in opium and heroin. Had it
been driven solely and genuinely by religious
considerations, the Taliban leadership should have
banned illicit drugs in all their aspects and should have
ordered the stockpiles destroyed.

According to our information, the stockpiles of
drugs in Afghanistan are huge enough to feed the
market at a steady rate for about 10 years. We therefore
highlight the conclusion of the report emphasizing the
need to monitor the flow of drugs from Afghanistan as
an integral component of the arms embargo. Effective
control of the financing of the Taliban also requires
control of the financial support provided to them by
individuals and institutions in the region and beyond.

Most of Afghanistan's neighbouring countries
face various difficulties and troubles emanating from
civil war and lawlessness in that country, and they need
assistance from the international community to cope
with the situation. In this context, the need for training
and equipment support from the international
community to modernize the border services of the
countries neighbouring Afghanistan is an appropriate
point referred to in the report. In that respect, it is
pertinent to refer to the crusade by the Iranian
Government against transnational drug mafias. Among
other things, that has led to the seizure of 263 metric
tons of drugs in the past year alone. Needless to say,
these endeavours, which have been undertaken at high
human and material costs, help to a great extent to
shield the other countries of the region, and far beyond,
from the effects of the lawlessness in Afghanistan.

As to the recommendations made by the
Committee, they are currently being considered within
the Iranian Government on the basis of the assumption
that monitoring is an indispensable tool for the
enforcement of resolution 1333 (2000). Pending the
result of the ongoing consideration, we believe that the
eventual stationing of Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams in the region should, and could, be compatible
with the sovereign rights of the receiving countries.
Moreover, some aspects of the proposed mandate of
those teams and of the Office for Sanctions Monitoring
and Coordination need further clarifications, and more
details should be known to enable the relevant
Governments to comment. No doubt consultations
between officials of the countries concerned and the
members of the Security Council prior to any decision
being taken by the Council could pave the way for the
smooth implementation of any final decision.

