Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding country
Croatia, the candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and
Serbia, the countries ofthe Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as the Republic of Moldova
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to begin by thanking Special
Representative Mahiga for his briefing and the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his statement.
I would also like to thank and congratulate the
Secretary-General and his staff for having organized
the timely and successful Somalia mini-summit in
the margins of the General Assembly. It provided an
excellent opportunity for participants, including the
European Union, to hear from Somalia's newly elected
President, Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, with which
priorities his Government aims to set the foundations
for a new beginning.

Like others, we welcome the prospects that the end
ofthe transition has brought to Somalia for lasting peace,
prosperity and stability. It is clear, however, that much
work remains to be done. The new federal institutions
should embark on stabilization and reconciliation
efforts throughout the country, including in those areas
recovered from Al-Shabaab, where they will need to
establish inclusive, representative administrations. Both
are crucial for the future of a viable federal Somalia.
The people of Somalia should also be assured of good
governance, transparency and accountability, justice,
respect for their rights and fundamental freedoms, and
economic development. The new federal institutions
should reach out to Somalis of all walks of life and act
in their interests, and they should finalize key pending
elements of the provisional Constitution.

The humanitarian situation remains dire. All
parties to the conflict have an obligation to comply with
international humanitarian law and to protect civilians.
Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in
need must be ensured by all parties involved.

Against the background of those significant
challenges, the international community should remain
strongly committed to the provision of support to the
Somali people. But in doing so we must respect Somali
ownership, carefully structuring and aligning our
collective actions into a truly comprehensive approach,
in partnership with Somalia. That requires increased
coordination, both among donor countries and among
other international actors. We must avoid duplication
and fragmentation of our support. We are ready to play an
active role and look forward to the results of the United
Nations strategic review of its presence in Somalia. We
believe that such a review must also include a renewed
commitment to help the Somali Government improve
the human rights situation and strengthen monitoring
mechanisms to that end. The European Union supports
the Office ofthe High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the implementation, with the Somali authorities, of
the human rights road map.

Such a comprehensive approach would have to
deliver support at the right place and at the right time. In
line with the President of Somalia's initial vision, that
means in practice focusing on, first, an accelerated and
intensified approach to security-sector reform; secondly,
a comprehensive approach to the elimination of piracy;
thirdly, immediate support to build the capacities of
the institutions and improve their transparency and
accountability through appropriate mechanisms; and,
fourthly, the rapid delivery of services to regions no
longer under Al-Shabaab control.

The new Somali Parliament was able to vote for
a change because of the new sense of security made
possible by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). I therefore want to use this opportunity to
once again acknowledge the great sacrifices made by
AMISOM. troops for the benefit of the Somali people
and the role that the mission played in finalizing the
transition.

Since the deployment of AMISOM, the European
Union has been one ofthe main funders ofthe operation.
The total support to AMISOM. provided by the European
Union since 2007 amounts to €412 million. We join
the African Union in its call for more predictable and
sustainable AMISOM. funding, as repeated in its latest
report on the mission, and we call on others to contribute
to the AMISOM. Trust Fund, in line with the demands
contained in successive Security Council resolutions.
The planned assessment of the African Union and the
United Nations on the future of international support to
Somalia should take this issue into account.

I can assure the Council that, in addition to
its support for AMISOM, the European Union
will continue to contribute to Somalia's efforts in
addressing the remaining challenges, including
through its large amount of development assistance and
its Common Security and Defence Policy operations.
Those operations include the European Union Training
Mission, the Atalanta Naval Force and the new regional
maritime capacity-building mission for the Horn of
Africa.

In conclusion, the transition may be over, but it is
clear that the work of transformation is just beginning.
In four years' time, Somali institutions need to
create the conditions for holding a referendum on the
provisional Constitution and elections under universal
suffrage. The United Nations and its Members will
have to stay committed in their support and, in close
cooperation with our Somali counterparts, achieve a
united, efficient and transparent organization of our
international assistance. The Somali people deserve no
less.

