A month ago, in this very place, Secretary-General Guterres and Special Coordinator Mladenov sounded the alarm that Israel's plan to annex parts of the West Bank "grievously harm the prospect of a two-State solution and undercut the possibilities of a renewal of negotiations" (SS/2020/596, annex 1) and "would have serious implications in terms of ... the prospects of a negotiated, sustainable peace" in the region (ibid., annex 2). Such a prospect, about which we all had a legitimate reason to worry in view of its imminent realization, would certainly have put an end to all hopes. And yet, since 1967, the United Nations, in particular the Security Council, the parties themselves and the international community as a whole, have made efforts to pave the way to the peace that we have been seeking for nearly 70 years, a peace that necessarily involves the abandonment by Israel, the occupying Power, of the annexation of the Palestinian territories and the destruction of Palestinian homes, with their attendant violence and deprivation of all kinds. In the briefings that we have just followed with great attention, Mr. Nicholas Mladenoy, as usual, gave us, without complacency, the picture of the situation on the ground (annex 1), which is quite worrisome, to say the least. I thank him for that. also thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Mr. Khalil Shikaki for their briefings on the situation in the Middle East and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (annexes 2 and 3, respectively). Now more than ever, it is time for us to give hope to the peoples of the Middle East so long exposed to the torments of instability, violence and war. These populations, mostly young, many of whom are women, whose genius extends beyond the borders of this region, deserve our solidarity and our unwavering support. The current grave situation triggered by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic compels us individually and collectively to show ingenuity and a greater sense of solidarity. It is this reality that, a few months ago, prompted the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to overcome their differences and build cooperation to respond effectively to the consequences of the pandemic for their respective peoples. With its devastating effects, the pandemic has added to an already complex health situation, with a lack of adequate medical equipment and products and a disastrous economic situation induced by a blockade on the Gaza Strip, thereby increasing the vulnerability of the Palestinian people. We therefore rightly commend all countries that have shown great generosity by agreeing to contribute to the financing of the United Nations COVID-19 intervention programmes as well as the daily activities of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East on the ground. In conclusion, it is incumbent today on the Security Council, the Quartet and the international community to spare no effort to exploit this glimmer of hope, however small, with a view to relaunching the Israeli-Palestinian peace process on the basis of universally accepted ideals and principles, in particular through resolution 1515 (2003), which enshrines the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and security and in strict compliance with the 1967 borders, as the basis for resolving the conflict. Was it not Mr. Ban Ki-moon who stated in his time that "(t]he path out of the current political deadlock requires commitment, compromise, mutual respect and leadership on both sides. It also requires the acceptance - demonstrated by deeds as well as words - that the two-State solution is the only road to peace" (S/PV.7673, p. 4)? These words are still relevant today.
