Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the
Kuwaiti presidency for organizing this open debate.
We appreciate the Kuwaiti delegation's commitment to
inclusively discharging its functions as the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and other
Procedural Questions. We recall the work accomplished
by the delegation of Japan in its recently concluded
tenure as the Chair of the Informal Working Group. We
thank Mr. Ian Martin, Executive Director of Security
Council Report, for sharing his insights this morning.

My delegation finds itselfin a position in which we
can align ourselves with the pertinent points made by
all non-Council members so far.

We take this opportunity to share some observations
in the light of our recent engagements with the Council
in the aftermath of the atrocity crimes reported in
Myanmar's Rakhine state since 25 August 2017 and
the resulting forced exodus to date of nearly 688,000
people, mostly Rohingya, into Bangladesh. At a time
when the Council members were still figuring out how
to respond to the unfolding humanitarian crisis, the
Secretary-General rose to the occasion by exercising his
authority under Article 99 of the Charter of the United
Nations to sensitize the Council about the potential
threats posed by the crisis to international peace and
security. We urge that this practice be encouraged on a
more regular basis, as warranted by any humanitarian
exigency likely to be compromised by otherwise
political considerations.

The Council, on its part, had convened a number
of consultations on the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
which resulted in the adoption of a fairly comprehensive
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22). Given the
unfolding nature of the crisis, it is to be expected
that the Council remain seized with the issue, and
that it implement a periodic schedule to monitor the
presidential statement's implementation by all the
parties concerned. Regular briefings and consultations
on such pressing issues would only further enhance the
Council's credibility and minimize the possibility of
relying on the discretion of one Council member or the
other. In that context, we put on record our appreciation
for the Kuwaiti presidency for remaining seized with
the possibility of reconvening an open meeting on the
subject, since the last one was held nearly three months
ago (see S/PV.8133).

In the same vein, we deem it appropriate for
Council members to consider undertaking a visit to
Myanmar and Bangladesh to reaffirm their support to
the hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons, who have a rather uncertain future still
awaiting them. The Council's visits on the ground
are indeed a useful exercise, and we would wish to
see the visits organized in a way that responds to the
most urgent conflict and humanitarian situations under
its consideration.

The Council has so far found it difficult to adopt a
draft resolution on the Rohingya humanitarian crisis,
mostly due to the possibility of the exercise of the veto
against any such draft resolution. We acknowledge
the veto as a responsibility and remain mindful of its
varied use throughout United Nations history, with
mixed results. However, we are increasingly convinced
that the exercise of the veto should be avoided in cases
that involve mass atrocity crimes.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Secretary General's Special Adviser
on the Prevention of Genocide and the Responsibility
to Protect and the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Armed Conflict have, among others,
unequivocally referred to the reported commission
of atrocity crimes against the Rohingya in northern
Rakhine state since 25 August 2017. Further facts
attesting to the commission of such crimes are also
coming to light. Against that backdrop, it is expected
that the Council demonstrate pragmatism by working
on a draft resolution that charts a durable solution
package for the Rohingya.
In relation to the reported atrocity crimes, it
is expected that the Council particularly consider
decisive action by demanding accountability, in order
to heal the trauma suffered by the Rohingya and restore
their confidence in the possibility of a safe, dignified
and voluntary return to Myanmar. In that context, as
a State party to the Rome Statute, Bangladesh would
particularly stress the importance of addressing the
critical question of resources in cases referred to the
International Criminal Court by the Council.

Much has been said about the need for streamlining
the work of the various Council sanctions committees,
especially in terms of making their decision-making
processes more transparent and consultative for
non-Council members. In relation to the latest Rohingya
humanitarian crisis, we will particularly remain attuned
to the Council's actions on possible sanctions, as
recommended by different mandate holders. We would
also wish to see information shared in a transparent
manner on actions taken against Member States that
have reportedly violated the Council's own sanctions
regime, particularly in cases of arms transfers.

To conclude, we would urge the Council to give
due recognition and space to the voices of victims by
allowing the representatives of the Rohingya to come
and share their narratives with the Council. One clear
facet of the much anticipated reform of the Security
Council must be to further enhance its human face
and interactions.

