Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Let me join our
colleagues in offering you, Mr. President, our warmest
congratulations on a successful presidency. We also
want to thank you for this wonderful gift of the songs
of Habib Koite, who we understand is Mali's greatest
singer.

We also agree with your opening observation that
these wrap-up sessions are useful for reflection. I
certainly agree also with what Ambassador Valdivieso
said, that we can build and develop on them. And I
agree with him that we can do more advertising, but
ultimately there is a market test. If we are sufficiently
reflective and thoughtful, I think the audience will
appear.

As this is the last wrap-up session for the year,
we thought that it might be useful to do a wrap-up for
the year, and not just the month.

The Security Council has 15 members: five
permanent, five departing this year and five departing
next year. Using this numerical structure of 15, we
would like to suggest that the Council had five
successful, five unsuccessful and five moderately
successful files this year. I shall first speak of the
successful files.

The first successful file is terrorism and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. The adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) clearly represented one of the
high points of the Security Council in its entire history.
With one resolution, 189 nations were obliged to
comply with far-reaching anti-terrorism moves.
Without the Security Council, this could not have
happened. This event, more than anything else,
demonstrated the usefulness and indispensability of the
Security Council. If there are any doubts about that, let
us imagine what the world would have done after 11
September if the Security Council did not exist. We
also feel that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
done impressive work, and that Ambassador
Greenstock has been deservedly and universally
praised for his chairmanship.

The second successful file is East Timor, Of all
the issues on the agenda of the Security Council, only
one promises a full and complete recovery: East Timor.
In 2001, the Council adopted an important presidential
statement spelling out exactly what would be needed to
preserve a success story, that is, a continuing
peacekeeping mission comprising military, civilian
police, and civilian components, all of which would be
provided assured and assessed funding from the
peacekeeping budget. If we mismanage our exit
strategy from East Timor, as we did perhaps in the
Central African Republic and Somalia, we will
jeopardize the only real success story of the Security
Council in recent times. Indeed, at his year-end press
conference, when Secretary-General Kofi Annan was
asked what he was optimistic about, he replied, "East
Timor and Sierra Leone".

The third success story is therefore Sierra Leone
and Liberia. The story here is simple. Compare Sierra
Leone in the year 2000, when United Nations
peacekeepers were held hostage by the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), with 2001, when United Nations
peacekeepers disarmed the RUF. The sanctions on
Liberia obviously helped, and the billion dollars
Member States have paid for the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone have been well spent. But this
major investment must now be protected. We must
ensure successful elections next May.

The fourth successful file is Afghanistan.
Afghanistan began 2001 as a forsaken country
receiving single-issue focus by the Council. After 11
September, the decisive intervention of the United
States-led military coalition, exercising the right of
self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter, paved the
way for a new Afghanistan to emerge. Mr. Brahimi was
the midwife at the difficult labour in Bonn. So far, the
delivery has been successful. But babies require great
care to avoid the usual perils of infant mortality.

Successful file number five is in the procedural
area. On the procedural front, two success stories stand
out. First, a level playing field was created for all 15
members on the speakers list with the decision to go
for balloting or lottery. I thank Jamaica for that. We
agree with Ambassador Greenstock that we can
improve on it by having the lottery earlier. Secondly,
Ambassador Greenstock's 15 + 15 series of lunches,
which he referred to, have generated many useful ideas
for improving the Council's work.

Let me turn now to the unsuccessful files. Here,
again, there are four substantive and one procedural
files.
The first unsuccessful file is the Middle East.
This needs no elaboration. The Council could not find
a role for itself whereby it could fulfil its primary
responsibility to handle a serious threat to international
peace and stability. But I also agree with Ambassador
Greenstock in this regard, that we came up with useful
ideas at the lunch with the Secretary-General on
Wednesday, 19 December.

The second unsuccessful file is Western Sahara.
Despite spending hundreds of millions of dollars on the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara, which we believe costs $50 million a year, and
the enormous efforts of the Secretary-General's
envoys, negotiations have stalled. A number of recent
developments seriously threaten the ceasefire regime.
The Council must manage this issue very carefully in
accordance with the relevant resolutions.

The third unsuccessful file is Georgia. Despite the
efforts of the Secretary-General's envoy and the work
of the Group of Friends - and in this regard I am glad
that Ambassador Chowdhury, speaking earlier, noted
that the work of the Group of Friends should become
more transparent and accountable 4 there has been no
movement. Indeed there have even been adverse
developments. When will the Council admit that all its
efforts have failed because of the lack of unity?

The fourth unsuccessful file is Angola. Angola
presents a similarly depressing story. The humanitarian
and human rights situations have continued to
deteriorate. UNITA remains defiant. In my notes, I was
going to say there has been no good news lately from
Angola, but as we all know, this morning Ambassador
Gambari finally delivered some good news, which we
hope will be built upon.

On the procedural front, the fifth file is the
Working Group on Sanctions. The Working Group,
under the chairmanship of Bangladesh, was scheduled
to complete its work on 30 November 2000, 13 months
ago. Bangladesh did a great job in that Working Group.
But all the elected members which participated in the
Working Group will be leaving the Council in 10 days'
time. The institutional memory will leave with them.

Let me now turn to the moderately successful
files, of which four are substantive and one is
procedural. The first moderately successful file is
Eritrea and Ethiopia. On balance, the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) is a United
Nations peacekeeping success story. The Governments
of Eritrea and Ethiopia deserve commendation for
complying with fundamental obligations. But there
remain serious problems. United Nations flights are
jeopardized because they cannot fly directly. The
Border Commission lacks funds - a classic case of
being penny-wise and pound-foolish.

The second moderately successful file is Kosovo.
The Kosovo-wide elections were a success. But they
have not brought Kosovo one step closer to any final
resolution. There is no exit strategy. There are not even
regular reviews of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We face the danger of the "Cyprusization" of the
Kosovo file.

The third moderately successful file is Iraq. Iraq
is clearly the second most difficult file of the Security
Council. I think we all know which is the first. Iraq has
divided Council members for years. The unanimous
adoption of Security Council resolution 1382 (2001) on
29 November was a step in the right direction. But
there is now enormous pressure on the Council to reach
agreement on the Goods Review List by 30 May 2002.
The Council is also committed to a comprehensive
settlement of the issue, including any clarification
necessary for the implementation of resolution 1284
(1999). Whether the Council can deliver on this may
well be one of its biggest challenges in 2002.

The fourth moderately successful file is the Great
Lakes. The picture on the Great Lakes is mixed. There
was a successful Security Council mission in May, ably
led by Ambassador Jean-David Levitte. President
Mandela pulled off the impossible, securing an
agreement to create a new transitional government in
Burundi. The difficulties remain with the
implementation. The peace process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains fragile, as that country
continues to be a subject of plunder, as documented by
the Kassem report, which we heard during your
presidency. Clearly, new thinking is needed in the
Great Lakes region.

The fifth moderately successful file is on the
procedural front. Despite an agreement in principle to
reform the annual report of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, little progress has been made on the
new format, primarily because the informal working
group on documentation and other procedural questions
rarely meets. There is one logjam, but the question is
how we are to deal with the analytical portion of the
report. We have thought of a simple proposal, which
we will put forward at the next informal meeting.

In conclusion, we should stress that our list can in
no way be definitive or authoritative. Our key purpose
is to generate a thoughtful and reflective discussion,
which we hope will lead to an improvement in the
Council's work on these files. We have also not
touched upon the hardy perennials, including Cyprus,
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force (UNDOF), Somalia, and so on and so forth. In
each of them, there was a mixture of good news and
bad news. But, clearly, the Council needs to do a
review of long-standing files to either rejuvenate them
or close them.

Finally, we would also like to join our colleagues
in thanking Bangladesh, Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia and
Ukraine for their splendid contributions over the past
year. A new spirit of camaraderie exists among the
elected members, thanks to Ireland and the leadership
of Ambassador Richard Ryan. We now look forward to
working with Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and
Syria before we ourselves depart a year from now.

