Mr. Soler Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, allow me to join others in congratulating
the Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals on
their briefings this morning. Our delegation
acknowledges the significant work carried out by both
Tribunals in providing peace, justice and reconciliation
to Rwanda and to the republics of the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, we hail and thank all of the
staff of the Tribunals for their work, in particular their
efforts to ensure compliance with the goals of the
completion strategies as laid out in resolutions 1503
(2003) and 1534 (2004).

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), we are
pleased to note the satisfactory cooperation received
from the Governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Montenegro. It is important that that cooperation
and dialogue continue, in particular with regard to
witness protection and enforcing sentences. However,
we are concerned by the report's observation that
cooperation by the Government of Serbia is not
satisfactory with regard to access to archives and key
documents and to the capture of those who are still
fugitives, including Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic.

With regard to the work of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), our delegation
has taken note of the recent arrests, the workload that
those new cases mean for the Tribunal and the effects
that that will have on the expectations contained in the
completion strategy. We therefore await with interest
the result of the deliberations that the Tribunal will
have to carry out as soon as possible to deal with this
new workload. We are committed to working
constructively on the basis of that analysis.

With regard to the situation of ICTR fugitives,
my delegation is concerned at the recent report by the
Office of the Prosecutor that indicates insufficient
cooperation by the Governments of Kenya and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge the parties
to comply with their legal obligations in order to meet
the objectives of the Tribunal as established in
resolution 1503 (2003).

The ICTY and ICTR were not established as
permanent institutions, and therefore their task should
be completed in full, as established in the completion
strategies adopted by the Security Council. Therefore,
the Tribunals need the infrastructure and the
administrative and judicial staff necessary to ensure
that both of them can meet their objectives with the
same diligence as we have seen thus far in their work.

We also believe that it is of the greatest
importance to listen to the concerns and considerations
put forward by both Tribunals with regard to the
retention of experienced staff. That issue could
indubitably have negative repercussions for the work
of the Tribunals. We acknowledge and thank the United
Nations Secretariat for the measures taken last year in
that context, and we urge it to take additional measures
to ensure that the Tribunals have the personnel they
need to finish their tasks on time and in an efficient
manner.

Finally, we note the studies and proposals made
by the Tribunals on their legacies and residual issues,
and we thank them in particular for the effective
communication and interaction with the Council's
informal working group on the Tribunals. We agree
with them that the Council should ensure the creation
of an effective jurisdictional mechanism to resolve
those residual issues and to consider options for trials
of individuals captured after 2010.
