Mr. Ruganda (Uganda): My delegation
welcomes you, Mr. President, the Secretary-General
and the Ministers present here to this debate on the
Middle East. We thank you for organizing this debate
at this time and at this level. It is a clear testimony to
the commitment of the Security Council and of the
international community to the ongoing efforts towards
the resolution of the Middle East conflicts and towards
ensuring lasting peace and security in the region.

We also welcome the Secretary-General and
thank him for his briefing on the overall situation in
the Middle East, the progress made so far, the
challenges and what more needs to be done. Uganda
commends the efforts and initiatives of the Quartet,
Egypt, the Arab League and other actors in that regard.

We are convinced that a durable solution to the
Middle East conflict can be achieved only through
negotiations and agreement among the parties
concerned. We continue to support all the parties in the
Middle East in their efforts to achieve a comprehensive
peace based on the vision of a region in which two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by
side in peace within secure and recognized borders, as
envisaged in resolution 1860 (2009). We call upon both
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority to
remain committed to the irreversibility of the peace
process, based on previous agreements and obligations.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, my
delegation is encouraged by the reduction in the
number of incidents since the most recent briefing on
this subject. We welcome the summary report of the
Secretary-General and the Board of Inquiry. However,
we are concerned at the fact that the situation remains
fragile. There is still no permanent ceasefire, there
remain incidents of violence, and the levels of
humanitarian assistance reaching Gaza are below what
is urgently required. There is an urgent need for a
durable and fully respected ceasefire, for an end to
arms smuggling and for the reopening of crossing
points, as envisioned in resolution 1860 (2009).

We reiterate our commendation of Egypt and
other parties for the role that they continue to play in
facilitating the ceasefire talks between Israel and
Palestine. We are also concerned that the divisions
among Palestinian groups persist, and we call upon
them to resolve their differences through dialogue and
to reconcile and forge a common front.

We note with concern that, while $4.5 billion
were pledged in March this year during the
International Conference in Support of the Palestinian
Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, the provision
of immediately needed materials for construction has
not been possible, owing mainly to the blockade. We
therefore call upon all parties concerned to ensure that
those pledges are honoured and used for Gaza
reconstruction programmes.

The situation in the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory also raises concern. We note from
the briefing that there has been a significant rise in
settler activities both in the West Bank and in East
Jerusalem. We therefore call for an end to all settler
activities.

With regard to Lebanon, Uganda welcomes the
improvement in the political and security situations.
We commend the steps taken to improve relations
between Lebanon and Syria, including the
establishment of diplomatic relations. My delegation
also welcomes the commitment of the Lebanese
leadership to free and fair parliamentary elections,
scheduled for 7 June.

We urgently need to give new impetus to the
search for a solution to the conflict in the Middle East.
In that regard, Uganda fully supports the proposal by
the Russian Federation to convene, in consultation with
the Quartet and other parties, an international
conference on the Middle East peace process in
Moscow this year.

Finally, Uganda wishes to thank the Russian
delegation for the draft presidential statement, which
Uganda fully supports.

