Mr. Bessedik (Algeria): At the outset, I would like
to thank Mrs. Retno Lestari Priansari Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia, for
organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict - a subject of enormous
importance that is a matter of high priority and concern
for my country, Algeria. I would also like to thank in
particular the Permanent Representative of Indonesia
for his concept note (S/2019/385, annex). We fully share
his views on the priority areas he identified.

Algeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Let me be clear - humanitarian law is a sensitive
issue and no compromise can be tolerated. It must
be respected in all circumstances so as to ensure the
survival of the values of humanity and, very often,
simply to protect human lives, which is an obligation,
not an option.

The changing nature of contemporary armed
conflict and of the means and methods of warfare
highlights the constantly shifting challenges that civilian
populations are facing around the globe. That change
raises multiple questions regarding the applicability
of international humanitarian law and its efficiency
as we celebrate this year the seventieth anniversary of
the cornerstone of international humanitarian law, the
Geneva Conventions, and the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), relating to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Despite the efforts made during the past two
decades to protect civilians in armed conflict through
the strengthening of peacekeeping mandates and their
implementation, and the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation process, following
the issuance of the Secretary-General's first report
on the issue (S/1999/957), the situation with regard
to the protection of civilians has, unfortunately, not
changed. At that time much remained to be done,
and the report cited the displacement of civilians and
refugees, serious human rights abuses, the use of sexual
violence and starvation of populations as a weapon of
war, the recruitment of child soldiers, the proliferation
of small arms, cross-border movements, the difficulty
of delivering emergency humanitarian aid and attacks
against humanitarian personnel - all of which are still
characteristics of the many conflicts that are shaking
the planet.

The protection of civilians must be the core of any
mediation and conflict resolution effort, and mediators
must attach special importance to that aspect. In that
regard, I would like to share with the Council our Vision
of the way forward and, in particular, how the Security
Council and the United Nations and its Member States
could act.

First, there is an imperative need to establish a
comprehensive, coherent and concrete approach to the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Second, we need to adopt an inclusive strategy that
attacks the root causes of conflict and ensures the long-
term protection of civilians.

Third, we must strengthen the international and
domestic legal frameworks in post-conflict settings.
States must, inter alia, adopt legislation that punishes
the most serious violations of the Geneva Conventions
and their Protocols Additional.

Fourth, the protection of civilians has to obey the
principles of universality and non-selectivity. In that
regard, we deplore the fact that, in many situations,
the international community is doing little or nothing,
especially with regard to populations under foreign or
colonial occupation.

Fifth, no one is above the law. To that end, it is
important to prevent all violations defined as such in
the various legal instruments.

Sixth, more needs to be done to ensure that
humanitarian personnel have access to the most
vulnerable and that they be treated with respect
and dignity. Action should be taken against
humanitarian personnel who Violate the principles of
humanitarian action.

Seventh, it is important to ensure more effective
coordination between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, and to
further involve regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, which has made great
progress in that regard.

Eighth, the Security Council should consider the
systematic inclusion of the monitoring of human rights
in all peacekeeping mandates so that Violations of
human rights and humanitarian rights are reported and
necessary measures can be taken. This meeting must be
seen as a reaffirmation of our collective commitment
to protecting civilians in situations of conflict and
be the first step towards a transition to a policy of
non-indifference.

Lastly, when all States and all parties engaged in
armed conflict respect international humanitarian law,
it will be easier to create a more humane world.

