Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I express my sincere congratulations to Viet Nam, Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Niger and Tunisia on having begun their work in the Security Council. I also join other countries in expressing appreciation for the work of Peru, Poland, Equatorial Guinea, Cote d'Ivoire and Kuwait during the term that just ended. I am also grateful for the excellent organization of this open debate and Viet Nam's efforts to ensure an open and inclusive Security Council during its presidency, and I also congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency during the first month of the decade of implementation. Seventy-five years ago, the world was emerging from one of the most brutal wars in history. The United Nations was built upon those fragile ashes. It is we, the peoples of the world, who strengthen those foundations year after year. After three-quarters of a century, the principles of the Charter of the United Nations remain intact, but in the face of destructive narratives inveighing against multilateralism, the threat of a resurgence in nationalism and an increase in violent extremism, today's debate represents a fresh opportunity to renew our commitment to the Charter of the United Nations. Ecuador is acountry of peace and is especially proud not only as a founding Member of the Organization, but also for having presided over one of the committees responsible for drafting the text of the Charter pertaining precisely to this area. Likewise, Ecuador held the first rapporteurship of the First Committee, dealing with disarmament and international security issues, and consequently had the honour of presenting to the General Assembly the first draft resolution which that organ adopted on the establishment of a commission to address the problems raised by the discovery of atomic energy (General Assembly resolution 1 (1)). This year, 2020, when we will celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary the Organization, will be key to determining the future of international peace and security for the new decade and beyond. This year will see the convening of the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We must be more ambitious and move towards the universalization of the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. This year will also provide us with the opportunity to improve the United Nations peacebuilding architecture and, consequently, that of the entire world. We have 10 years left to achieve Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is focused on achieving peace, justice and strong institutions, as well as the other Goals, taking into account that peace and development are mutually reinforcing and that both are predicated upon just and inclusive societies. The subject of this open debate is exceptionally timely in that, in addition to its action-oriented approach, itis forward-looking. We have just experienced difficult times of great uncertainty, while geopolitical tensions are at their highest level this century, as Secretary- General Antonio Guterres said in his statement of 6 January, where he urged us not to forget the terrible human suffering caused by war (SG/SM/19929). In that connection, I would like to recall Pope Francis' appeal that all parties "avoid an escalation of the conflict and keep alive the flame of dialogue and self-restraint, in full respect of international law". While one of the great achievements of our Organization has been to avoid a third world war, conflicts nevertheless continue to rage in several regions. The year 2020 offers us an opportunity to put an end to those conflicts, but others might still arise. It is up to us and us alone, as Member States, to choose the path to take. Without political will, the Security Council and our own institutions are reduced to empty shells. More specifically, we must endeavour to ensure that this new decade is not remembered as one of unilateral action, but rather as the decade of collective effort. We will broaden the scope of our efforts to advance the Organization's work, as well to tackle our common challenges and to increase awareness and understanding of the value of the Charter of the United Nations. We will therefore be able to promote the defence of its founding principles; indeed, the guardians of the Charter are our peoples. Finally, while the General Assembly strives to reach a comprehensive decision on the reform of the Security Council, the Council's permanent and non-permanent members alike must broaden open activities, such as this debate, and use the most transparent and inclusive working methods during their presidencies. We will defend the Charter of the United Nations by listening more to one another, fostering dialogue and resolving disputes exclusively through peaceful means. Let us practice tolerance and coexist as good neighbours.
