Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation is
pleased to see you, Mr. President, presiding over our
meeting today. We welcome President Faure
Essozimna Gnassingbe of Togo to the Council and are
pleased that he has personally participated in this
meeting. We congratulate Togo for organizing this
debate on the impact of drug trafficking and organized
crime in West Africa and the Sahel region. We thank
the Secretary-General and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UN ODC) for their informative remarks.

In recent years, West Africa has made significant
progress towards security and development. The
violent conflicts and election-related violence that
devastated the region for many years have ended, and
countries that were ravaged by conflicts are going
through a post-conflict development phase. That
progress is increasingly at risk from the threat posed by
transnational organized crime, including with regard to
illicit weapons, drug trafficking, maritime insecurity in
the Gulf of Guinea and terrorism.

Drug trafficking and organized crime have
negative impacts on the security and stability of States.
The international community, in collaboration with the
countries of the region, should continue to support
regional initiatives to fight the scourge of drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, we are
of the view that the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) should coordinate their efforts to support
the region and the countries of the Sahel to fight
organized crime.

In that regard, we welcome the initiative taken by
UNODC to closely work with ECOWAS to develop a
regional plan that includes aggressive measures to fight
drug trafficking and organized crime in the region.
South Africa is of the View that that intervention,
coordinated with and integrated within the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), is in direct
support to the implementation of the ECOWAS
political declaration and its regional action plan on
drug trafficking, organized crime and drug abuse.

South Africa supports the close collaboration on
security sector reform by the West Africa Coast
Initiative with the Department for Political Affairs,
UNOWA, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and INTERPOL. In our View, that is a concrete
example of an integrated and effective approach to
fighting drug trafficking and organized crime. South
Africa encourages the countries of the region to
develop an integrated drug control strategy that
addresses the capacities of countries to combat drug
trafficking and organized crime. In that regard, the
region needs a comprehensive and integrated approach

that strengthens coordination among the countries of
the region and countries of origin, transit and final
destination.

The Libyan crisis has injected new elements of
instability in an already vulnerable area. There is no
denying the fact that the Sahel region had its own set
of challenges prior to the onset of the Libyan crisis.
However, literally overnight, the entire region was
forced to deal with the consequences of the unfolding
crisis in Libya, which brought with it an inflow of large
numbers of returning jobless migrants and large
quantities of weapons and ammunition. The effects of
that disturbing combination manifested themselves in
different forms in the different countries that comprise
the Sahel. What started as a conflict in one country has
now spilled over to become a regional problem with
unprecedented consequences.

The proliferation of arms brings to bear greater
challenges on the Sahel region, of a greater magnitude,
and for Governments that already have to deal with
porous borders, trafficking in drugs and weapons, and
the presence of armed groups and active terrorist
groups. Those challenges pose an obvious threat to
international peace and security. The region has
additional problems to contend with, such as increased
criminal activity and armed clashes with security
forces as a result of weapon trafficking from Libya,
heightened radicalization and widening networks of
terrorist groupings, such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb and Boko Haram.

Clear political will exists among the States of the
subregion to find common solutions to their common
problems. Looking forward, we urge the United
Nations system to address those challenges in a
coherent and integrated manner, working in partnership
with those countries and in accordance with their
national and subregional structures. The international
community has an important role to play in facilitating
support and technical assistance through coordination
by the United Nations. Such systemic interventions,
managed in an integrated and coordinated manner, will
constitute an investment in the long-term stability of
the subregion.

Finally, South Africa fully supports the draft
presidential statement to be adopted later today.

