Mr. Eitel (Germany): I should like to thank you,
Sir, for convening this meeting regarding the agenda item
"The situation in the occupied Arab territories". We, of
course, support what Italy will say on behalf of the
European Union. To that I would like to add the
following.

 

The situation in the Middle East had remarkably
improved after Oslo and Madrid. Deeply rooted hostility
affecting the whole Middle East region had given way to an
effective peace process. This process has already yielded
results that would have been unimaginable not so long ago.
Recent events remind us, however, that the peace process
is not yet all-inclusive, and that it continues to be
threatened by terrorism.

At the same time, it is obvious that lasting stability in
the Palestinian territories requires the genuine support of
the local population. It is only natural that they want to see
concrete improvements as regards their own living
conditions. Concrete successes in this regard will lead to
ever greater dynamics for the peace process and will
successfully discourage terrorism and extremism aimed at
derailing what has been achieved with so many sacrifices
and efforts over the past years.

Terrorism has taken a particularly heavy toll on Israel.
In numerous, horrible terrorist attacks the lives of Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin and of many - too many -
innocent civilians have been taken by enemies of peace. We
feel deep sympathy for the people of Israel mourning these
losses, and we understand Israeli security needs.

At the same time, we are concerned about reports of
economic hardship in the Palestinian territories. The
security measures imposed by Israel lead to economic
losses totalling several million dollars per day. They place
a heavy burden on a civilian population that in recent
elections endorsed the peace process by a wide margin.

My Government fully agrees with and actively
contributed to the results of the summit meeting held in
Sharm El Sheikh on 13 March 1996, which had the
objectives of enhancing the peace process, promoting
security and combating terror. Among other things, the
participants of this summit meeting decided, and I quote:

"To support the Israeli-Palestinian agreements, the
continuation of the negotiating process and to
politically and economically reinforce it, to enhance
the security situation for both, with special attention to
the current and pressing economic needs of the
Palestinians". (S/1996/238, annex)

In the light of this, we strongly welcome the efforts
made by the Palestinian authorities to combat terrorism and
to prevent the territory they control from being used for
terrorist attacks against Israel.
We also welcome Israeli decisions over the last few
weeks to ease parts of the measures imposed on the
Palestinian territories. We feel that these should be
followed by more and further-reaching decisions to ease
the blockade, and that Israel should reconsider the other
measures that have been imposed.

We call upon all parties concerned to use maximum
restraint and to stand against any escalation of violence.
All provisions of international law must be respected,
including common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions.

Many decades of confrontation and public
condemnation, including through United Nations organs,
did not change the situation in the Middle East. A few
years of sincere negotiations have made all the difference.
Therefore, this is the time for supporting the peace
process, the time for encouraging Israel and the
Palestinian authorities to cooperate in ending economic
hardship and bringing prosperity and enhanced security to
their peoples, and the time for calling upon those who are
not yet participating in this process to join in the pursuit
of peace, prosperity and security for the whole Middle
East region.

Germany has contributed considerably to the
economic development of the Palestinian territories and
will continue to do so.

