Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to express to you and the entire
Chinese delegation our sincere congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We have noted the excellent manner in
which you have conducted the work of the Council,
ensuring the success of its deliberations on a broad
range of problems, notably the tragic impact of the
earthquake in Haiti and the resulting enormous
destruction and loss of life. Among the dead or injured
were members of the staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, who were carrying out
their duties in defence of the principles and ideals of the
Organization, and including the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and head of mission, the late
Hedi Annabi of Tunisia. May God have mercy on their
souls.

I also wish to congratulate the five new
non-permanent members of the Security Council. We
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his excellent
briefing this morning.

Today we are discussing once more the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
in the context of the deadlock to which the peace
process has regressed since the negotiations stopped,
and amid all the events that have increased tensions
and escalated the situation in the region, despite the
efforts of many international parties to reconvene the
peace negotiations.

The excesses of Israel and its practices in the
occupied Palestinian territory have further complicated
the situation and placed obstacles in the way of the
revival of the peace process. The continued settlement
activity; the demolition of houses; the evictions of

Palestinians in East Jerusalem; the excavations around
the Al-Aqsa mosque and other holy places in the city;
and the plans to change its geographic and demographic
character: all of these constitute grave violations of
international instruments and resolutions of international
legitimacy, in particular General Assembly resolutions
on Jerusalem, as well as exacerbating tension
throughout the region.

The continued blockade unjustly imposed on the
Gaza Strip and the policies of closures in Palestinian
areas and of restricting Palestinians' movements have
contributed greatly to increased tensions in the region.
This is despite repeated calls from the international
community, notably from the Secretary-General in
numerous reports and through his efforts to urge the
Israeli authorities to lift the blockade and enable the
international bodies and organizations working in this
area to make progress in their reconstruction efforts
and in providing for the basic needs of the civilian
population in Gaza.

Tunisia has been consistently committed to the
principles of justice and peace; it is eager to achieve a
solution to the problem and alleviate the suffering of
the brotherly people of Palestine and favours the path
of peace. It therefore calls on international actors,
especially the Quartet, to step up their efforts to
pressure Israel to put an end to its provocative actions
and seriously engage in the peace process. This means,
essentially, halting settlement activities, lifting the
blockade on Gaza and all the restrictions on other
Palestinian territories and immediately ending all
activities that can alter Jerusalem's character or deprive
the Palestinian people of their rights.

In that context, Tunisia believes that the current
deadlock and the return of tensions to the region, as a
result of the total lack of progress in reconvening
negotiations, pose a grave threat to the situation in a
region that simply cannot take any more tension or
escalation. We therefore call on the international
community to redouble its efforts to surmount the
obstacles blocking the way to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace. Such a peace can be achieved
only through negotiations, and that requires trust and a
commitment by all parties concerned to existing
agreements and to the terms of reference of the peace
process.
In regard to the sister republics of Lebanon and
Syria, I reiterate our call for Israel's withdrawal from
Syrian and Lebanese occupied territories, based on the
option of a comprehensive settlement of all aspects of
the Middle East crisis, in a way that will strengthen
peace and stability for all the peoples of the region.

Tunisia, under the leadership of President Zine
El Abidine Ben Ali, puts the Palestinian question at the
top of its priorities and concerns. This steadfast,
principled attitude affirms my country's position vis-a-
vis the Palestinian people in their just struggle to
regain their national rights and establish an independent
State on their own land. We reiterate our support for all
efforts that seek a just and lasting settlement of the
Arab-Israeli conflict in a manner that can guarantee the
return of the occupied Arab territories, in accordance
with the resolutions of international legitimacy and the
terms of reference of the peace process, including the
Arab Peace Initiative.

Tunisia therefore reiterates its commitment, as a
peace-loving country that respects international law
and believes in humanity's values and ideals, to
pursuing all efforts to put an end to this long-standing
crisis and to the suffering of a people deprived for
decades of the exercise of their basic rights. We hope
to achieve concrete measures that can realize the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people to attain
freedom and sovereignty on their national soil, to
regain all occupied Arab territories and to achieve
peace for all peoples of the region. That alone will
eliminate all tensions and initiate a new era of stability
and peace.

