Mr. Biagini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2368 (2017), which
it co-sponsored. The resolution is aimed at updating
and expanding the international legal framework for
the sanctions regime against Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL)/Al-Qaida. Its implementation is now
paramount. The sustained military pressure on Da'esh,
as well as the depletion of its financial resources, has
diminished but not taken away the group's ability to
fund its supporters outside the conflict zone and to
carry out attacks on civilians. ISIL can still rely on
diversified sources of financing and has drawn income
from, inter alia, antiquities smuggling, the exploitation
of mineral resources and human trafficking.

Since resolution 2253 (2015) was adopted, the global
nature of the threat posed by terrorists has changed
and the international community has been confronted
with new challenges, including the increasing flow
of returning foreign terrorist fighters, the misuse of
the Internet and social media by terrorists and the
exploitation of human trafficking networks. The new
resolution acknowledges and tackles this evolving
scenario, which requires a coordinated response by
the international community. The United Nations must
spearhead the efforts for enhanced cooperation.

In an effort to address and detect the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, some States have adopted
and put in place the Advanced Passenger Information
and Passenger Name Records tools. These tools are an
important means to rein in thr movements of terrorists
and recruiters more effectively, and we encourage
Member States that have not yet done so to take the
necessary steps to develop them. Member States have
also taken concrete steps to strengthen their relationship
with the private sector with a View to responding
to terrorist use of information and communication
technologies. These public-private partnerships are of
paramount importance, not only in countering terrorism
financing, but also in detecting and removing terrorist
contacts on line.

With regard to the growing concern that terrorists
could benefit from trafficking in persons, we regret
that it was not possible to have more stringent language
in the resolution, stressing the exploitation of human
trafficking networks in conflict zones and the potential
nexus between that heinous practice and the financing
of terrorist organizations.

It is still imperative for the international community
to put into place an effective and coordinated response
to the terrorist threat for the purpose of eliminating
any gaps. It remains crucial to enhance cooperation
within and between public sector agencies, both
domestically and internationally, and to empower
financial intelligence units, law enforcement and
intelligence services to improve the exchange of
relevant information in a timely manner. Italy is
strongly committed to providing international judicial
and law enforcement cooperation in the framework of
transnational investigations.

Let me conclude by reiterating Italy's strong
appreciation of the work conducted by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team and of
the significant role played by the Office of the
Ombudsperson in its efforts to guarantee due process
and transparency.

