Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first of all thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
extend a special welcome to the Ambassador of the
Sudan. Needless to say, we will listen very carefully
to how the Government of the Sudan wants to take
forward the issue under discussion today.

Like many among us, the German delegation
was extremely impressed with the way the Sudanese
delegation, led by Prime Minister Hamdok, articulated
its vision for a new Sudan during the high-level week.
Our German Foreign Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas,
expressed that during the high-level meeting on the
Sudan when he offered Germany's full and concrete
support for the transitional Government and the people
of the Sudan. I think that the Security Council must ask
itself the exact question of how we can best support the
Sudanese vision for peace. How can we help implement
the priority that the transitional Government attaches
to ending the conflicts in the country, as clearly stated
in the constitutional agreement and so convincingly
articulated by Prime Minister Hamdok here in
New York?

One important tool of the Council is the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and it is clear to us as co-penholder that
we as the Council members should live up to our
responsibility by working towards two goals with
regard to UNAMID.

First, in the short term, we must provide the best
stabilization efforts in Darfur and ensure immediate
expert support to the ongoing peace talks. We need to
secure UNAMID's investment in peace and stability
in Darfur - an investment that is needed more
urgently than ever at this decisive time for the future
of the Sudan. As we just heard from Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix, that is an aspect that was
also recently emphasized by Prime Minister Hamdok
during the recent United Nations-African Union Visit
to the Sudan.

Secondly, in the medium term we should provide
a tailored, joint United Nations-African Union support
package that helps the Government achieve lasting
peace in Darfur and beyond. That is why we think that
we should not jeopardize UNAMID's ability to support
the peace process by directing the mission to focus on
completing its drawdown. Continuing UNAMID for a
further period oftime, as suggested as one option in the
report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(S/2019/816), would indeed, in our View, be the prudent
way forward. That would respond to the continued need
for stabilization in Darfur and preserve the international
engagement at such a crucial time, while peace talks are
being held, and would enable uninterrupted, continuous
support to the ongoing mediation by the Joint Special
Representative and his team.

If we take our commitments to improve
peacekeeping seriously, we should not wind up a
peacekeeping mission at precisely the moment when
peace talks have just been revitalized, even more so
because they have the potential of ending a decades-old
conflict. Taking a disruptive decision against UNAMID
now would turn our joint commitment to the primacy of
politics on its head.

At the same time, we think that the Council should
encourage the United Nations and the African Union
to continue their conversation with the Sudanese
Government about a follow-on mission to UNAMID.
Such a mission should, in our View, reflect the priority
that the Government attaches to peacebuilding,
reconciliation and tackling the root causes of conflict.

