Mr. Brammertz: I thank the Council for giving
me the opportunity to present the 11th report on the
completion strategy of the Office of the Prosecutor.

I will provide the Council with a brief update on
our judicial work, the cooperation of States, efforts
undertaken to support the work of prosecution services
in the former Yugoslavia and, importantly, the
organizational plans for my Office during the final
phase of the Tribunal's existence.

It is expected that 2009 will be the last year of
full trial activity before the downsizing of the Tribunal
begins in 2010. During the last six months, the
Prosecution has made significant progress in achieving
the completion strategy goals. Since I submitted my
written report to the Security Council in the middle of
May, the Prosecution has completed its final arguments
in a trial of two accused - the Lukie and Lukie case -
and judgement is expected in the coming months.

There are at present six cases - and 19
accused - in trial. One of these cases, a complex
prosecution of seven accused persons charged with
crimes committed in Srebrenica, is now in its final
stages. The Prosecution's final brief in the Popovie et
al. case is due at the end of July and final arguments
are scheduled for the end of August.

The other cases in trial - the Bordevie and
Perisic' trials - are well advanced into the prosecution
phase, while the Prlie et al. and Gotovina et al. cases
are now in their defence phase.

Despite the prosecution's efforts to move forward
through the trial schedule, some additional delays have
occurred. Most notably, in February 2009, the Seselj
case had to be adjourned as a result of difficulties in
securing the remaining witnesses' evidence.
Significant progress has been made in the last
four cases currently at the pretrial stage. The Karadeie
prosecution team has been working consistently to
ensure the case is ready to start trial shortly. After a
lengthy adjournment due to Jovica Stanisie's health
problems, the Stanisie and Simatovic' case is due to
recommence soon. The prosecution is ready to begin
the Stanisie and Zupljanin trial, which is expected to
begin in September, and the Tolimir case should begin
trial in September as well. In order to ensure the
immediate commencement of new trials, we have
moved quickly by reassigning staff finishing the
Popovic' et al. and Lukic' and Lukic' trials.

Prosecution work on appeals cases remains
constant and is expected to increase significantly in
future months. By the end of 2009, the Appeals
Division will have a continuing inventory of
24 appeals case.

The cooperation of States with my Office remains
critical to the successful completion of our trial and
appeals work. We continue to request the assistance of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia in a
number of areas, such as the provision of documents,
access to archives, ensuring that witnesses can testify
before the Tribunal, and assisting in locating and
arresting fugitives. I recently travelled again to those
countries, where I met with authorities at the political,
judicial and operational levels to raise all those
matters.

Since my last briefing to the Council, Serbia has
made additional progress in its cooperation with my
Office. The large majority of requests for assistance
have been complied with, including those for access to
documents and archives. As senior leadership trials are
ongoing and others will start soon, we hope that that
trend will continue.

The search for and arrest of Ratko Mladic' and
Goran Hadzic' remain the central issue in relation to
Serbia's cooperation. My Office remains in close
contact with the services in charge of tracking fugitives
and closely follows their activities. During my recent
visits to Belgrade, I had full briefings on their work.

Developments at the political level in the past
year and the new leadership at the operational level
have led to an improvement in the professionalism and

the efficiency of the activities to locate and arrest the
remaining fugitives. I hope that the political authorities
in Serbia will provide all necessary support to the
professional work done at the operational level.
Cooperation must continue and hopefully will lead to
further concrete and positive results.

In my report, I have also expressed my concern
with regard to recent negative statements by senior
Government officials about the Tribunal's judicial
decisions. They seem to be in contradiction with the
level of cooperation on the ground.

With regard to Croatia, the remaining and only
outstanding issue is the prosecution's request that
Croatia provide a number of key military documents
related to Operation Storm in 1995. The lack of success
of efforts by my Office over a considerable period of
time to obtain those documents has required the
prosecution to bring the matter before the Trial
Chamber.

Croatia was ordered by the Tribunal to conduct an
investigation into the missing documents. In response,
Croatia submitted several reports, providing, in its
most recent submission, additional information on the
administrative investigation and supplementary
information on the chain of custody of the missing
documents. A number of meetings, focusing on those
outstanding matters, were held with the authorities.
Unfortunately, progress in the lengthy investigation has
been limited and, to date, most of the military
documents have not been submitted to the Tribunal. We
have raised with Croatia our concerns about the focus,
manner and methodology of the investigation
conducted.

That matter remains pending before the Chamber.
The trial has now entered the defence phase and is
nearing its completion. It is therefore crucial that
Croatia continue to focus its efforts on locating and
providing those key documents. I will remain in close
contact with the authorities in the hope of achieving
further progress in the near future, but I would also like
to take this opportunity to thank the Prime Minister for
his personal interest and determination to resolve this
issue.

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
cooperation, there are no specific outstanding issues in
relation to our trials. However, the judicial system of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to face serious
challenges, which could have an impact on its
cooperation with the Tribunal. I support all efforts
undertaken to strengthen its judicial capacity to cope
with the numerous unresolved war crimes cases. In that
regard, a national strategy for war crimes processing
was adopted last December and is a promising
development. Together with representatives of the
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
am in favour of maintaining an international presence
in judicial institutions, such as the Special Department
for War Crimes of the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Another priority of my Office is the support to
national jurisdictions prosecuting war crimes. Assisting
our colleagues in the former Yugoslavia in successfully
conducting war crimes prosecutions remains a key
component of the completion strategy. It is the best
way to ensure the successful continuation of our work.

In the next months, we will complete the process
of transferring investigative material to national
prosecution services. We are now ready to transfer
three cases involving 10 suspects to the Office of the
State Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The last
four cases, involving 11 suspects, will be transferred to
Bosnia and Herzegovina before the end of the year.

Responding to requests for assistance and making
available documents and archives are other important
aspects of that cooperation. We are providing such
information to prosecution offices, both within and
outside of the former Yugoslavia. In the past six
months, our transition team has handled over 90
requests for assistance. Interestingly, half of those
requests originated from countries outside of the
former Yugoslavia.

Although cooperation between prosecution
services is improving, national judiciaries continue to
face significant legal obstacles and challenges with
regard to the prosecution of war crimes cases.
Prohibitions on extraditing one State's nationals to
another State and the legal barriers to transferring war
crimes cases between States threaten their successful
investigation and prosecution. All authorities
concerned should address those issues by establishing
the necessary legal frameworks. That appears to be the
only way to avoid an impunity gap.

My Office has participated in several conferences
with prosecutors from the region to strengthen
cooperation in judicial matters between States of the
former Yugoslavia. One important recent achievement
in that process are databases and inventories of war
crimes cases in the region. Another important
development, which I announced during my last
briefing, is the establishment, with the support of the
European Commission, of a concrete cooperation
project that allows prosecutors from the region to be
integrated into our Office in The Hague. The first
liaison prosecutors are expected to start working in my
Office this month. That initiative, like others, reflects
the excellent interaction my Office has had with the
State and War Crimes Prosecutors' Offices in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia.

I would now like to briefly address the
organizational plans of my Office for the future. A
serious downsizing programme has been planned to
begin in 2010. In our budget proposal, which was
submitted to the Secretariat this week, we envisage,
over the next two years, a reduction of 60 per cent of
our posts and a 42-per-cent reduction in non-post items
in the Office of the Prosecutor. There will also be a
gradual redeployment of posts from the Trial Division
to the Appeals Division to meet their growing
workload.

While we are fully committed to the downsizing
process, I would like to once again stress the need to
retain our experienced and specialized staff members
in order to complete our work. In the present situation,
a considerable number of staff members have left my
Office and more could leave the institution because of
other opportunities elsewhere. It is therefore crucial
that their needs be taken into consideration and that
ways be found to retain our staff members until the end
of the trials. Together with the President and Registrar,
we will continue to address those issues with relevant
United Nations bodies and Secretariat offices.

Finally, I would like to thank the Council once
again for the continuing support provided to my Office.

