Mr. Berger (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Force Commanders for their thorough
briefings. I strongly welcome their presence here today.
Such annual consultations are always an excellent
opportunity for greater insight. The face-to-face
exchange with those on the ground is highly important
to our work here in New York. I would like to express
my gratitude to them for their work, and through them I
would like to thank all those serving, often under very
difficult circumstances, in peacekeeping operations.

In recent years, much has been achieved in terms
of reforming United Nations peacekeeping, including
shaping doctrine and reviewing capabilities. Building
on those efforts, we need to continue to adapt and
strengthen peacekeeping in order to make it more
effective. Missions, as has been said here before by
colleagues, must have the resources needed to do their
jobs, but in times of financial constraints it will be
necessary to make full use of the potential for higher
efficiency and increased performance.

In the area of mandates and mandate reviews, we
should focus our attention on formulating clear, realistic
and achievable mandates, on reviewing and adapting
those mandates in the light of changing circumstances
on the ground, and on preparing transitions and crafting
exit strategies. In terms of mandate implementation
and mission management, we need to continue to
work towards faster mission deployment and build-up,
and towards streamlining all aspects of field support.
Continuous dialogue among all relevant stakeholders is
crucial in that regard.

I would like to take the opportunity to interact
directly with the Force Commanders present and ask
them the following questions.

The Security Council has stressed the need for
inter-mission cooperation in various cases. In that
context, the cooperation between the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Operation in
C6te d'Ivoire has been mentioned here. I would like to
ask the Force Commanders to communicate their views
with regard to sharing scarce assets. Which practical
problems have arisen? Which approaches proved
successful? What lessons can be learned? Would they
have any proposals to share with the Security Council?

With regard to the use of modern technology,
situational awareness is crucial in theatre. A better
operational picture might assist in more safely
coping with the challenges faced by a mission. How
do the Force Commanders assess the use of modern
technology? I believe it was Major General Obi who
mentioned the case of Jonglei. In our View, that would
be a good example of a place where modern technology
could have been of great help.

With regard to common operational military
standards, contemporary peacekeeping operations
are more and more complex and multidimensional.
Common operational military standards could
facilitate the process of expanding the base of troop-
and police-contributing countries and at the same time
enhance the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
What is the Force Commanders' experience? What are
the areas in which those standards are most needed?

Finally, with regard to coordination within a
mission, coordination is one of the challenges of a
composite force. Common standards, training and
the interoperability of equipment are prerequisites for
effective coordination. In that regard, I understood
Lieutenant General Prakash's suggestions when he
commented on his experience. The question, apart from
what he said, is whether there are other experiences in
that regard that the Force Commanders could share with
the Council. Would they have any recommendations to
make in that area?

