Mr. Sabarullah Khan (Sri Lanka): My delegation
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and would like to make
the following remarks in its national capacity.

Today is a holiday in Sri Lanka. It is the Sinhala
and Tamil New Year, and our Permanent Mission is
closed for the holiday. That is why I am alone without
anybody sitting behind me in the Chamber.

Today, every Sri Lankan is celebrating the New
Year, but only a few years ago, the situation was
very different. As a country that suffered under the
oppressive yoke of terrorism for nearly three decades
until 2009, Sri Lanka understands the related challenges
and encourages genuine efforts to strengthen the
United Nations system and its role and effectiveness
in addressing the issue. Sri Lanka wholeheartedly
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
It is a scourge that is not exclusive to any one country or
region and is spreading across national borders.

We continue to be deeply concerned over the acute
and growing threat of foreign terrorist fighters. This
phenomenon has assumed serious proportions, given
the death and destruction caused by such organizations.
We have also to look at new and innovative ways to
counter this growing threat.

Today,terrorismtargetsvulnerableandmarginalized
communities, children, minorities, women and girls. It
is therefore imperative that we proactively include and
engage those entities of the United Nations system that
deal with children, minorities, women and girls. The
eradication of poverty, in concert with increased social
and economic opportunities, is essential to countering
human frustration and the threat of radicalization.
The General Assembly unanimously adopted the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to
enhance national, regional and international efforts to
counter terrorism.
We must also recognize that the building blocks
for enhancing international cooperation in these areas
are already contained in the efforts undertaken by the
General Assembly, in particular the Ad Hoc Committee
on International Terrorism. I must mention in this
context that, despite the support of most Member States
and a mandate of the General Assembly to come up
with a comprehensive legal framework to fill possible
gaps in the existing sectoral conventions on terrorism,
there has been a failure to muster the necessary political
will to break the current impasse surrounding the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

It is pertinent at this time to recall that the
conclusion of such a comprehensive convention was
one of the key components of the 2005 plan of action
to combat terrorism. While acknowledging these
continuing efforts, my delegation urges Member States
to cooperate fully in resolving any outstanding issues
that remain in order to ensure that a comprehensive
convention may be concluded successfully. Given the
threats we face today, there is no time more urgent than
now to do so, and we are already seized of the building
blocks to formulate a comprehensive response to these
threats to international peace and security.

