Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Gambari, for his
comprehensive briefing on his visit, and we reiterate
our full support for his good offices. My delegation is
encouraged by the positive tone of the message of Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, which confirms - as if
confirmation were still needed - that she is ready for
dialogue. We now await a gesture in the same direction
from the Burmese authorities.

The recent meetings of Aung San Suu Kyi with
the Minister of Labour, Aung Kyi, and her meeting
with the Central Executive Committee of her party are
developments in the right direction. The freeing of
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi is, however, indispensable in
order to enable her to fully play the important role
which falls to her as part of genuine political dialogue.

My delegation has noted with interest in the
statement of the Permanent Representative of Myanmar
in New York that "Relations with the United Nations
are the cornerstone of the foreign policy of our
country". In this context, my delegation invites the
United Nations authorities to translate that

commitment into concrete action. Meeting with
Mr. Gambari and initiating contacts with Aung San Suu
Kyi are positive actions in terms of process, but that
process must lead to some results. The majority of the
demands included in the presidential statement of
11 October (S/PRST/2007/37) still remain to be met.

Belgium remains particularly concerned about the
fate of the political prisoners and about the fact that
several hundred demonstrators from August and
September are still being held in detention. They must
be freed without delay.

International mobilization must continue. In this
context, all eyes will be on Singapore, where in the
coming days we will see the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Summit, followed by the East
Asia Summit, then by the ASEAN-European Union
Commemorative Summit. All countries of the region
agree that a return to the status quo ante is not an
option. It is essential that the Myanmar authorities also
realize this and factor it into their action.

The Security Council must continue to closely
follow the situation in Myanmar and to speak with a
unified and clear voice with regard to its expectations
from the Burmese authorities on the basis of a
timetable. Additionally, Belgium hopes that the
General Assembly's draft resolution on renewing
Mr. Gambari's good offices mission will enjoy the
broadest possible support. My delegation is also
attentively awaiting Special Rapporteur Pinhero's
report to the Human Rights Council following his visit
to the country.

In recent weeks, the European Union has adopted
targeted restrictive measures. The European Union has
also indicated its readiness to review those measures in
the light of developments on the ground and the results
of the good offices mission. The European Union
recently appointed its own Special Envoy, Mr. Piero
Fassino. He will coordinate the action of the European
Union in order to support the good offices of
Mr. Gambari and the action of the United Nations
vis-a-vis Myanmar, and to assist Myanmar on the path
towards democracy, respect for human rights,
reconciliation and prosperity.

Belgium pays tribute to the tireless efforts of the
Special Adviser, Mr. Gambari, and his team. My
delegation looks forward to Mr. Gambari's return to
Myanmar in the near future and the prospects for an

agreement on a permanent presence of his team in the
country.

