Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this debate, for the concept
paper (S/2014/725, annex) and for your able stewardship
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions.

Liechtenstein aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Switzerland on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and also with
the statement to be delivered by the representative of
Norway on behalf of the Group of Like-Minded States

on Targeted Sanctions. I have the honour to deliver the
following remarks on behalfof Costa Rica, Hungary, the
Netherlands, Slovenia and Switzerland, as well as my
own country. These remarks will focus on the follow-
up to Security Council referrals to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the use of the veto. I hope
the Ombudsperson and other members of the Council
will not misunderstand this as a lack of interest in the
issue of sanctions, which is also important, but it is also
in the interest of having an efficient debate.

When the Security Council created the ad hoc
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the ad hoc International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
it took care to ensure an effective follow-up. It invited
the Presidents and Prosecutors of those Tribunals to
conduct regular briefings, and created the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals to address
the day-to-day issues arising from the Tribunals'
work. All of us know the tremendous value of such an
established mechanism for interaction. We also know
that no such mechanism exists to address issues arising
from Security Council referrals to the ICC, despite
almost a decade having passed since the first such
referral by the Council of the situation in Darfur to
the ICC.

While individual delegations have made
commendable attempts to improve the interaction,
for example through informal, interactive dialogue
between the Council and the ICC Prosecutor, such
innovations have been ad hoc and were left unfinished.
In February 2013, the Council formally committed itself
to effectively following up on issues of cooperation
with international tribunals, including the ICC, but
that promise remains unfulfilled. As a consequence,
real issues arising from that relationship continue
to go unaddressed. In the case of Security Council
referrals, the Council can and should act as a powerful
enforcement mechanism. We believe it is high time for
the Council to start fulfilling its part of the bargain.

The failure of the Sudan, for example, to cooperate
with the ICC reflects badly on the Court, through no
fault on its own. The repeated failure of the Council,
however, to enforce its own resolution 1593 (2005),
which imposes an unambiguous obligation on the Sudan
to cooperate with the ICC, undermines the credibility
of the Council and empties of meaning its public
commitment to ensuring accountability for the worst
crimes under international law. Creating a follow-up
mechanism to deal with cooperation problems would
be a first step in the right direction.

cc "

Two no votes prevented the Council from
referring the situation in Syria to the ICC - two "no"
votes against 13 votes in favour, with 65 sponsors. We
certainly accept the veto as part of the United Nations
Charter, which we all ratified, but we do not accept
that it be used in a way contrary to the very purposes
and principles contained in the Charter. We have
repeatedly called on the permanent members to commit
to refraining from the use of the veto in situations
involving genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

The meeting convened last month by the French and
Mexican Foreign Ministers on that subject demonstrated
that many Member States share that view. We applaud
the French initiative and hope to see more concrete
results soon. In our View, a code of conduct should also
have a preventive function. It should allow the Council
to stop these horrendous crimes from happening in the
first place. We also believe that elected members of the
Council should sign on to such a code of conduct. They
have an equally important obligation not to vote against
Council action in situations involving atrocity crimes.
For our part, as non-members, we will continue to work
through the ACT Group to contribute to the success of
that initiative.

