Mr. Butagira (Uganda): For some years, Uganda
has been fighting a lone battle in the northern part of
the country against a brutal, vicious rebel group known
as the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). The group has
killed, maimed or mutilated children as well as adults.
They have no political agenda beyond sheer barbarism
and cannibalism. Those horrors have not been on the
radar of the international community, despite the fact
that they are well known and documented. It took the
events of 11 September 2001 for the world to realize
that terrorism was a threat to international peace and
security.

In the wake of the attacks of 11 September, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1373 (2001), on
counter-terrorism. The resolution was mainly aimed at
Al Qaeda and the Taliban, and was limited in scope.
Yet terrorism is terrorism, wherever it occurs and
regardless of who commits it. Now, with the recent
brutal murder of Russian school children, the point has
been brought home that there should be no lull in the
fight against terrorists. The delegation of Uganda
therefore welcomes resolution 1566 (2004), which was
long overdue. Before I comment on that resolution, let
me say the following.

Uganda has been pressured to talk to the
murderous LRA rebels. Unfortunately, that has the
effect of appeasing and encouraging the rebels in their
murderous adventure. Terrorists should be fought, and
not appeased. The crusaders of the gospel of peace
talks have not, in the same vein, urged a dialogue with
Bin Laden. Sometimes the double standards make one
sick.

That said, Uganda has nevertheless offered to talk
with the rebels. Not surprisingly, they have not
responded, as they have no political agenda. Our offer
to them still stands, if they lay down their arms. We
also have an amnesty in place. Those who have
responded have been welcomed and reintegrated into
society. In the meantime, the war against them is
almost over, with large numbers of rebel commanders
captured or killed. I can do no better than to quote the
words of one of the top rebel commanders to have been
captured, Brigadier Kenneth Banya. He said, in
appealing to his boss to respond to the amnesty, "Don't
let the amnesty period expire while you are still in the
bush. Time for rebellion is over. Don't go back to
Sudan, where you will surely die."

Many abducted children and adults, including the
terrorist leader's wives, have been freed. Internally
displaced persons will soon go back to their homes.
Although we still need humanitarian assistance, the
situation is not as bleak as the one painted by our
detractors. Children are going to school in the region,
and the Government recently paid school fees for all
students whose parents are in camps. We are grateful to
agencies such as UNICEF for their assistance in that
regard.

Resolution 1566 (2004) has made it clear that all
intentional acts of violence against civilians are
criminal and unjustifiable, whatever the motivation -
whether political, philosophical, ideological, racial,
ethnic or religious. That resolve on the part of the
international community, as epitomized by the
resolution, is commendable. Although the resolution
falls short of coming out with a global blacklist of
terror suspects and groups, it has nevertheless
established a Security Council working group that will
work on measures and procedures to deal with terror
suspects outside of Al Qaeda and the Taliban. It is
Uganda's hope that that process will be concluded
soon, so that the likes of LRA or similar rebels are
dealt with conclusively.

Terrorists must be brought to justice in order to
discourage a culture of impunity. In Uganda we have
asked the International Criminal Court to investigate
and to have Joseph Kony, the leader of the LRA, and
his gang prosecuted. Investigations are now taking
place, and it is our hope that an international arrest
warrant will soon be issued against them. We expect
States to comply with such an arrest warrant by
arresting said criminals if they happen to be on their
territory. But we are saddened by some voices calling
for Uganda to withdraw the case from the Court on the
grounds that that would encourage Kony and his gang
to attend peace talks. We are not impressed by that
argument. There should be no compromise. Impunity
must be punished if terrorist acts are to be discouraged.

Resolution 1566 (2004) calls for more effective
procedures to bring to justice those involved in
terrorist activities through prosecution or extradition,
the freezing of their financial assets, preventing their
movement through the territories of Member States and
preventing them from being supplied with arms and
related materials of any kind. Uganda has on numerous
occasions, both in the open debates of the Council and
in its relevant letters to the Council, which are part of
this body's documents, called on the international
community to institute such measures. My delegation
is therefore glad that the Security Council has now
come up with such proposals. We are also pleased that
those measures are under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

We call on all States to work together to eliminate
the menace of terrorism.

