Mrs. Izata (Angola): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the Presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November and to express the support of my delegation
in the arduous work ahead of us during this month,
including the situation in Angola. Allow me also to
congratulate the outgoing President, Ambassador
Belinga-Eboutou of Cameroon, for the brilliant manner
and dedication with which he conducted the
proceedings of the Council during his mandate.

I am taking the floor to thank the Panel of Experts
for its report on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2002/1146). This
is the fourth report on this matter, and the practical
results have not met our expectations. As a
consequence, a greater coordination of efforts is
necessary to find clear solutions which may help to end
the war in our sister Republic. The illegal exploitation
of resources and the politico-military situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are a matter of
concern for Angola, which has a border of
approximately 2,000 kilometres with that country.
Therefore, it is important for Angola to support
measures to end that exploitation, which hinders the
political, economic and social development of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Let me stress that the report does not include
Angola among the countries illegally extracting natural
resources from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
That confirms the statements frequently repeated by
my Government.

The report brings to our attention increasing
activities of traffic networks, allegedly supported by
the members of some Governments. Those activities
endanger the peace and national reconciliation process
now under way in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Angola is of the view that all activities must be
directed to help the peace process and the efforts of the
international community, particularly those of my
country, in order that the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are used to improve
the situation of the whole country and not to enrich a
few individuals.

It is well known that Angolan and allied forces
went to the Democratic Republic of the Congo at the
invitation of its Government, without any benefit or
material compensation, to help that country face a
difficult situation. That was reiterated once again in the
speech by Mr. Leonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, when the report was presented.
We are encouraged by that statement, and we also take
good note of the decision of the Public Prosecutor of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to open a
judiciary investigation on that country's nationals who
are named in the report, showing that country's
willingness to take the recommendations of the report
seriously.

The October 2002 communique by the allied
Heads of State exalted the role played by the alliance
against non-invited forces. Therefore, as stated by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the legal status of
forces invited by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to its territory should not be
confused with the activities of forces of countries that
have not been invited, and which are undertaking
illegal activities there.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
sovereign and independent country. Its Government is
recognized by the international community. It has the
right to sign agreements with other States in
conformity with national and international laws. No
one else, in our opinion, has the right to rule over the
Congolese Government and people or to dictate how
they should act. It is up to the Government and the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
determine their own destiny and to decide who their
allies and friends will be, as well as the forms of their
cooperation with those allies.

As is well known, the Republic of Angola has
already withdrawn its forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This decision was
taken jointly, in a responsible manner and in the
interest of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
order to facilitate the pacification of that country.

As a sovereign State, Angola will always honour
its commitments because it acknowledges the
importance of peace, stability and development, not
only for the Democratic Republic of the Congo but also
for the Great Lakes region and all of Southern Africa.

We call for the withdrawal of uninvited forces
from the territory of that country, respect for the
Security Council resolutions and of the Lusaka
Agreement, as well as the fulfilment of the
commitments reached in Pretoria and Luanda,
including the inter-Congolese dialogue. This is the
course that will enable us to resolve the present crisis
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Angola will continue to work and coordinate its
actions with the legitimate Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and with the
peaceful forces. Our goal is to bring the peace process
of that country to completion as soon as possible. We
will support all measures along that path.

