Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua would like to

thank Viet Nam for convening this very important
meeting. The delegation of Nicaragua regards this
debate in the Security Council as one more opportunity
to call attention to the tragic evil that embroils
hundreds of thousands of children in armed conflict
around the world, depriving them of their family life,
their childhood, their education, their health and above
all, in most cases of the simple opportunity to live.

Over the past few years, there has been much
discussion on that topic and tangible progress has been
acknowledged, including the creation of the Working
Group of the Security Council on Children and Armed
Conflict, the establishment of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism and the adoption of commitments
and plans of action by countries affected by armed
conflict.

Nonetheless, many challenges remain to be faced.
Moreover, we must not ignore the importance of
sustainable reintegration into communities and family,
in which education plays a decisive role as a factor for
peace. Greater efforts must be made to ensure the right
to education in emergency situations. Education has
often been ignored in situations of armed conflict. In
order to achieve the Millennium Development Goal on
education, we must give more attention to the fact that
education is currently not part of emergency response.
At the present time, two thirds of the children of the
world who are not in school live in countries affected
by conflict.

Above and beyond all of those endeavours and
the challenges that we face, if we really wish to put an
end to the participation of children in armed conflict,
we need to tackle the problem at its root - conflict
itself. We agree with what has been said by many
delegations and by the presidency of the Security
Council in its statement issued in February, in which
the need was stressed to establish a broad-ranging
strategy of prevention aimed at attaining sustainable
development and the eradication of poverty.

What is needed is to seek urgently an alternative
to unbridled capitalism, which exacerbates conflicts to
the benefit of the economic interests of the arms
industries or those that extract natural resources, which
are ultimately the greatest beneficiaries of the suffering
and death caused by armed conflict.
Lastly, my delegation would encourage all
interested parties to continue to foster a constructive
dialogue with the parties to conflict, which would yield
tangible benefits for boys and girls affected by armed
conflict.

