The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

China has always been very careful about
adoption of sanctions by the Security Council. Past
practices and experiences reveal that, more often than
not, sanctions cannot reach expected results. On the
contrary, sanctions victimize civilian populations.
Therefore, China abstained in the voting on resolutions
1556 (2004), 1564 (2004) and 1591 (2005). Just now,
China abstained in the voting on resolution 1672
(2006).

More importantly, China believes that the timing
for adopting such a resolution is not right. During the
course of consultations, many Council members,
including African members, repeatedly expressed such
concern about the timing.

The African Union-led Abuja peace talks are
currently at a crucial juncture. The top priority of the
work of the Security Council in this regard is to assist
the African Union in bringing the Abuja talks to a
conclusion before the end of the month and to urge the
parties to sign the package peace agreement. That is
the priority for the African Union. It is also an urgent
task for the international community, including the
Security Council.

Approximately one week remains before the
deadline. During this exceptionally important period,
the Security Council should focus on the overall
political situation and remain on high alert. If it takes
any course of action, it should focus on promoting and
facilitating, rather than affecting and interfering in, the
peace talks. If, as a result of the Security Council's
sanctions resolution, any party to the Abuja talks has
second thoughts about signing such a peace accord, the
conflict in the Darfur region will inevitably be
prolonged or even intensify. The Security Council
would have to assume responsibility for such an
eventuality.

Like other members, China is very concerned
about the situation in Darfur. China also hopes that the
humanitarian crisis can be neutralized and the
humanitarian situation improved in the near future.
China supports the pivotal role played by African
Union Mission in Sudan in stabilizing the security
situation in the Darfur region. We also endorse the idea
that those responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and international human
rights must be brought to justice.

The proper settlement of the Darfur problem will
not only affect the security and humanitarian situation
in the Darfur region, but also have an impact on the
peace process between the north and south in the
Sudan, on the neighbouring countries of Chad and the
Central African Republic and on the subregion as a
whole. On that critical issue, the Security Council
should send a constructive message and avoid actions
that might give rise to misinterpretation or even affect
the peace process as a whole.

During discussions in the Security Council
sanctions Committee, the Chinese representative joined
other colleagues in requesting clarification of criteria
for the inclusion of individuals on the list of sanctions.
Regrettably, the sponsors and the panel of experts have
yet to provide supplementary material. Sanctions
should be applied as an extremely careful step. Before
a number of specific details could be clarified and
convincing evidence established, certain members
requested the termination of discussions in the
sanctions Committee and submission of the matter to
the Council for action. Such an approach is at variance
with the Council's practice of many years' standing;
neither is it in accordance with the guidelines for the
work of the sanctions Committee. We therefore express
our reservations in that regard.

For those reasons, the Chinese delegation had no
choice but to abstain on the vote on the draft
resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
