Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): Today's
meeting is a timely opportunity to discuss the future
of peacekeeping at a moment when it is increasingly
challenged. I thank the Dutch presidency of the Security
Council for taking the initiative to convene this debate.
I also thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his
efforts on behalf of the cause of peace and development
in Africa.

The peacekeeping operations authorized by
the Security Council are among the most powerful
instruments available to the international community
in promoting international peace and security. They
exemplify the strong added value of multilateralism
and symbolize international solidarity. Needless to
say, Africa is profoundly attached to the principle of
multilateralism and to the institutions that embody it.
Faced with the complex and interlinked challenges that
are confronting our planet, the multilateral approach is
the only way to ensure lasting and effective responses.

Unilateralism is synonymous with egoism,
especially at a time when humankind is in need
of solidarity. It is of hollow utility because lasting
solutions to the problems that call for our attention
demand cooperation and consensus. It poses grave
threats international stability. Everything must
therefore be done to maintain and promote United
Nations peacekeeping operations, of which almost
half are deployed in Africa and contribute to reaching
the goal of ridding the continent of the scourge of war
by 2020.

The imperative need to strengthen the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations has been acknowledged
by everyone. It is linked to the volatility of the
environments in which such operations are deployed,
as well as to the lack of tangible progress made in the
political processes which they are supposed to support.
In Africa, many examples attest to that dual-reality.
The African Union is determined to fully execute
the mission incumbent upon it so as to find suitable
responses to those challenges. In that regard, I should
like to share with the Council three key messages.

The first concerns the need to provide peacekeeping
operations with the resources they require to carry out
their mandates effectively. The times are undoubtedly
inclined towards frugality, but the latter cannot be
allowed to take priority over peace and the protection
of civilians exposed to every kind of abuse, especially
since the peacekeeping budget represents only a tiny
fraction of what is spent worldwide on weapons.

My second message involves the need for close
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union so as to move forward the political
processes underpinning peacekeeping operations. It is
clear that, in the absence of such political processes,
peacekeeping runs the risk of becoming enmired. The
response to such difficulties cannot be allowed to result
in the international community's disengagement or a
decrease in its involvement. Unfortunately, resolving
political issues is often a long-term endeavour. The
mere presence of a peacekeeping operation has a
stabilizing effect. It would be morally and politically
unacceptable to jeopardize such benefits. The complex
nature of political processes clearly highlights the
need to redouble efforts to overcome obstacles.
From that perspective, it is crucial to strengthen the
close partnership between the African Union and the
United Nations to a greater degree, in the spirit of the
Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security signed in
April 2017.

That joint effort must be guided on two levels.
With regard to relations between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
the agreed modalities of cooperation between the two
organizations must be translated more effectively into
action, including through joint visits on the ground and
coordinating the messages sent to parties in conflict.
More generally, it is important for the Security Council
to give due consideration to the views of the African
Union on issues of linking justice to the search
for peace, matters of inclusivity and other relevant
questions, while respecting African ownership. With
regard to the relationship between the African Union
Commission and the Secretariat, in addition to what
is already under way, we need to increase the number
ofjoint visits on the ground - including those at the
highest level - to consider sending, whenever possible,
joint representatives, and promote common positions.

My third message concerns the need for
complementarity between United Nations operations
and African Union missions. United Nations operations
are supposed to be deployed when minimum conditions
are met to enable the maintenance of peace once it
is restored. African Union missions are deployed in
situations that continue to be marked by violence. The
African Union and its regional mechanisms have shown
their determination to take risks on the ground to
accelerate the achievement ofpeace. The African Union
Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel attest to that commitment. But as
the Council is aware, those missions face financial and
logistical difficulties that undermine their ability to
carry out their mandate. I can only reiterate here our
appeal to the Security Council to adopt the measures
that we expect of it in favour of sustainable and
predictabe financing for the peace support operations
that it has mandated, while bearing in mind its primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Hesitation and procrastination are no longer
the order of the day.

Peacekeeping is at a crossroads. This form of
collective action has achieved remarkable results
that we should all be proud of, but many challenges
lie before us. I reiterate the commitment of the
African Union to working with other members of the
international community to improve the effectiveness
of that irreplaceable tool of the multilateral system.
Regardless of the legitimate criticism sometimes
levelled at peacekeeping operations, we must take
care not to throw out the baby with the bath water out
of overzealousness.

