Mr. Kubis: I have the honour to present the third
report 8/2016/396 of the Secretary-General pursuant
to paragraph 7 of resolution 2233 (2015), as well as
the tenth report (S/2016/372) of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 4 ofresolution 2107 (2013), on the
issue of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals,
and property.

Since my previous briefing to the Security Council
(see S/PV.7623), a profound political crisis has engulfed
Baghdad and the country and brought paralysis and
deadlock to the work of the Government and the Council
of Representatives. The failure of Iraq's Government
and political class to agree and carry on genuine reforms
that would improve governance and accountability and
include equal justice for all, jobs and services while
curbing corruption, as demanded by the Iraqi people,
notably in Baghdad and southern Shiite provinces since
last August, prompted the demonstrators to request
reform of the whole Government and political process,
abandoning the ethnic and sectarian quota approach
that has been in the fundament of the Iraq political
system since 2003.

In February a mix of civil-society protesters was
joined by the supporters of Sayed Muqtada Al-Sadr.
Spurred by that pressure, Prime Minister Al-Abadi
attempted to accelerate the delivery of his reform
programme and to replace the Cabinet created on the
basis of party affiliation or ethnic or sectarian identity
by a so-called technocratic Cabinet, requested, among
others, by Al-Sadr. For the majority of Iraqi protesters,
such a Cabinet is needed to enact genuine reforms, get
rid of a powerful patronage system and achieve success
in fighting corruption. However, the majority of Iraqi
political blocs reject such a fundamental overhaul of the
political process. They view such attempts as efforts to
delegitimize not only the Government or the Council
of Representatives, but the whole political system.
Notably, they also view Al-Sadr's action as an attempt
to take over the power on the back of the Shiite street.

Following months of controversy and weeks
of political paralysis and split in the Council of
Representatives, the promise of a solution to the
political deadlock came with some new ministerial
appointments at the parliamentary meeting of 26 April.
Yet that hope suffered a significant setback on 30 April.
Once it was clear that voting would not take place on
another set of ministerial candidates, Sadrist and civil-
society demonstrators breached the entry checkpoints
of the Green Zone and stormed the Parliament building.
Acts of vandalism and attacks on some members of
Parliament, sadly, broke with the practice of many
months of peaceful protests. The protesters withdrew
from the Green Zone the following day, yet they pledged
further action in series of escalating steps - the
dismissal of the three constitutional leaders of the
country, early elections culminating, if necessary, with
attacks on the seat of power, civil disobedience or a
general strike f unless the Government and Parliament
made rapid progress on reforms. At this stage, although
the situation has calmed down, it remains unpredictable
and could unfold in many different directions.
Since the beginning of the pro-reform protest
movement in August 2015, the Shiite religious
leadership, the Marja'iya, has backed the people's
requests for political solutions to the current deep
political crisis, as well as for progressive reforms in
Iraq, including through the most recent statement by
the Office of Grand Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani on 4 May.
In it, the Marja'iya renewed its warning to the parties
against a continuation of the current course in dealing
with the country's issues and its many crises and called
on them to think of the future of their people and
take serious and tangible steps to resolve the current
situation.

I strongly urge the Government, constitutional
and political leaders and civil society to work together
in a constructive dialogue that will not only resolve
the political impasse, but give a clear perspective of
better a future for the people, which will unite them
and their leaders. Maintaining focus and unity of effort
in fighting the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) remains a critical priority, followed by
mobilizing international assistance to help alleviate
a deep economic, fiscal and humanitarian crisis, and
promote stabilization and the return of internally
displaced persons (IDP). A business-as-usual approach
simply will not be enough for the people. They want
genuine change that will improve their lives.

It is imperative to resume soon the work of
the Council of Representatives and to confirm a
Government that will be able and willing to promote
genuine reforms. Iraq's political groups must together
find a political solution based on the Constitution, the
law and the principles of democracy, in order to respond
to the needs of the people, put an end to the split and
paralysis in Parliament and enable the rapid enactment
of the necessary reforms and anti-corruption measures,
and the smooth functioning of State institutions, without
threat or intimidation. I also call on the Government to
take specific steps to promote women's participation in
politics as part of the reform process.

Despite the notable and consistent progress on
the ground against ISIL, it remains a formidable and
determined enemy that constantly adjusts its tactics
and attack patterns, while also taking into account
of developments in Syria. As the Secretary-General
has advised the Council on numerous occasions, ISIL
cannot be defeated by military means alone. Without
addressing the root causes of violent extremism and the
underlying ideology, efforts will not be sustainable or
lasting. Military victories need to be complemented by
support for displaced people and increased stabilization
and rehabilitation efforts that prioritize the rule of law
and good governance and allow for the safe return of
IDPs to their places of origin. Simultaneously, Iraqis
must prioritize political and community reconciliation.

The recent resumption of contacts and dialogue
between Baghdad and Erbil should be turned
into a genuine partnership of mutually beneficial
cooperation. Reconciling differences and working
together on the necessary reforms will create the
conditions for enhanced financial and technical support
by the international community to Iraq, including the
Kurdistan region.

The visit of the Secretary-General to Iraq on
26 March, accompanied by Mr. Jim Yong Kim, President
of the World Bank Group, and Mr. Ahmad Mohamed
Ali Al-Madani, President of the Islamic Development
Bank, was an illustration of the seriousness of the
international community in its support for Iraq. The
world must recognize that Iraq requires more, not
less, international support at this critical juncture as it
struggles with many challenges and to break from past
legacies of poor governance and corruption. While the
international community is ready to offer more support,
Iraqis themselves must implement reforms that will put
their country on the road to recovery.

I welcome the progress achieved during Iraq's
negotiations with the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank, which should be finalized during
another round of negotiations in Amman in mid-May.
Positive results will also be needed in order to promote
Iraq's case at the forthcoming Group of Seven Summit
in Japan.

Stabilizing newly liberated areas remains a
priority, and is key to laying the groundwork for future
reconciliation. The problems are immense, as shown
by the example of Ramadi, with the huge challenges
that are posed by the vast degree of destruction and
unprecedented contamination by explosive devices.
Despite the Government's warnings about the threat
of improvised explosive devices (IEDs), thousands of
desperate families have already returned to the city
of Ramadi and its surrounding areas. We are very
concerned about reports of dozens of civilian casualties
from booby-trap IEDs placed by ISIL, as well as
remnant explosive devices. In close collaboration with,
and under the guidance of, the national and provincial
authorities on mine action, the United Nations Mine
Action Service has played a role in helping to mobilize
international capacities to address explosive remnants
of war, including IEDs, at the local level.

I am concerned about the reports of ISIL's use of
weaponized chemicals in its attacks on civilians and
security force personnel, as has been happening recently
in Bashir, Taza and Matar. I urge the international
community to support the ongoing investigation into
those incidents by the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and to ensure accountability for
anyone found to be involved in, or facilitating the use
of, weaponized chemicals.

The humanitarian crisis in Iraq remains one of
the worst in the world. The number of Iraqis in need
has doubled over the past year. Nearly one third of the
population, more than 10 million people, now require
some form of humanitarian assistance. Depending
on its scope and intensity, the military campaign will
almost certainly lead to mass displacement in the
months ahead. In a worst-case scenario, another more
than 2 million Iraqis may be newly displaced by the end
of the year. The United Nations is especially worried
about humanitarian conditions in Fallujah, which
remains under ISIL's control and effectively under siege.
The Government is bringing to safety families that
manage to reach mustering points. The humanitarian
community has been mobilized to provide lifesaving
support to them and to the people trapped in Fallujah.

The 2016 humanitarian response plan requests
$861 million to provide lifesaving assistance to 7 million
Iraqis. Disappointingly, only a quarter of that has been
secured so far. Unless $300 million is received by June,
dozens of front-line lifesaving programmes will be cut
back or closed. The priority humanitarian plan for this
year is intended to cover existing needs in the country.
It does not include the additional needs included in the
contingency plans for Mosul's liberation. The amount
required to help those who will be affected by the
military operation in Mosul will depend directly on
the type of the operation. If destruction is widespread
and there is mass displacement for a long period, the
cost of supporting the populations will be enormous.
We also need to step up human resources and funding
to address the immense needs of displaced women and

girls, which include specialized psychological care and
education.

I would now like to turn to the tenth report
(S/2016/372) of the Secretary-General on the issue
of missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals and
missing Kuwaiti property, including the national
archives. Iraq's Ministry of Defence has officially taken
over the technical overview of the missing Kuwaiti
persons file, resuming the work and undertaking a
number of activities since the transition. That is an
encouraging and welcome step, which I hope will
add impetus to the Government of Iraq's efforts.
Unfortunately, a stalemate still persists with respect to
missing Kuwaiti property. In a follow-up to his visit,
the Secretary-General and I visited Kuwait at the end of
March, encouraging the Iraqi leadership to take every
possible step to achieve tangible progress concerning
the issues ofboth missing persons and property. In order
to contribute more actively to that effort, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq will be reaching
out to various stakeholders to seek their assistance
with various aspects that will help to push the process
forward.

However, I would like to emphasize that the main
responsibility for ensuring progress lies with the
Government of Iraq. While we remain cognizant of the
sheer volume of challenges that Iraq is currently facing,
its international obligations have to be fulfilled and that
issue cannot fall by the wayside.

