Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (EU) (annex 29). Italy wishes to thank Indonesia for organizing this high-level open debate of the Security Council on pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has shown us the need to promote a coordinated multilateral response. Global health is a fundamental precondition for peace, stability and prosperity and interacts with the tripartite nexus of peace, humanitarian aid and development. That is why, from the very beginning of this global emergency, Italy strongly supported international solidarity and an international alliance to advance research on a COVID-19 vaccine. Italy has made it a consistent priority to promote universal equitable access to the vaccine and other life-saving treatments, such as therapies and diagnostics, to make sure that no one is left behind. We were proud to be among the promoters, in partnership with the EU and other key partners, of the Coronavirus Global Response pledging conferences held on 4 May and on 27 June, which collected almost €16 billion for fair universal access to vaccines, treatments and diagnostics to fight COVID-19. We were also among the pioneers of the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and the main contributors to the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility through the Gavi Alliance advance market commitment, which will ensure access for developing countries to the vaccine. Italy believes that increasing our support to the most vulnerable countries remains an absolute priority, which we will also promote in the context of the upcoming Italian presidency of the Group of Twenty in 2021. In addition to its severe impact on public health, human rights and socioeconomic conditions, the pandemic has aggravated existing threats to the maintenance of international peace and security and hampered the delivery of necessary humanitarian aid. A multidimensional crisis requires a multidimensional approach and response from the United Nations, which is at the heart of the sustaining peace agenda. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we commend the Secretary-General's leadership and multiple initiatives to address the multifaceted COVID-19 pandemic. We welcome the adoption of resolution 2532 (2020), which calls for a global ceasefire. In the coming months there are several priority areas to which Italy is ready to contribute. In the present state of emergency, it is of paramount importance for everyone to have access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food. In that spirit, Italy is committed to supporting the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (FAO), the World Food Programme and all the relevant United Nations actors in their efforts to prevent a global food crisis. We have been promoting a food coalition through FAO to mobilize expertise, provide policy support, establish a space for dialogue and promote initiatives focused on the creation of more resilient and sustainable food systems. The pandemic has also reminded us of the importance of fully implementing the women and peace and security agenda, as well as the youth, peace and security agenda. Women and girls have been particularly exposed to sexual and gender-based violence, including domestic violence, and to an unequal sharing of responsibilities. At the same time, women, who represent the majority of health workers, have been at the forefront of the response and will be the backbone of recovery in local communities. We must redouble our commitment to achieving gender equality and to ensuring that women participate meaningfully in decision-making processes. COVID-19 is also exacerbating the already tragic condition of people living in conflict-affected areas, in particular vulnerable groups, such as children, women and girls. That is why it is fundamental now more than ever to ensure respect for international humanitarian law and to support the United Nations efforts for a global ceasefire. In these difficult times, United Nations peacekeeping operations have a special role to play in supporting local communities in their handling of the pandemic. The support that troop- and police-contributing countries have provided to local communities - as in the case of our national contingent in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon - shows how peace operations can serve as a flexible tool to preserve peace and stability. In that perspective, together with the other EU troop-contributing countries, we have committed to keeping all our military assets at their current levels and to complying with the guidelines set out a few months ago by the Secretariat in order to avoid spreading the virus in missions. The Action for Peacekeeping initiative has constituted a fundamental step forward in modernizing United Nations peacekeeping missions. The unprecedented challenges posed by COVID-19 must be transformed into opportunities for sustaining peace at all levels and inform the process of reviewing the peacebuilding architecture. The upcoming peacebuilding architecture review should therefore stress the importance of strengthening existing partnerships between the United Nations and various international financial institutions and regional organizations and developing coherent comprehensive responses to complex interrelated challenges. It is crucial to involve local communities and the private sector in that effort. The only effective way to address the consequences of the current crisis is a truly concerted effort at the global level. The COVID-19 pandemic must further drive our search for a whole-of- system response based on coordination, partnerships and the flexible use of existing platforms. The Peacebuilding Commission, which, under its current Chair, has proactively adapted its programme of work to address the challenges of the current situation, and a better financed Peacebuilding Fund have a crucial role to play. They must mobilize a conflict-sensitive international response to the pandemic, support efforts by local communities and foster a coordinated peacebuilding response to COVID-19. Italy will continue to contribute to the current discussions on the review of the peacebuilding architecture. We must avoid any reversal in the hard-won gains in peace, security, development and human rights. Our collective effort in tackling the effects of the pandemic must remain focused on advancing our peacebuilding and sustaining peace agenda.
