Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in expressing our solidarity with, and
sympathy for, the victims of Hurricane Florence and
other natural disasters around the world, which are
becoming ever more frequent and intense as a result of
climate change.

We want to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting, and Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for
her briefing.

Peru notes with deep concern the serious threat to
international peace and security posed by the nuclear and
ballistic-missile programme ofthe Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. It constitutes a flagrant violation of
international law, the nuclear non-proliferation regime
and specific decisions of the Security Council. That
programme and all related activities must be completely
abandoned in a verifiable and irreversible manner. Until
that occurs, the sanctions imposed by the Council must
remain in force and be universally implemented. Peru
implements them within its jurisdiction and believes
that the Security Council must remain vigilant and
adequately respond to any possible non-compliance,
wherever it may occur.

We wish to underscore the unity and commitment
of the Security Council on this matter. We attach
the greatest importance to maintaining that unity
and commitment with a view to achieving the
ultimate objective of the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
At the same time, we commend the high-level
diplomacy conducted by the authorities of the Republic
of Korea and the United States aimed at building the
trust required to alleviate tensions, reduce the risk of
miscalculations or misunderstandings and, ultimately,
achieve denuclearization.

In that regard, we stress that the sanctions regime is
a tool for bringing the North Korean Government to the
negotiating table, and should not lead to a deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the country or restrict
access to the assistance the civilian population needs.

Finally, regarding existing discrepancies in
compliance with the restrictions on refined petroleum
products, and the transfer of such to North Korean
vessels, we must express our concern and underscore
the need for strict respect for the provisions ofresolution
2375 (2017).

In conclusion, we commend the work carried out by
the Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), our colleague
Ambassador van Oosterom, and underscore the need to
safeguard the independence of the Committee's Panel
of Experts.

