The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Germany.

Let me join others in warmly welcoming and
thanking the Special Representative for his briefing
today. We equally thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement.

My Government aligns itself with the statement
to be made later by the European Union (EU).

I will touch upon three issues today.

First, with respect to transition, Germany
welcomes the fact that the process of security transition
is progressing, in line with the improved quality and
quantity of the Afghan security forces. My delegation
welcomes in particular the beginning of a security
transition in the first tranche of seven districts and
municipalities to Afghan security responsibility this
month.
It is important to underline that, as per the
agreement between NATO and the Afghan
Government, the transition period will continue to be
gradual and condition-based. The number of security
incidents in recent months illustrates clearly the
magnitude of the challenges still ahead of us. We
believe, however, that the strategy and need for
timeliness agreed between Afghanistan and the
international community will continue to serve us well,
and we intend to stay the course.

Germany condemns the ongoing violence, and
particularly, in the strongest terms, the latest attack on
a hospital in Logar. We note with continued serious
concern a further increase in civilian casualties, up to
90 per cent of which are now caused by insurgents. We
commend the professional reaction by the Afghan
security forces during last week's heinous attack on the
Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul.

Here in the Council, I would like to stress in
particular the security of the United Nations. Like
everyone here today, Germany greatly appreciates the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and of other colleagues of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
most challenging circumstances. But as we expect
UNAMA to continue with its indispensable work, we
have a shared responsibility to do everything we can to
protect United Nations staff and operations. Mazar-e-
Sharif was another shocking experience for the United
Nations community, and we extend our condolences to
all the families of the victims. Germany calls for
maximum efforts, including by the Afghan
Government, to protect international support
operations in Afghanistan.

Secondly, with regard to the Kabul process, the
transition agenda described in the process will, over
time, also change the nature of international support.
However, it is the strong expectation of the
international community that United Nations resources
and expertise are made use of to preserve the progress
achieved and to build a sustainable partnership with a
viable State based on Afghan leadership, democratic
principles and respect for human rights and reliable
governmental and non-governmental institutions,
founded on a firm constitutional basis.

One of the determining factors for the success of
the Kabul process is a solution to the Kabul Bank
crisis. There is no substitute for credible financial
institutions. Germany concurs with the report's
assertion that the absence of an International Monetary
Fund programme seriously endangers the Kabul
process and the ability to increasingly channel
development support through the Government budget.

Thirdly, let me briefly touch upon preparations
for the international conference on Afghanistan to be
held in Bonn in December, which some members have
mentioned and which Germany looks forward to
hosting upon the request of the Afghan Government.
On the whole, the conference is about shifting more
weight onto the long-term and political components
within our common Afghanistan strategy. As was
decided by President Karzai, the three main aims of the
conference to be chaired by Afghanistan are to further
define the civilian aspects of the transition process
until 2014, to strongly confirm and define long-term
international support for Afghanistan beyond 2014, and
to contribute to the political process of reconciliation,
including its regional dimension. We expect that the
Bonn conference will be an important milestone on the
way to a stable Afghanistan at peace with itself and its
neighbours.

In that context, Germany considers the recent
split of the sanctions regime under resolution 1267
(1999) into separate Al-Qaida and Taliban regimes as
an important stepping stone.

Let me end by reiterating continued and long-
term German support to our Afghan friends and by
underlining our appreciation for UNAMA'S role and
the wider support of the United Nations. Germany
considers UNAMA and the United Nations system as
co-partners in a successful transition in the interest of
all Afghans.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.

