Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): Let me thank Judge
Carmel Agius, Judge Vagn Joensen, Judge Theodor
Meron, Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow for their comprehensive briefings. For the past
20 years, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) have played a crucial role
in promoting the rule of law and ending impunity by
establishing an internationally recognized system of
criminal justice, setting up a national and international
justice mechanism, leading the fight against impunity
and ensuring that many of those responsible for serious
crimes against humanity were held accountable and
brought to justice.

As the cessation ofthe ICTR's activities draws near,
we commend the contribution, support and international
cooperation afforded to it by Member States, as well
as its legacy on best practices and lessons learned in
the tracking and arrest of fugitives, the prosecution of
sexual and gender-based violence and the referrals of
international criminal cases to national jurisdictions.
The final judgement, in the Nyiramasuhuko et al.
(Butare) case, which is scheduled for 14 December and
will formally mark the end of the Tribunal's operations,
will be a landmark event in the history of international
criminal and humanitarian law. The Tribunal has played
a crucial role by contributing to peace and reconciliation
in the Great Lakes region and by pursuing justice for
the victims and survivors of the 1994 tragic events
in Rwanda. The Tribunal's formal closure coincides
with the completion of its work and the transfer of
any residual functions to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which, according
to resolution 1966 (2010), has the responsibility of
tracking the remaining fugitives indicted by the ICTR.
Ensuring the arrest and prosecution of the remaining
fugitives is a top priority of the Residual Mechanism.

During the period under review, the ICTY
completed nearly all of the cases under its jurisdiction,
with four trials and two appeals still pending at the end
of 2015. We acknowledge the Tribunal's commitment
to completing its work expeditiously, and the judges'
efforts to expedite the pending cases. We value greatly
the Tribunal's commitment in meeting the date foreseen
for its closure in 2017, as well as the diligent efforts
to expeditiously complete the transfer of functions to
the Residual Mechanism in accordance with resolution
1966 (2010). However, we are concerned about the
continued challenges the ICTY is facing, particularly
those related to staff attrition, resulting delays in trials
and appeals, and the Tribunal's inability to offer an
end-of-service incentive. We hope those delays will not
affect the trials that are ongoing and that the Tribunal's

judicial work will be effectively completed by the end
of 2017.
We note that the Residual Mechanism will assume
full responsibility for the ICTR's remaining functions
by the end of 2015. The ICTY's closure is expected
for 2017, while the Tribunal principals and staff will
continue working to ensure a smooth transition for the
remaining functions and services, harmonizing and
adopting best practices. However, the Mechanism is still
facing two long-standing challenges - ensuring that
the nine individuals indicted by the ICTR who remain
at large are apprehended, and that the 18 individuals
who have been acquitted and released by the ICTR but
who are unable to return to their countries of origin are
relocated.

We are encouraged by the fact that the Mechanism
has continued to communicate and cooperate with
Rwanda and the States of the former Yugoslavia,
keeping them updated on the Mechanism's activities,
the transition of responsibilities and on its assistance
to national jurisdictions. We would like to highlight the
fact that international criminal justice, through both the
Tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda, has been crucial
to the recovery processes following the horrific events
that took place in those territories.

Finally, in closing these files, it is critical to
ensure that we have the cooperation and support of the
international community for the ongoing operations
tracking and capturing fugitives and for the Tribunals'
remaining work.

