Mr. Lararn (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Two decades
have passed since the launch of the peace process in
its current form. However, it continues to be a failure
because it focuses on managing the issue instead of
on dealing with the root causes, namely, the continued
Israeli occupation. Despite that failure, we believe that
the window of opportunity remains open in the form of
the Arab Peace Initiative, which has been on the table
for over a decade. Arab countries continue to affirm
their commitment to that peace plan. However, it is also
clear that the window will not remain open indefinitely.
It is therefore important to intensify efforts and work
very seriously and quickly in order to take advantage of
the opportunity before it is too late.

Based on the foregoing, the recent Arab League
summit meeting, which was held last month in Doha,
decided to form a ministerial committee headed by
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, the Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar. The
committee has been given the task of liaising with the
Security Council and the capitals of certain influential
countries in order to promote the Arab Initiative. We
hope that that effort will receive a positive response.
It is important to pressure Israel to put an instant end
to the settlement projects in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, and to hold it to its
commitments, including releasing prisoners that have
been held since before the Oslo Accords, terminating
the unfair and aggressive siege of the Gaza strip and
ceasing to tighten the noose around the Palestinian
economy.

The international community cannot turn a blind
eye to efforts to Judaize the city of Jerusalem. It is an
Arab city that will continue to be proudly Arab with
its different religions and ethnicities. We would like
to affirm that there is no Palestinian State without
Jerusalem and there is no Jerusalem without the
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

It is also important to achieve Palestinian
national reconciliation as a prerequisite for a just and
comprehensive peace. All parties must work together
in order to support and encourage all efforts that aim
to achieve that reconciliation, instead of undermining
them.

The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic continues
to deteriorate. Despite the ongoing military escalation,
we note that the Syrian regime continues to lose control
on the ground. Therefore, its insistence on remaining
in power has forced it to go to extremes and attempt
to impose a military solution using various methods
against the steadfast Syrian people. Although the regime
is legally and morally responsible for the protection of
its people, it unfortunately continues to use excessive
force, perpetrate massacres and target residential
areas and sanctuaries, such as refugee centres,
schools, hospitals, bakeries and houses of worship,
even historical buildings and archeological sites. That
confirms what is already clear to everyone - the
regime has lost its legitimacy.

A few days ago, the forces of the Syrian regime and
the militias supporting it committed another massacre,
this time in Jdeidet al-Fadel, where they shelled and
destroyed the only bakery in town. The massacre of
J deidet al-Fadel and other massacres in Darayya, Houla,
Karm al-Zeitoun and Al-Qubair and other placess are
all crimes against humanity, that is, crimes against us
all that are a source of shame for the regime in the eyes
of humankind as a whole.
One of the most dangerous forms of escalation
in Syria seen recently is the reported use of chemical
weapons. In that regard, the fact-finding mission
formed by the Secretary-General to bring out the
relevant facts and investigate the various repercussions
of those allegations, is of crucial importance.

The briefings by United Nations humanitarian
affairs officials to the Council last Thursday
(S/PV.6949) showed that it has been impossible
to find a humanitarian solution to the Syrian
crisis - the most dangerous humanitarian crisis in
the world. We commend the efforts of the United
Nations and the pledges of humanitarian aid to the
Syrian people. However, we are concerned that the
humanitarian crisis is deteriorating so quickly and in
a manner that is beyond the international community's
ability to respond in terms of aid and assistance. The
danger is not limited to Syria alone; rather, the crisis
has started to spread to neighbouring countries and
threaten the entire region.

We would like to remind the Council that the longer
the Syrian crisis remains unresolved as a result of the
reluctance of the international community to resolve it
and support the Syrian people, the harder it becomes to
achieve a political solution, thus giving more space to
the cycle of violence and the growth of extremism. In
that regard, I would like to refute the lie that the Syrian
regime has been peddling, namely, that its remaining in
power is the only guarantee of safety for the minorities,
In fact, the truth is completely the opposite - the
oppression by the regime and its belittling of the Syrian
people and homeland threaten every part of Syrian
society.

Facing the urgency of the crisis, the Arab League
has, from the very beginning, exerted efforts to create
an atmosphere that would encourage the emergence of
a peaceful solution. In that regard, we supported an
important step, namely, the unification of the Syrian
opposition in its political and military wings under
the umbrella of the National Coalition for Syrian
Revolutionary and Opposition Forces. That step was in
response to an important demand by the United Nations
and the international community. We believe that the
United Nations must now, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of its Charter, support the efforts of the League of
Arab States in its capacity as the regional organization
for the region where the Syrian crisis is unfolding.

The State of Qatar, in cooperation with most Arab
States and a large number of other States, is submitting
a draft resolution to the General Assembly aimed at
supporting international, regional and United Nations
efforts to achieve a political solution to the Syrian crisis.
In that regard, we would like to note that we believe that
it is of utmost importance for the Security Council to
take unified action to put an end to the humanitarian
catastrophe. The failure of the Security Council to take
a position, stop the crisis and protect the Syrian people,
as well as the Council's failure to deal effectively
with the Palestinian cause, will have very dangerous
repercussions for the Middle East region as a whole.

