Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): We, too, welcome today's
briefing and would like to thank High Commissioner
Antonio Guterres for providing us with a
comprehensive overview of the current global trend
regarding refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as it pertains to the role of the Security Council
and the challenges that such situations pose to regional
and international peace and security.

Given the fundamental interlinkages among
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and humanitarian
activities to achieve durable peace, Croatia is
concerned to learn that there has been an upward trend
in terms of the number and the complexity of refugee
and IDP situations worldwide since the High
Commissioner's previous briefing, in 2006 (see S/PV.5353). In addition to old crisis areas, there are
relatively new ones. There can be no solution to the
refugee and IDP crisis without political commitment.
At the same time, we commend the UNHCR staff for
its tireless work in the conditions described in the High
Commissioner's briefing. Those members of the
Security Council who visited a number of crisis-
affected areas in Africa in June can attest to that.
Croatia believes that, in addressing contemporary
forms of threats to peace and security in a world of
increasingly interconnected threats, new and emerging
causes of forced displacement are intrinsic factors that
cannot be overlooked by the Council in its future work.

In the light of the Council's forthcoming debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the
High Commissioner's briefing is particularly timely in
underscoring the importance of protecting the physical
security of refugees and IDPs as well as of
humanitarian workers, which is called for in a number
of Security Council resolutions. Croatia is especially
concerned by the increased use of sexual violence as a
tool of war and in post-conflict refugee situations.

While recognizing the need to protect all vulnerable
members of refugee populations, including women and
children, Croatia is committed to safeguarding
women's rights in conflict situations and continually
seeks the strengthening of the role of women in all
aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, Croatia
hopes that the agreement on opening up a humanitarian
corridor will be adhered to by all sides for the benefit
of the civilian population there. It is our hope that
today's briefing will serve as a catalyst for resuming
the practice of regular briefings by the High
Commissioner to the Council. Croatia believes that
such briefings would prove to be a value-added asset
for the Council's comprehensive approach in
establishing or renewing increasingly complex,
multidimensional peacekeeping and peacebuilding
mandates.

We hope that, in addition to the existing global
and universal international legal instruments, an
African Union convention for the protection of and
assistance to internally displaced persons will soon be
adopted and enter into force, and that its
implementation will involve coordinated activities that
will lead to the alleviation of the refugee and IDP crisis
in Africa, which is the part of the world most affected
by that crisis.

Finally, drawing on Croatia's first-hand
experience working with UNHCR and on lessons
learned in dealing with our own refugee and IDP
situation during an armed conflict and in the ensuing
post-conflict years, we would like to reaffirm Croatia's
full support for the High Commissioner's mandate.

