Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement's appreciation for the convening of this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, at this critical juncture for
Palestine, the Palestinian people and the international
community. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this opportunity
to once again reaffirm its long-standing solidarity with
the Palestinian people. It also reiterates its support for
the realization of the Palestinian people's legitimate
national aspirations and inalienable rights, including
to self-determination and freedom in their independent
State ofPalestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
a just solution for the plight of the Palestinian refugees,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(m).

NAM. stresses the urgency of achieving a just,
lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and calls for the exertion of serious efforts by
all the parties concerned to realize this long-overdue
objective. A peaceful solution to the question ofPalestine
remains a priority on the Movement's agenda. The
year 2014, which had been proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, has passed, and yet the suffering
and injustice borne by the Palestinian people continues.
Israeli intransigence and illegal policies continue to
undermine the resumption of credible negotiations and
to obstruct the achievement of a just and lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. We express our grave
concern regarding the consequent deterioration of the
situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and stress that
the status quo is unsustainable. The situation requires
immediate attention by the international community.

Despite decades of good-faith participation in
peace efforts and a clear commitment by the Palestinian
people and their leadership to international law, which
was reaffirmed by the recent accession by the State
of Palestine to several international conventions and
treaties, including the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, the Palestinian plight and predicament
have worsened on all fronts. That is due directly
to illegal Israeli policies and practices, which have
entrenched the occupation and undermined all peace
efforts to the point casting the viability of the two-State
solution into grave doubt.

The situation deteriorated dramatically, and the
brutalization of the Palestinian people reached a new
apex, when the Israeli military aggression waged against
the besieged and blockaded Gaza Strip in July and
August 2014. Israel has not been held accountable for
those crimes, despite the fact that the occupying forces
launched tens ofthousands ofmissiles, bombs, artillery
shells and live ammunition against the defenseless
Palestinian civilian population. NAM. continues to call
for accountability for all of those violations and crimes.
Moreover, we urge the international community to
fulfil pledges made at the Cairo conference on Palestine
to accelerate reconstruction in the Gaza Strip and to
provide the Palestinian people with the humanitarian
assistance urgently needed to alleviate their suffering.
We also reiterate the call for an end to the Israeli
blockade of Gaza and the inhumane isolation of the
Palestinian people there.

NAM. also reiterates its strong condemnation
of Israel's continuing and escalating settlement
construction throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around occupied East
Jerusalem, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention and United Nations resolutions, including
of the Council. Those and other systematic violations,
including the demolition of homes, the forced
displacement of Palestinian civilians, the arrest and
detention of Palestinians, including children, and the
incessant violence, terror and provocation by Israeli
settlers and extremists, including at sensitive religious
Muslim and Christian sites, particularly the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, have worsened conditions on the ground,
inflicted grave hardships on the Palestinian people,
further fragmented their land and contributed to the
destruction of the viability of the two-State solution.
Moreover, all such illegal Israeli policies and practices
deepen the already serious doubts that prevail regarding
Israel's claimed commitment to the two-State solution
and peace - claims that have been further undermined
by the blatant and shocking anti-peace, anti-two-State
solution declarations by Israeli officials, including in
the recent election campaign.

We have all acknowledged that the situation is
unsustainable and that this unjust situation cannot
be allowed to continue. The Security Council cannot
remain on the sidelines as the international community
continues to seek a just and peaceful solution to the
question of Palestine, especially when the situation
continues to deteriorate so dramatically and threatens
complete destabilization. NAM. therefore urges the
Security Council to act forthwith, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, and to undertake
resolute action towards ending the Israeli occupation
and the decades-long injustice against the Palestinian
people.

We regret that, contrary to the overwhelming
international consensus in that regard, as reflected
in the vote of 181 Member States in the General
Assembly in support of the right of Palestinian people
to self-determination and freedom and the many
other declarations from around the globe, including
Government, inter-governmental and non-governmental
organization and parliament appeals for an end to
this prolonged conflict, in 2014 the Security Council
failed to shoulder its responsibilities and meaningfully
contribute to a peaceful solution in the Middle East.

NAM. believes that the message is loud and clear
worldwide: it is time to end the abhorrent Israeli
occupation and impunity that has brought about so
much suffering, caused so many crises, sown so much
instability and anger throughout the Middle East, and
that continues to undermine regional and global peace
and security. In addition to the annual resolutions of
the General Assembly, that message was also been
strongly reaffirmed in the recent Conference of High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention,
hosted by Switzerland in its capacity as depositary
State. That message has also been and continues to
be reaffirmed by the appeals launched by numerous
European Parliaments calling for recognition of the
State of Palestine, and the fact that 135 countries
already recognize the State of Palestine.

United Nations States Members have conferred
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, and we
strongly urge the Council to act to uphold its own
responsibilities towards the question of Palestine with
full recognition of the implications that will have for
peace and security in the Middle East and beyond.
Today, NAM. calls, and will continue to call, upon the
Security Council to act in accordance with its Charter
duties, and stresses the important role to be played in
that regard by NAM. caucus members.

Lebanon continues to suffer from consecutive
Israeli violations of its borders and incursions against
its territory, followed by years of occupation and
aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese airspace and to intensify its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are blatant violations of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006), the
provisions of which should be implemented in a manner
that guarantees the consolidation of the foundations of
stability and security in Lebanon and prevents Israel
from undertaking its daily violations of Lebanese
sovereignty.

Finally, with regard to the occupied Syrian Golan,
the Movement condemns all the measures taken by
Israel, the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical
and demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement once again demands
that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders
of 4 June 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

