At the outset, I would like to thank the Dominican Republic for convening this important meeting on youth, peace and security. Also, I wish to extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his first report on this issue (S/2020/167). As the Secretary-General's report points out, it is of critical importance to encourage the meaningful participation of youth in efforts for peace and security. Their future depends so heavily on whether or not they are entitled to freedom from fear and freedom from want and equal opportunity to enjoy all their rights and fully develop their human potential. If given the opportunity, they can make critical contributions to achieving peace and security for all. The human security crisis caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is seriously affecting the most vulnerable communities around the world, in particular those in conflict and post-conflict situations. Youth in those communities are no exception. They could be either a factor of fragility or a proactive contributor in overcoming the crisis. Japan is fully committed to supporting the active participation of young people in the peace and security agenda. They are key players in promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, Goal 16 of the Sustainable Development Goals. We are thankful to the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, for visiting Japan in February to interact with young people in Hiroshima and other cities and for promoting the #Youth4Peace agenda as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Japan's engagement with youth for peace and security is based on the human security approach, which calls for the twin strategy of protection and empowerment. First, youths need to be protected from armed conflict, terrorism, gender-based violence and other physical threats to their lives, livelihoods and dignity. Japan echoes the point in the Secretary-General's report on the need for additional investment in a whole-of-society approach to prevent violent extremism and promote gender- responsive policies and programmes. Secondly, youths need to be empowered so that they can protect themselves and also fully develop their potential, enabling them to contribute to building peaceful societies. Let me share some concrete programmes for youth empowerment Japan has been supporting. Japan provides extensive training in the field of peacebuilding and development for young civilian experts from Japan and many other countries in Asia, the Middle East and Africa, in collaboration with United Nations Volunteers. The programme for global human resource development for peacebuilding and development has enrolled around 350 youths with diverse backgrounds since 2007. In addition, Japanese participants are subsequently deployed to overseas field posts in peacebuilding and development as United Nations volunteers. Many who completed the course are now actively contributing to the peace and security work of the United Nations system. Japan supports capacity-building for youths in post-conflict countries, such as Iraq, South Sudan, States in the Sahel region and Afghanistan, in partnership with the Hiroshima office of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research. We invite young entrepreneurs and leaders, particularly women, from a wide range of sectors, including the public and private sectors, academia, media and non- governmental organizations, to participate in training courses to strengthen their leadership, business planning and entrepreneurial skills. Alumni are active in the fields of humanitarian affairs, public health, education, agriculture, environment, anti-corruption and many other areas critical to the establishment of sustainable peace and development. The total number of trainees from those countries since 2015 amounts to 320. Japan has been working with UN-Women in Bangladesh for a project aimed at empowering women to counter the spread of violent extremism. A forum was established in close cooperation with local universities to raise awareness of the role of women in preventing violent extremism and radicalism. It has attracted more than 300 young participants to discuss issues such as gender equality, the empowerment of young women and the role of young women in peacebuilding. Since the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) by the Security Council in 2015, young peoples' role in peace and security has been increasingly recognized not only by Governments but also by civil society worldwide. However, we need to do more. Japan reaffirms its unwavering commitment to building a world where human security is ensured and young peoples' future is better protected and promoted. We look forward to working closely with the United Nations in that joint endeavour.
