Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Today's draft resolution on
Iraq addresses the desperate humanitarian situation in that
country and our reaction to it through the oil-for-food
programme initiated in 1995 under Security Council
resolution 986 (1995). The programme thus authorized
sought and continues to seek to mitigate the negative effects
of the sanctions regime on Iraq. In supporting this draft
resolution, we are acutely aware of the problems that
continue to plague the implementation of the humanitarian
programme in Iraq.

The present renewal is viewed against the backdrop of
the recently heightened tensions between Iraq and the
United Nations, which precipitated a crisis, and the report
of the Secretary-General dated 28 November 1997
submitted pursuant to paragraph 3 of Security Council
resolution 1111 (1997), prior to the end of lSO-day period,
on the overall implementation of the programme. At the
height of these tensions, and during the standoff between
Iraq and the United Nations, the attention of the
international community was drawn to the acute
humanitarian situation, which has caused immense suffering
among innocent civilians in Iraq. The diplomatic activities
that followed added impetus to the growing momentum at
the United Nations and elsewhere for the Council urgently
to address the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

In our view, therefore, the two questions we should
ask ourselves as the Council considers the renewal of
resolution 986 (1995) for an additional 180 days are, first,
where does the problem lie with regard to this rather
difficult situation? And secondly, what should be done to
mitigate the suffering occasioned by the sanctions on the
innocent civilian population?

In answer to these questions, we have to look at the
Secretary-General's report and his briefing today as well as
at the external reports of the United Nations agencies
involved in the implementation of the programme on the
ground. They all agree that the delivery and distribution
of food and medicine in Iraq has progressed according to
plan and that the Iraqi Government and local authorities
have cooperated in this regard. The Executive Director of
the Office of the Iraq Programme, Mr. Benon Sevan, who
has just returned from Iraq, has confirmed that this is the
case in the field. In this regard, let me just add a word of
commendation to him and his team for doing an excellent
job under difficult circumstances.

The Secretary-General, while acknowledging the
considerable improvements made in the approval process
under phase II, is of the View that much remains to be
done to ensure an overall increase in the speed of
implementation of the programme. We know - and this
is a view shared by many observers outside this
Council - that notwithstanding the efforts of the Security
Council Committee, its working methods remain
cumbersome and time-consuming and must, in the words
of the Secretary-General, "be urgently addressed". We
know that the Chairman of that Committee, our colleague
Ambassador Antonio Monteiro, has exerted immense
efforts to alleviate this problem, for which we commend
him.

It is therefore necessary to re-examine the whole
process of the implementation of resolution 986 (1995)
and how it has fared. Unfortunately, that resolution
created expectations that have become difficult, if not
impossible, to meet under existing arrangements. For this
reason, there has to be a genuine attempt to improve the
humanitarian situation.

According to the report of the Secretary-General,
there is a need to adjust upwards the $2 billion worth of
oil exports. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
amount is inadequate to meet the humanitarian
requirements of the Iraqi people and that they continue to
face a serious nutritional and health situation. After all,
out of this $2 billion, only $1.23 billion goes to the
purchase of humanitarian goods. It is also of concern that
problems such as the slow and erratic pace at which
humanitarian inputs arrive in Iraq, the operating
difficulties of the distribution system, and the
deteriorating basic infrastructure in the various key sectors
responsible for providing social services continue to
hamper the implementation process. The Secretary-
General tells us that the poor state of the infrastructure
has undermined the value of humanitarian inputs, and he
is right. This is an important issue because in every
decision we take, we must bear in mind the humanitarian
dimension in its implementation.

 

It is with this in mind that we welcome the Secretary-
General's intention to undertake a systematic review of the
whole process of contracting, processing of applications,
approvals, procurement and shipment and distribution. This
should be conducted urgently and should address
comprehensively the issues I have mentioned.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
supplementary report intended to address these issues by
the end of January 1998. That report should look into all
problems and avoid a piecemeal approach in response to
the many concerns.

