Mr. Liden (Sweden): Sweden fully aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the representative of
the Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.
Nonetheless, I would like to take the floor to highlight
some issues that Sweden believes to be of particular
importance.

As Members of the Organization, we have a duty
to respect and promote the rule of law. That applies
both at the national level and in our international
relations. Without the rule of law, there can be neither
economic progress nor social justice. We therefore
welcome the Secretary-General's intention to make the
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and post-
conflict societies a priority for the remainder of his
tenure.

As in our intervention in the debate on this item
last year, Sweden would like to put extra emphasis on
the issue of prevention. In the Secretary-General's
words, "an ounce of prevention is worth significantly
more than a pound of cure" (S/2004/6I6, para. 4). The
experience of the United Nations in the field of justice
and the rule of law in post-conflict situations should
enhance our ability to act early to prevent conflicts. As
stated by the Secretary-General, the root causes of
conflict have often been left unaddressed:

"Peace and stability can only prevail if the
population perceives that politically charged
issues, such as ethnic discrimination, unequal
distribution of wealth and social services, abuse
of power, denial of the right to property or
citizenship and territorial disputes between
States, can be addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner. Viewed this way, prevention is the first
imperative ofjustice." (Ibia'.)

Sweden fully subscribes to that View. To recognize
these links and to address the root causes in time will
require enhanced coordination among all the relevant
actors.

Prevention is one of the Security Council's
responsibilities, as reaffirmed by its resolution 1366
(2001). Peace-building efforts in the area of the rule of
law and justice in post-conflict societies constitute one
form of preventive action. It reduces the risk that such
societies will fall back into conflict.

Domestic institutions must be complemented by
international and multilateral action. The existence of

the International Criminal Court is a deterrent for
presumptive perpetrators; so is the readiness of
domestic legal systems to apply universal jurisdiction
for international crimes. Not only do we need to make
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
universal; we also must increase cooperation between
domestic legal authorities.

Increased focus on those matters requires
concrete action within the Secretariat, and changes in
the Organization may be needed. In that context, I
welcome the interesting proposals on the rule of law
and transitional justice submitted by Finland, Germany
and Jordan.

Another key issue is the division of labour
between the various bodies of the United Nations and
the international community. This should be
determined by needs, not by budgetary concerns.
Further, we must ensure better cooperation between
those bodies, not least regarding the transition of
responsibilities. The overall aim must be to work
towards establishing the rule of law in a coherent
fashion and through the whole transition from conflict
to peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance to
sustainable development.

Finally, let me stress three facts that are
sometimes overlooked.

First, attorneys - defence lawyers and others -
are vital to a nation's legal system. Not only do they
provide the representation and assistance to which both
accused and victims have a right; they also contribute
to the rule of law, by ensuring that authorities are held
to account and by defending human rights. Secondly,
concerning the importance of gender justice, the
outcome of the conference organized by the United
Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and
the International Legal Assistance Consortium (ILAC)
conference in September could prove valuable in
mainstreaming gender issues in the area of the rule of
law and in contributing to further implementation of
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) concerning
women and peace and security.

Thirdly, no one - including peacekeepers - is
above the law. We welcome the bulletin of the
Secretary-General on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, and believe
it is essential that any United Nations personnel not
complying with those minimum standards be held
accountable.

The rule of law is a means of protecting the
dignity of all human beings as well as the foundation
for well-functioning societies. Sweden is grateful that
the issue of rule of law and transitional justice is
brought to the fore and that it remains on the agenda of
the Security Council and the United Nations at large. It
is by focusing on the promotion and respect for justice
and the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict
societies that we might be able to prevent conflicts
from reoccurring.

