Mr. Karsgaard (Canada): As this is the first time my
delegation has addressed the Council this month, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of July
and on the effective way you have led the Council's work
this month. I also wish to thank the Permanent
Representative of Germany for his leadership during the
month of June.

When the Security Council met in January this year
to authorize the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), the international community
was hopeful that Haiti was moving forward in its efforts
to build a stable and democratic society. In the past six
months, Haiti has made important progress in this
direction. Without denying the obstacles ahead, Haitians
can now look to the future with more hope and less fear.
UNMIH, in carrying out its mandate, is playing a
significant role in supporting this process.

Canada welcomes in particular UNMIH's success in
helping to create security and stability in Haiti. While
crime remains a problem, the fundamentals of the
situation have changed completely. Political oppression
has ended. Assassinations committed with the complicity
of public authorities have ceased. Those having
committed these crimes in the past are no longer immune
from prosecution. The Haitian people are increasingly
aware of their rights and are able to exercise them freely.

In order to guarantee long-term security and stability,
Canada is working with the Haitian Government and
others, including France and the United States, to create
a new professional civilian police force, fully trained in
the respect for human rights. More than 700 police
officers have already been trained by the Haitian Police
Academy in Port-au-Prince and have been deployed
throughout the country. A new class of 350 graduates will
join them in the coming days. UNMIH's role in
establishing an effective police force is essential. The
support and advice they are providing is key to their
success.

Long-term security and stability in Haiti also
depends on the consolidation of the rule of law and the
existence of an independent judiciary respectful of
citizens' rights. In this regard, we very much welcome
and underline the importance of efforts of the
international community, as noted in report of the
Secretary-General, to put in place a functioning judiciary.
The opening of a magistrate's school in Port-au-Prince is
a positive step in what is a long-term but nevertheless
crucial element for the future of democracy in Haiti.
Canada is participating in these efforts through, among
other projects, a programme to reactivate the lower court
system through the repair of courthouses and a training
programme for officials.

 

On 25 June last, Haiti held its first free elections since
the coup d'etat of 30 September 1991. The organization of
this vote presented tremendous logistical challenges. The
elections were held in an environment largely free of
violence in the majority of Haitian communities. This is an
encouraging sign of the democratic will of the Haitian
people and of the hard work of Haitian electoral officials
and international observers across the country.

In our view, the first round of the legislative and
municipal elections constituted an important step in Haiti's
political, social and economic development, and indicate
that democracy is taking hold in Haiti. UNMIH made a
vital contribution to this process by helping to ensure public
security and providing logistical support to the Provisional
Electoral Council.

However, the vote did not occur without significant
problems, as reflected in the report prepared by the
Organization of American States electoral observation
mission. We strongly urge all parties to this process to
resolve these difficulties and ensure that the elections are
completed in a fair and free manner.

The work accomplished to date by UNMIH in
discharging its mandate has been impressive. The draft
resolution the Security Council is considering today will
extend the mandate of the Mission until February 1996. We
believe it will be important to consider, well in advance of
the expiration of this mandate, ways to ensure that what we
are helping Haitians to build will continue. It would be
unfortunate if the democratic foundations for Haiti's future,
which we are helping to construct through our considerable
investment in UNMIH, were to crumble in the absence of
sustained engagement by the international community. To
this end, we look forward to the report of the Secretary-
General at the mid-point of this upcoming mandate
extension period, as called for in the draft resolution, and
to discussing options for a continued international presence
in Haiti.

UNMIH is providing an essential and undeniable
contribution to the return of stability and the construction
of a democratic society in Haiti. UNMIH's personnel have
carried out their tasks with considerable professionalism
and have the confidence of the Haitian people. For these
reasons, Canada is pleased to support and co-sponsor the
draft resolution before the Security Council.

