Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, I would like to
congratulate the United Republic of Tanzania on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month of January. I wish to pledge Uganda's
full support during Tanzania's presidency, and I am
delighted, Madam President, to see you presiding over
the Council.

May I also take this opportunity to register our
appreciation to the United Republic of Tanzania for the
initiative of convening this important meeting at this
time, when many of the countries of the Great Lakes
region are grappling with the challenges of peace,
security, justice, post-conflict reconstruction and
development.

Before I make my comments, allow me, on behalf
of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, to
convey our condolences to the Government of
Guatemala, the United Nations and the families of the
eight United Nations peacekeepers who died in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
at the hands of the notorious terrorist group known as
the Lord's Resistance Army.

One of the best formulas that our countries have
designed for resolving the contradictions in the region
was the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in 1999 in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which was
supplemented by the Luanda Agreement between
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and the Pretoria Agreement between Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2002. The
tripartite plus agreement between Uganda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi, which was concluded in 2004 to deal
specifically with the issue of negative forces, is another
mechanism in that respect. We have also witnessed the
successful conclusion of peace initiatives in Burundi
and Southern Sudan. The ongoing International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region has provided a
framework for a vision integrating peace, security,
stability and development.

It is clear that in the last five years the Great
Lakes region has recorded some positive trends. The
fact that the Security Council is discussing the Great
Lakes region today gives us hope that those initiatives
will be supported, so that the positive trends can be
maintained.

My delegation is happy to state that Uganda has
played, and will continue to play, an active role in
support of the implementation of all these processes in
various capacities.

Uganda has participated in the Regional Peace
Initiative on Burundi, as Chair. It has also held the
chairmanship of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), under whose auspices the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan and the

Somali peace and reconciliation agreement were
concluded. In addition, Uganda chaired the Political
Committee which oversaw and monitored the
implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
We continue, along with our partners in the region, to
host the Tripartite Plus meetings and to participate
actively in the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region.

On its own accord, Uganda has taken measures to
ensure that its territory is not used by negative forces
to destabilize our neighbours. Those measures include
expelling Congolese militia in August 2005; handing
over other militia to the Congolese Government in
December 2005; initiating a verification process with
respect to various allegations, jointly conducted by the
Uganda-Democratic Republic of the Congo military
intelligence team, with the support of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC); and engaging with
our neighbours in the region through joint border
meetings, diplomatic representation, exchange of
special envoys, joint verification mechanisms, joint
security liaison offices, Amnesty Commission offices,
and so on.

My delegation believes that there is a strong link
between conflict and poverty in the Great Lakes
region. I wish therefore to pay tribute to the Secretary-
General for the initiative on the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, which will help
to build confidence in the region as well as to create
capacities and an impetus for good neighbourliness,
regional cooperation and economic integration,
together with sustainable peace, post-conflict
reconstruction and development.

We call upon the international community to
continue to support the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region's constructive process, including
the implementation of the priority programmes,
projects and protocols designed to entrench a culture of
stability, security, good governance and development,
based on the Dar es-Salaam Summit Declaration of
November 2004.

The recent progress made with respect to the
peace initiative in our region clearly indicates that
prospects are more promising than ever before for
transforming the Great Lakes region from a zone of
conflict to a region of peace, stability, prosperity and
cooperation in Africa.

My delegation strongly believes, however, that
the most urgent challenge and the biggest obstacle to
peace in the Great Lakes region remains the problem of
the negative forces, especially the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF), the Forces Democratiques de Liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR), the People's Redemption Army
(PRA) and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). It is
important to recall that negative forces were the
genesis of the Great Lakes conflict in the 1990s. They
continue to cause untold suffering to civilian
populations, resulting in excessive loss of life,
humanitarian crises in refugee and internally displaced
person (IDP) camps, and deepening levels of poverty
in the region. The LRA, for example, has caused a
massive humanitarian crisis, with 1.5 million IDPs in
northern Uganda, millions of IDPs in southern Sudan,
and the hampering of the return of 280,000 Sudanese
refugees. I therefore appeal to the Security Council to
focus on the question of foreign negative forces as one
of the most urgent threats to regional peace and
security in the Great Lakes region.

Uganda is committed to the objectives and
mechanisms of the Tripartite Plus Joint Commission
mechanism between Burundi, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda as a critical
component of the post-Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement
activities for addressing the outstanding issue of
negative forces in the Great Lakes region. We are
therefore encouraged by the recent joint MONUC-
Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces
operations to disarm the ADF and PRA and by efforts
to disseminate information about the effectiveness of
amnesty provisions in Uganda.

In that context, we look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General and to a positive debate in the
Security Council in March 2006 on our request for a
strengthened mandate under Chapter VII, to enable
MONUC to carry out an effective disarmament of the
FDLR, the ADF, the National Army for the Liberation
of Uganda (NALU), the PRA and the LRA operating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My delegation wishes to take the opportunity of
today's debate to engage members of the Security
Council on the question of the LRA, a well-known
terrorist group based in southern Sudan and in the
Garamba National Park in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which has caused thousands of deaths and
inflicted tremendous suffering on the people of
northern Uganda and southern Sudan as well as on
animal populations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

For far too long, the Uganda People's Defence
Force has single-handedly fought against the LRA
terrorist group using a two-track policy combining
military pressure and political negotiations based on
peace initiatives and an effective amnesty regime, as
well as measures to protect the civilian population
from attacks and abductions. Uganda is also committed
to working with the United Nations Secretary-General,

the core partner countries - namely, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Norway and the
Netherlands - the European Union and non-

governmental organizations (NGOs) to address the
practical challenges of the humanitarian situation in
northern Uganda.
Although the military campaign has not
completely eliminated the LRA threat to civilian
population and aid workers in the Acholi subregion in
northern Uganda, the UPDF has succeeded in severely
weakening the LRA by reducing it from 3,000 to about
500 to 600 through defections and capture; rescuing
about 18,000 abductees, including women and
children, largely from the southern Sudan; stopping
further abductions; taking over LRA bases in northern
Uganda and the southern Sudan; and restricting LRA
leaders north of Juba and Garamba National Park in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Security has been
tightened around internally displaced persons camps,
including by providing escorts for civilians and aid
workers. Except for the hard core LRA rebels who still
believe in Joseph Kony's "holy spirit" of cult and
myth, many are now defecting while on mission to
commit atrocities in Uganda. We are convinced that the
leadership of the LRA will never cross back into
Uganda without being captured and handed over to the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

The Government of Uganda has also embarked on
a number of peace initiatives to have the LRA conflict
resolved through a negotiated settlement. An amnesty
act, enacted in the year 2000, and its implementing
Amnesty Commission have been put in place to
accommodate those who renounce rebellion and
promote reconciliation. Over 2,000 LRA rebels have
taken advantage of the amnesty provisions. Major
efforts for a negotiated peace settlement originated or
supported by the Government since 1994 have included
the Government initiatives and those of the Carter
Center and of the Acholi Religious Leaders, and the
Bigombe Initiative. Unfortunately, due to the lack of a
political agenda by the LRA and pressure from its
external backers, efforts for political negotiations with
the LRA have been fruitless. As a gesture of good will
and political commitment to a negotiated settlement,
the Amnesty Act remains in force, and the Ugandan
Government negotiating team is also in place.

I have circulated to the Security Council a
document entitled "Uganda Government Interventions
on the Humanitarian Situation in Northern Uganda",
which details the Ugandan Government's commitment
to effective interventions, in cooperation with the
United Nations agencies and NGOs, to deal with the
security and humanitarian situation in northern
Uganda.

My delegation believes that there are strong
factors that create, with the support of the United
Nations Security Council and the international
community, an historic opportunity to decisively deal
with the LRA now. Following the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for Southern Sudan, both the
Government of the Sudan and the regional government
in southern Sudan have shown willingness to cooperate
with Uganda in dealing with the threat posed by the
LRA. Indeed, we hope that the agreement between the
UPDF, the Sudan People's Liberation Army and the
Sudanese army will bear fruit in the near future. The
ICC has documented evidence and has indicted the top
five LRA leaders for crimes committed against
humanity in the Great Lakes region. And we have seen
that, when given an adequate mandate, a United
Nations force such as MONUC, working with the army
of the host country, such as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, can be effective against negative forces
such as the ADF. Lastly, the African Union (AU) and
other subregional security mechanisms are now more
willing and ready to play an effective role in dealing
with negative forces as a threat to the maintenance of
regional peace and security in Africa.

My delegation would therefore like to strongly
urge the Council to undertake the following measures.

First, it should send a clear message that the
countries in the Great Lakes region have the
responsibility and obligation not to allow safe havens
for terrorists and negative foreign rebel groups to
destabilize their neighbours in the region.

Secondly, the Council should strongly support
sustained efforts of MONUC and the Forces Armees de
la Republique Democratique du Congo (FARDC) to
forcefully disarm the negative armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
respond positively to the request contained in the letter
of the Foreign Ministers of the Tripartite Plus Joint
Commission on the Great Lakes region, dated
21 October 2005 (S/2005/667, annex).

Thirdly, the Security Council should strongly
condemn the LRA's attacks against civilians and
humanitarian workers, call for the immediate cession
of all the violence and urge those countries and groups
that provide financial, material and logistical support
to the LRA to meet their international obligations by
immediately ceasing such support to the LRA.

Fourthly, the Council should call on the Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to take
seriously their national and international obligations to
ensure that their territories are not used to harbour
negative elements that cause insecurity in the Great
Lakes region.
Fifthly, it should urge the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to intensify military
pressure to disarm the LRA as a negative foreign force
operating from their territories and to cooperate fully
with the ICC by implementing the arrest warrants
issued by the Court on LRA terrorist leaders and to
hand them over to the ICC.

Sixthly, under Chapter VII of the Charter, the
Council should mandate MONUC and the United
Nations Advance Mission in the Sudan (UNAMIS) to
assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Sudan to disarm the LRA elements operating in the
southern Sudan and in Garamba National Park and in
executing the ICC arrest warrants for the LRA
leadership.

The Security Council should encourage countries
of the Great Lakes region to enter into or strengthen
various bilateral and regional arrangements, including
joint security liaison and coordinated operations, joint
verification mechanisms and other mechanisms to deal
with negative forces, including the extradition of those
not willing to take advantage of existing credible and
effective amnesty regimes, as in the case of Uganda.

The Council should welcome and fully support
the AU initiatives intended to forcefully disarm foreign
negative forces and to urge the United Nations and the
international community to extend to the AU the
necessary logistics and political support.

The Council should support the establishment of
a coordinating and monitoring mechanism in Kampala
between the Government of Uganda, the United
Nations - the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Political
Affairs, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Children's Fund - and the core countries, including
the United Kingdom, United States, Norway, the
Netherlands and others, as well as the AU and
representative credible NGOs, to strategically address
the humanitarian situation and resettlement of
internally displaced persons in northern Uganda.

The Council should treat the Great Lakes region
as a special post-conflict reconstruction zone with
components for different countries and therefore adopt
the zone as one of the key priorities under the
Peacebuilding Commission recently established by
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/180.

Finally, my delegation urges the Security Council
to support the establishment of a Great Lakes
reconstruction fund.

