Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the convening by New Zealand of this
open debate on the question of the Middle East. China
welcomes the fact that the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of New Zealand has travelled to New York to personally
preside over the meeting. I thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his briefing. I also listened attentively to
the statements made by the representatives of Palestine
and Israel.

Recently, the situation between Palestine and Israel
has remained tense. The Middle East peace process
remains bogged down. China has always believed
that achieving independent statehood for Palestine
and peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel
through peace talks is the only viable way to address
the Israel-Palestine question. There is no winner in this
conflict. Force will only exacerbate hatred and hostility.
All questions should be resolved through negotiation.
Palestine and Israel must both be committed to taking
the strategic option of peace talks, strengthen their
confidence in peace, maintain their patience with
regard to peace talks, demonstrate their determination
to achieve peace, and resume as soon as possible and
promote the peace talks.

We hope that the Israeli Government will take
credible measures to create the conditions for peace
talks, including steps to halt the construction of
settlements, release the detained Palestinians and
completely lift the blockade against Gaza. At the same
time, Israel's legitimate security concerns should also
be seriously addressed.

Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian question will
require joint efforts by both parties and the international
community as a whole. China hopes that efforts will be
made to fully tap the potential of existing mechanisms
in the Middle East peace process. China also supports
the Security Council in its efforts to play its rightful
role on this question, actively respond to the legitimate
demands of Palestine and the Arab countries and take
concrete measures to promote peace talks, bring about
an end to occupation and promote reconstruction in
Gaza.

China has always firmly supported the Palestinian
people's just cause of struggling for the restoration
of their legitimate national rights. China supports the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
full sovereignty on the basis of the 1967 borders with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

China wishes to see Palestine and Israel enjoy
common peace and security. China is open to all
initiatives conducive to resuming the dialogue and
negotiations. China has always, through its own ways
and means, actively promoted peace among the parties
concerned. China has long provided assistance within
our capacity to support capacity-building in Palestine
and ease the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We are
ready to work with other parties in the international
community to make more contributions to the
achievement of peace between Palestine and Israel, in
favour of stability in the region.

The question of Syria is central to the situation
in the Middle East and to international peace and
stability in general. Finding a comprehensive, lasting
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria is
consistent with the common interests of the people
of Syria and the countries of the region and the
international community as a whole. The situation
in Syria is now at crucial juncture. The international
community should be unwaveringly committed to
seeking a political settlement, setting forth clear targets
and making concerted efforts.

The priority tasks at this moment should be, first,
to promote early and unconditional participation by
all sides in the negotiations and dialogue with a View
to reaching a settlement plan that is suitable to the
situation of the country and accommodates the interests
of all sides. Secondly, the good offices of the countries
of the region, particularly those with influence, must
be actively carried out; those countries must fully
play their role. Thirdly, it is essential that the broadest
possible participation of all stakeholders be ensured,
and it is necessary that the United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, remain unified with
respect to the question of Syria.

China has always supported the United Nations
in playing a leading role on the question of Syria. We
recently welcomed Special Envoy De Mistura to China
and encouraged him to continue to play an active role in
seeking the political settlement of the question of Syria.
China will continue to play an active and constructive
role in bringing about a comprehensive, just and
appropriate settlement of the question of Syria.

