Mr. Mohammad Kama] (Malaysia): First and
foremost, my delegation would like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his briefing this morning
and the Secretary-General for his latest lucid and
comprehensive report on the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of
25 October 1999.

The dynamics of this new, emerging independent
nation are positive, although the situation is not
without problems. Let me first welcome the historic
announcement and swearing-in of East Timor's eight-
member transitional Cabinet, four of whom are East
Timorese, at UNTAET's headquarters on 15 July. The
first meeting of the new Cabinet of the transitional
government, on 17 July, is particularly welcomed by
my delegation.

The holding of that meeting represents a very
important step in the right direction towards an
independent East Timor. It represents the first time in
the territory's history that East Timorese leaders have
participated as equal partners in the governing of their
own country. Nevertheless, Malaysia recognizes that
while a new state structure has emerged in East Timor,
reconciliation, tolerance and cooperation will continue
to remain the basis for a lasting peace in the future new
nation.

There have been other positive developments in
the last month, which my delegation applauds. These
include the decision by the Government of Indonesia to
send a 17-member team from the Attorney-General's
office to Dili on 20 July to question witnesses and
collect any material evidence concerning five criminal
cases presented by the Indonesian authorities. The visit
was the outcome of the first working-level meeting
between UNTAET's legal and political units and its
Indonesian counterparts in Jakarta last month.

In addition, we hope that the graduation on 11
July of the first batch of 50 graduates of East Timor's
Police Training College in Dili as police officers will
enable the territory to fully undertake the responsibility
of maintaining law and order.

At the same time, the coming into operation of
the East Timor Revenue Service on 1 July is indeed
timely. Ninety per cent of the businesses liable for the
new impositions have been contracted by UNTAET.
We welcome also the decision of UNTAET's land and
property unit to start a pilot mapping exercise on 26
July to determine land boundaries in Dili, which
hopefully will be the beginning of a systematic
registration of land parcels in open areas. Nevertheless
we are mindful that the project is not to determine legal
ownership or right of occupancy.

Meanwhile, we note with satisfaction the
establishment of a Joint Border Committee for the
management of all cross-border matters, agreement on
which was reached during two days of talks between
the Indonesian authorities and UNTAET in Surabaya
on 5 July. In this connection, we urge the two parties to
continue to explore ways and means to overcome the
problem of a land corridor to link East Timor with the
isolated Oecussi enclave, on the northern coast of West
Timor.

We are confident that further progress on other
remaining issues - such as scholarships for East
Timorese studying at Indonesian universities, pensions
for East Timorese who had worked in the Indonesian
administration, Indonesian assets and archives, and the
culture of East Timor - will be achieved at the
upcoming September meeting.

My delegation's optimism is tempered, however,
by the deterioration of the security situation in some
refugee camps in West Timor. We are particularly
dismayed at the fact that small groups of thugs are able
to carry out with impunity a campaign of intimidation
in the camps. We deeply regret that registration of East
Timorese refugees in the main refugee camps in
Kupang and in the border districts of West Timor has
been cancelled as a result of serious security
conditions.

Equally, the repeated abuse and threats by the
militias against the staff of the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) are a cause for serious concern to my
delegation. Malaysia believes that UNHCR must be
allowed to play its part in resolving the refugee
problems in West Timor with the full cooperation of
the Indonesian authorities.

We are also deeply saddened by the death of a
New Zealand peacekeeper, Private William Manning,
on 24 July, who was killed in a gun battle with armed
militias in East Timor. We extend our deepest and
sincerest condolences to the family of Private
Manning. This tragic incident serves to remind the
international community of the remaining daunting
challenges it faces in meeting its commitment to the
people of East Timor.

We welcome the actions taken by Indonesia to
date and look forward to further efforts by that country
to address this issue.

Although the process of achieving independence
and nation-building is currently under way in East
Timor under UNTAET, the local population is still
living in difficult conditions. Unemployment runs
about 80 per cent, and there is little indication that
things will improve anytime soon.

Foreign investment, considered vital to reviving
the shattered economy, is only trickling in. Apart from
a handful of service companies setting up shop in Dili
in the hope of profiting from the United Nations short-
term presence there, East Timor's private sector barely
exists.

Equally disturbing is the fact that land disputes
are proving to be one of the greatest stumbling blocks
to the economic development needed to sustain East
Timor as an independent country.

Without clear ownership laws, and with many
Government records destroyed, businesses, quite
understandably, are reluctant to invest in long-term
projects. While we fully support the proposal of the
United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia (UNTAC) to set up an independent
tribunal to arbitrate claims, the hundreds of cases that
are waiting could take years to be completed. Unless
UNTAET is able to resolve the problem quickly, the
new nation risks being left without a functioning
economy when the Transitional Administration comes
to an end.

We recognize that East Timor will need
substantial funding from outside the country for the
foreseeable future, if it is going to be able to rebuild
successfully and to lay the foundations for a society in
which the basic needs of all its citizens are met. While
donors are prepared to be generous in the short term,
they will be justifiably hesitant to commit themselves
to assisting East Timor for an indefinite period of time.

In conclusion, my delegation is pleased to hear
from Mr. Annabi just now that the leaders of East
Timor attended the recent thirty-third annual
ministerial meeting of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN), in Bangkok. This positive
development augurs well for the future relations
between independent East Timor and the ASEAN
countries - and, of course, for peace, stability and
prosperity in the South-East Asian region.

Finally, my delegation also wishes to pay tribute
to the efforts of UNTAET, under the leadership of Mr.
Sergio Vieira de Mello. These efforts have contributed
to the transformation of East Timor over the past 11
months.

