Mr. Cevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
United States presidency for organizing this important
debate, as well as the briefers for their insightful
comments and remarks.

The developments in the legal and normative
framework on children and armed conflict; the strong
attention devoted to the issue in the Security Council,
exemplified by the adoption of important resolutions,
such as resolution 2143 (2014); and the increased
momentum achieved by ground-breaking campaigns
such as Children, Not Soldiers have led to significant
developments on the ground.

Yet, significant challenges remain. The latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339) highlights
the despicable ways in which the rights of children
continue to be violated, as well as the severe effects that
conflicts have on children. With the changing nature
of conflicts; kidnappings, torture and sexual violence
against children; attacks on schools and hospitals;
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
needs; and wide-scale displacement have become the
realities of war.

One heartbreaking example is the situation in
Syria, which lies right across our border. According
to UNICEF statistics, over 5 million children in Syria
need essential humanitarian support, an estimated
3 million have been displaced, and over 1 million are
out of school, while schools are destroyed, damaged
or used for other purposes. Last month's report of
the Independent Commission of Inquiry points to the
grave crimes that continue to be committed against the
children of Syria, such as their killing, maiming and
injury, as well as their recruitment and use in hostilities.
Nearby in Gaza, children are experiencing difficulties
starting their new school year as educational facilities
have been destroyed or damaged or are being used for
shelter by the displaced. Last but not least, the Islamic
State in Iraq and Sham for gruesome violations against
children in Iraq and Syria.

A strong display of global political will and joint
action is our most crucial tool. United Nations and
other missions provide essential assistance to children,
as well as monitoring and reporting functions that
facilitate better planning, protection and response.
They should be supported.

Another way forward is the integration of child
protection provisions in negotiations and ceasefire
and peace agreements. It is also essential to provide
mediators in these situations with sufficient expertise
on child protection. Mainstreaming principles related
to children and armed conflict into peacekeeping
mandates is another way forward.

Finally, the increased number and scope of
conflicts heightens the importance of cooperation
and coordination between United Nations, regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors in crisis areas.
Regional and subregional organizations in particular
can contribute to the protection of civilians and child
protection.

While focusing on new threats and challenges, we
must not lose sight ofthe initial goal ofmobilizing efforts
to end the recruitment and use of children by armed
groups. The Security Council must continue to apply
pressure on persistent perpetrators, including through
sanctions if necessary. Preventive measures, such as the
establishment of legal frameworks and age-verification
mechanisms, especially birth registration, are of
particular importance. On the other hand, international
organizations and non-governmental organizations
should refrain from concluding any kind of documents,
including deeds of commitment, with terrorist
organizations, which can easily abuse this situation to
legitimize their existence and acts.

In concluding my words, I would like to voice
our strong readiness to extend our full support to
international and regional efforts related to child
protection and child soldiers. I would particularly
like to commend the valuable efforts of the United
Nations, and express our heartfelt gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
her hard-working team.

