South Africa wishes to commend the Russian Federation for its stewardship of the Security Council for the month of October, and I thank you, Minister Lavrov, for having convened this meeting today to review the situation in the Gulf region. As we heard from the interventions already made, security in the Gulf is intrinsically linked to global security, given the significant economic role and strategic position of the region. It is in the interest of us all for the countries in the region to be able to address the heightened tensions and protracted conflict that has come to characterize the region for so long. The tensions between key regional players and their allies are disconcerting, as their actions spill over to the wider region and further destabilize an already fragile Middle East. It is in that context that we reiterate that sustainable peace and stability in the Gulf and the wider Middle East region requires an end to its core peace and security challenge, which is the occupation of Palestine. The international community, including countries in the Gulf region, should continue to work towards a just and peaceful end to the occupation, guided by the relevant United Nations resolutions pertinent to a viable two-State solution that will guarantee and safeguard the human rights and dignity of all people on both sides of the agreed Green Line. Approaches that seek to undermine the internationally agreed parameters and that do not take into account the views and aspirations of the Palestinians undermine the prospects for peace and justice. We have seen the devastating impact that meddling by external Powers, especially in this region, can have on a State and its citizens. The lessons learned from the illegal, unauthorized invasion of Iraq remain a terrifying example thereof. The aftermath of the invasion of Iraq, which led to war and devastation, illustrates the consequences of countries resorting to unsanctioned military action, without due regard for international law and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. As the custodian of international peace and security, the Security Council should support any initiative by States in the Gulf region to work collectively to address the security situation and instability in the region. Such initiatives will lead to the restoration of peace and stability not only in the Gulf region but also the broader Middle East. It will allow for countries in the Gulf to work together to address broader issues, including countering terrorism and promoting sustainable development. South Africa believes, based on our own experience, that regional and intergovernmental organizations remain critical partners in resolving conflict and should remain impartial in the drive towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts. As a matter of principle, South Africa supports multilateral diplomacy, adherence to international law and the peaceful resolution of conflict. This is deeply rooted in its foreign policy, The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) illustrates how diplomacy and negotiations can resolve challenges between States prior to these evolving into full-scale conflict. We wish to reiterate that South Africa views the JCPOA as one of most important diplomatic achievements in the area of nuclear non-proliferation since the signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. We believe that it is an excellent example of collective action to consolidate peace through cooperation and collaboration on the basis of a binding agreement. We are also of the view that the JCPOA has contributed significantly to the reduction of tensions over Iran's nuclear programme and remains vital in promoting peace, stability and the normalization of relations within the Gulf. In an effort to avoid any measures that would challenge the integrity of the processes of the Council, South Africa will continue to encourage the States members of the Council to act responsibly and in a manner that promotes peace and builds confidence and trust among nations. South Africa will remain resolute in supporting efforts to resolve tensions between all stakeholders in the Gulf region and will always promote dialogue rather than antagonism in order to safeguard the gains already made in support of the maintenance of broader international peace and security.
