Mr. Guehenno: I wish to thank you, Mr.
President, for giving me this opportunity to express full
support for what the High Representative just said,
specifically with respect to ongoing efforts by former
police officers in Bosnia and Herzegovina to be
reinstated by the courts. Those police officers had been
deemed unsuitable to serve in the police force of
Bosnia and Herzegovina by the Commissioner of the
International Police Task Force (IPTF).

Let me recall that the Commissioner's decisions
followed an exhaustive two-year vetting process
undertaken in accordance with the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, resolutions of the Security
Council and the decisions of the Madrid meeting of the
Peace Implementation Council.

It is indeed important to recall that the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina were and remain under an
obligation, which is binding under international law, to
give effect to those decisions.

I would like to take this opportunity to confirm
that the United Nations Secretariat very much shares
Lord Ashdown's view on the political importance of
the challenges to the outcomes of the vetting process.
We also firmly endorse his view on the need for an
early solution.

To that end, while the United Nations no longer
has a mandate to act in the area of police reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we have sought to provide
every form of assistance to Lord Ashdown since he
first brought those challenges to our attention last year.

Unfortunately, neither our support nor the actions
of the High Representative have been sufficient so far
to resolve that question. The courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as we were just reminded, have ordered
the reinstatement of at least one former officer deemed
unsuitable to serve the people of that country.

As a result, and at the request of the High
Representative, legal experts from the United Nations
and international agencies operating in Sarajevo,
including the Office of the High Representative, have
been engaged in discussions to identify a workable
course of action.

The support of the Council will be of critical
importance in reminding the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as the High Representative has just said,
of the scope and nature of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
international obligations to implement the IPTF's
decisions.

