Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Security Council is meeting
today in the face of a horrific event. The Plurinational
State of Bolivia expresses its strong condemnation of
the use of chemical weapons and the use of chemical
agents as weapons - justifiable and criminal acts
regardless of the reason behind them, Whenever and by
whomever committed. Those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons must be duly investigated, tried
and punished to the fullest extent. The use of chemical
weapons is a violation of obligations established under
international law as well as a threat to international
peace and security. Bolivia demands an independent,
impartial, comprehensive and conclusive investigation
that is completely depoliticized. In that regard, we
reiterate our support for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
United Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism
in ensuring that, in line with their mandates, they can
carry out the tasks I mentioned.

We also express our vigorous condemnation of any
type of attack against innocent civilians or civilian
infrastructure in this or, indeed, in any other conflict.
We reiterate the obligation incumbent upon all parties
to ensure the safety and security of persons caught
in the middle of the conflict. We reiterate that the
use of chemical weapons is a serious crime against
international security. We also express our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims and the
Syrian people while encouraging them to continue their
efforts to finding a lasting peace.

With regard to the note submitted on 23 February
by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the verification
process of chemical weapons in Syria, we appreciate
that its secretariat "verified the destruction of 24 of the
27 chemical weapons production facilities declared by
the Syrian Arab Republic" that could have produced
chemical weapons. We hope that the security situation
in Syria will improve and allow for the verification of
the remaining facilities. According to the same report,

"all of the chemicals declared by the Syrian Arab
Republic that were removed from its territory in 2014
have now been destroyed".

We therefore underscore the willingness and
readiness expressed by the Syrian Government to
comply with its international obligations. We also
welcome the fact that the Joint Investigative Mechanism
continues to strengthen its operational capacity in
reopening its office for research at OPCW headquarters
and that it carries out its work in the most methodical,
technical and trustworthy way possible.

Bolivia calls for the unity of the Security Council
so that the Council Chamber is not used as a sounding
board for war propaganda, so that that the international
community can look upon it with confidence and so
that it not be used as a pawn in planning for war. Only
investigations will determine the responsible parties,
and we believe that the most responsible way to proceed
is not to prematurely determine who is responsible for
those acts but to ensure an independent, impartial,
comprehensive and conclusive investigation.

Finally, I would like to underscore the words of
the Secretary-General, who has reminded us that

Syria has undergone seven years of war marked by the
increasing suffering of the Syrian people. We believe
that it is incumbent on the Council to recall at present
and forever the causes of that terrible war. We would
probably not be sitting here and lamenting the seven
years of war and suffering of the Syrian people had it
not been for the invasion ofIraq more than 10 years ago
in the context of interventionist policies in the Middle
East. I believe that it is a universal responsibility for
those who committed such crimes to also assume their
historical responsibility. We believe that it is imperative
to recognize that interference, interventionism and that
policy of regime change undermine all civilizations
established by the various peoples of the world. We
naturally regret and are saddened and moved by the loss
of life, but we once again stridently call for the unity of
the Council and for it to be used not as a sounding board
for war propaganda but as a place in which we debate
and agree on the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

