Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I should
like to welcome and thank His Excellency Mr. Ismail
Omar Guelleh, President of the Republic of Djibouti,
for his presence and for his statement to the Council.
We appreciate the constructive role played by Djibouti
in the region and applaud President Guelleh's personal
efforts in that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is concerned about
violations of the sanctions regime, which are mentioned
in the report of the Somalia-Eritrea Monitoring Group,

transmitted by a letter dated 10 March 2010 (see S/2010/91). In that respect, we would like to pay
tribute to Ambassador Heller for his hard work as
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea.
We hope that his recent visit to the region will have
concrete effects.

We were also concerned as we listened to the
statement of President Guelleh; we understand the call
for urgent and firm involvement of all stakeholders that
can contribute to the common aim of achieving peace
and security in the region of the Horn of Africa.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has been consistent in its
position that international conflicts, including those
originating from border disputes, should be resolved by
peaceful means and in compliance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we welcome all efforts by the United Nations and by
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and the League of Arab States, to try to help the parties
de-escalate tension and move towards a peaceful
solution to the crisis. We sincerely hope that those
efforts will be honestly and wholeheartedly accepted
by all parties.

On the situation in Somalia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates its full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and for the Djibouti
peace process, which depends not only on internal
factors but also on sincere cooperation by the countries
of the region. We call on all parties concerned to
genuinely respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Somalia and to make a greater contribution
to peace and security in that country.

With grave concern, Bosnia and Herzegovina
shares the position expressed by other Council members
with regard to the fight against piracy: that a long-term
solution will come about only through the rule of law
and the establishment of security on the ground.

Finally, allow us to express our best hopes for a
successful outcome of the upcoming Istanbul
Conference on Somalia, an outcome that will foster
stability, security and the reconstruction of the country.
