The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We deeply regret the vetos of today's draft
resolution (S/2016/1026), introduced by Spain, Egypt
and New Zealand. Spain believes that its text, which
is not perfect and undoubtedly comes too late for the
thousands of lives that have been lost already, would
have made it possible to protect the civilian population
of Aleppo from the worst consequences of the war in
Syria and to re-establish the cessation of hostilities
throughout the country.

As divided as the Council is with respect to how
to respond to the conflict, it has continued to shoulder
the responsibility conferred on it by the Charter of
the United Nations. If peace cannot be maintained,
we should at least be able to maintain respect for
international humanitarian law, which prohibits attacks
on civilians and requires the regular provision of
humanitarian aid. Spain, Egypt and New Zealand share
duties as rapporteurs on the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Over the past two years, we have often been
tempted to urge a response to the problems in Syria
in the Security Council, but have refrained in order to
avoid divisiveness and interference in the negotiations
being conducted in other forums. We have crafted more
than one draft resolution that has not seen the light of
the day and have also participated in initiatives that
ran the risk of creating conflict within the Security
Council. This time, however, we could no longer stay
silent, considering that the General Assembly will be
holding a meeting in three days in order to debate a
draft resolution demanding that the Council take action
on the grave situation in Syria.

As my colleagues from Egypt and New Zealand have
recalled, we convened an initial round of negotiations
on today's draft resolution on 3 November. Despite
the desperate situation of Syria's civilian population,
we set aside enough time to help us work to reach a
consensus. We have striven to find language that
could bring together positions that were very different,
included some that were fully opposed. We have
incorporated suggestions from every delegation that
wanted to contribute to drafting the text. We have done
everything possible - indeed, perhaps, sometimes the
impossible - to reach an agreement. We are sorry that
our efforts have not produced results, but we do believe
it was our duty to try.

The year 2016 is the four hundredth anniversary of
the death of Cervantes, the author of Don Quixote, who
will always be remembered for his impossible dream
of becoming a knight errant. With today's veto of our
draft resolution, the Spanish delegation has awoken
from its dream, but we will not give up. I would like to
conclude by expressing our gratitude to the delegations
of Egypt and New Zealand, which have shared with us
our frustrated attempt to tackle the conflict in Syria. It
has been an honour to work with both of them.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of China has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

