Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): We
thank you, Sir, for having convened this debate, which
is very important in the current circumstances.

We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the Israeli measures that have prevented Muslim
worshippers from accessing Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
which runs counter to freedom of worship and is an
unacceptable provocation to all Muslims around the
world. It is part and parcel of a number of attempts
by Israel to impede the status quo in Jerusalem and in
Al-Aqsa Mosque.

We express our gravest concerns about the violence
we have seen on the holy esplanade. We insist that the
Mosque must to remain open to all worshippers. We call
upon all parties to demonstrate restraint and to abide by
international treaties, in particular the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The international community should
assume its responsibilities to end all violations and any
step to alter the historic and legal status of Jerusalem.
The Kingdom of Bahrain therefore calls once again on
the international community, and the Security Council
in particular, to assume their responsibilities, to end
those dangerous practices and to ensure respect for
the relevant conventions and laws, international law
as a whole and the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council concerning the city of Jerusalem by providing
the necessary protection to the Palestinian people and
to the holy sites in order to protect freedom of religion.

A fair and sustainable peace in the region will
depend to a great extent on the ability of the Palestinian
people to recover their legitimate rights, including
their right to an independent State within the borders
of 4 June 1967, and on an end to Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory and to all forms of settlement.

Finally, Bahrain recalls that the Palestinian question
remains among our major concerns. We therefore
encourage any attempt to help the international
community to find a fair and sustainable solution to
that question on the basis of the two-State solution,
international law and the Arab Peace Initiative, and to
provide the region with a genuine opportunity to live in
peace, security and development.

