Mr. Valle (Brazil): The Brazilian delegation considers
it a timely initiative to convene an open debate on the
peaceful settlement of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we express our sincere
appreciation to you, Sir, for having made it materialize.

In paragraph 8 of his important report of 13 April
1998 on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and development in Africa (S/1998/318), the
Secretary-General, who honours us with his presence here
today, pointed out that at the Congress of Berlin of 1885,

"Kingdoms, States and communities in Africa were
arbitrarily divided; unrelated areas and peoples were
just as arbitrarily joined together."

As underlined by the Secretary-General, the decision
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in 1963 to
accept inherited borders has provided the continent with a
powerful tool to prevent territorial conflict. The task of
nation-building, however, remains a daunting challenge for
present and coming generations of Africans.

In his wisdom, the Secretary-General proposed a set
of ideas to respond to the many situations of conflict that
afflict the continent. Those ideas approach the short-term
problems from the perspective of peacemaking,
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance. He also raised
the issue of building durable peace and promoting
sustainable economic growth, with special emphasis on
good governance.
In its reaction to the report of the Secretary-General,
this Council held an open debate on the issue and adopted
a programme of work that produced resolutions addressing
the efficacy of arms embargoes, the reduction of flows of
small arms and the strengthening of the coordination
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. In dealing with the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we should increasingly
resort to the options that have been developed throughout
the past year.

Placed in the very centre of the continent, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo shares borders with
nine other African States. It belongs to the central, eastern
and southern subregions and can be either the hub for the
promotion of economic integration and prosperity or a
focus for discord and strife. Throughout their long history,
African nations have been subjected to undue and
disruptive foreign interference. Uninvited involvement in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo should cease, and
a political formula to promote national reconciliation
should be negotiated.

A few weeks after receiving a notification from the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Security Council reaffirmed, on 31 August 1998, the
obligation to respect the territorial integrity and national
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
called for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of foreign forces
and the initiation of political dialogue. While upholding
the principle of non-interference, Brazil recognizes the
right of a State threatened by foreign invasion to call for
external assistance. We should differentiate those foreign
forces within the Democratic Republic of the Congo that
were invited by the Government from those whose
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
reflects different motivations.

Resolution 1197 (1998), adopted on 18
September 1998, stresses the responsibility of regional
organizations. The OAU and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) have played a leading
role in the attempts to solve the impasse in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. There is, however, a
need for increased political will on the part of the many
players, as was expressed at the ministerial-level meeting
of the Security Council on Africa last September.

The security of any State has a direct link with the
security of its neighbours. Therefore any attempt to
resolve the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will have to take into account the safety of other
countries of the region, some of which feel the impact of
episodes of lawlessness from across their borders. The
restoration of law and order is also a requisite for the full
enjoyment of human and political rights.

The States of Central Africa have already pondered
such questions. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
belongs to the group of countries that, within the
framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
organized a Subregional Conference on Democratic

 

Institutions and Peace in Central Africa, held at Bata,
Equatorial Guinea, in May last year. The Bata Declaration,
which was unanimously adopted, recognized that the
process of democratization in the region must lead to a
political system capable of allowing the full expression of
the people's will. It states that such a system should be
based, inter alia, on the principles of respect for the rule of
law; political pluralism; organization of free, transparent
and fair elections; freedom of the press; independence of
the judiciary; respect for human rights and human dignity;
and the practice of dialogue and tolerance.

The Governments of the region should be supported
and encouraged to fully apply those principles. That is the
only route to prevent internal discontent from leading to
armed conflict.

The international aspects of the conflict must be
addressed by improving the mechanisms of cooperation
between the United Nations, the OAU, SADC and other
relevant subregional organizations. In this respect we
support President Chiluba's efforts. The convening of a
conference on the Great Lakes should also be pursued. The
Security Council has reaffirmed the importance of holding
such a conference. It has also stressed that the Council is
prepared to assist, through effective measures, in the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement and in an agreed
process for a political settlement of the conflict.

OAU Secretary General Salim Salim addressed the
Council last October. He expressed the View that there is
consensus on the need to maintain the territorial integrity of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the legitimacy of
President Kabila's Government, the need to create political
space for the opposition forces, and the recognition that
some of the neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have real security concerns that need to be
addressed.

Those four points are essential in the quest for a
solution. A fifth element relies on political will, both on the
part of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the opposition parties, to engage in true
negotiations that could allow for the fair and meaningful
participation of all parties in the political process. The
international community as a whole is expected to provide
the financial, technical and political cooperation needed for
this dialogue to prosper.

