Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Ministers of Malaysia, the Netherlands,
Australia and Ukraine for marking this occasion with
their presence.

The United Kingdom is deeply saddened, frustrated
and disappointed that Russia has vetoed draft resolution
S/2015/562 today. The draft resolution was about
securing justice for the 298 people - including 80
children and 10 British nationals - who lost their lives
on board Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. Russia's
veto disrespects the victims and insults their families.
Through resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
unanimously agreed that those responsible for that
incident be held to account and demanded that all States
cooperate fully with efforts to establish accountability.
With its veto, Russia is not meeting that demand.

The Security Council had an opportunity today
to start a process that would have brought justice and
accountability for the families of all those who lost their
lives. There are clear precedents for the Council taking
this kind of action: securing international support for
the Lockerby trial, and establishing the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and another Special
Tribune for Lebanon, among others. A year after the
downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, this was
precisely the moment to establish a tribunal - to send
a clear and unambiguous message that the Council will
not tolerate impunity and that the Council has a clear
responsibility to address violent acts that constitute a
threat to international peace and security. We therefore
reject the Russian allegation that this draft resolution
was an unnecessary and premature move, and that
the Security Council should have waited for the
investigations to conclude. An operational and fully
staffed tribunal takes time to set up. Had we started
that process today, the tribunal would have been ideally
placed to act on the outcome of the investigations.

Despite Russia's veto, the investigations will
continue. The investigators have been exemplary in
their professionalism and integrity, working in the most
challenging circumstances. We reject any allegations
to the contrary. Russia has been involved in both
investigations. The Russian Federal Transport Agency
has actively participated in the technical investigation
and contributed material to the criminal investigation.
It is damaging that Russia has chosen to block the
best route to establishing a tribunal for that criminal
investigation to reach a conclusion. It is through those
investigations that we will bring those responsible to
account - as resolution 2166 (2014) demands. The
veto today will not prevent that. The perpetrators of
that terrible crime should find no comfort in Russia's
actions today. There must be accountability, and the
international community now needs to unite to make
that happen.

Allow me to conclude by returning to the victims.
To them, Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-l7 was meant
to be a routine flight to Kuala Lumpur: a business trip,
a holiday or a stop-over before a conference. Instead,
all 298 people on board lost their lives in a remote
part of eastern Ukraine - far from home, far from
those they loved and far from those who loved them.
They and those whom they left behind deserve justice.
Despite Russia's actions today, we will not give up in
our pursuit of that goal.

