Mr. Mitri (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like, on behalf of the Government of Lebanon, to
warmly thank the Security Council for expressing its
constant support for the independence, sovereignty,
security and freedom of Lebanon on the basis of the
principles underpinning international legitimacy and
the Charter of the United Nations. The Council has
never hesitated - particularly over the past two
years - to express its sympathy and support for and
commitment to Lebanon and its independence.

Indeed, ever since the Security Council adopted
resolution 1595 (2005), which established an
International Independent Investigation Commission to
inquire into the assassination of the late Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and members of his entourage, and in its
efforts to identify the perpetrators of that terrorist
crime and other political assassinations and attempted
assassinations perpetrated since October 2004, the
Council has consistently supported Lebanon. It has
adopted important resolutions to ensure that criminals
are brought to justice and that there is no impunity.
Those resolutions have been binding to ensure that
justice is done.
The Council has left no room for doubt in
expressing its commitment to Lebanon. Last summer,
the Council supported our country when we were the

target of a destructive and iniquitous Israeli aggression.
The Council called upon the international community
to play its role by bringing an end to that aggression
and providing the necessary assistance and support at
various levels to protect Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Last week, the Council reaffirmed
its support for Lebanon once again by condemning
terrorist acts aimed at undermining our security,
stability and vitality, as well as the role played by my
country - a role based on moderation, openness,
democracy and freedom.

Today, the Security Council has adopted a text
that forms the basis for the establishment of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon in accordance with a
methodology that has been very professionally and
meticulously worked out so that it meets the highest
legal criteria. I wish to express our warmest thanks to
the sponsors of the resolution and to those who voted
in favour of it, thereby enhancing the credibility and
effectiveness of the United Nations in carrying out its
responsibilities and helping Lebanon to do justice and
protect peace and security.

I also wish to take this opportunity to express my
warmest thanks to those States that abstained in the
voting. Despite the reservations that they expressed
regarding the resolution just adopted by the Council,
they once again reaffirmed their commitment to the
paramount importance for the principle of justice of the
establishment of a special tribunal for Lebanon to
identify criminals and deter the undermining of our
freedom and sovereignty.

Our warmest thanks go also to the Secretary-
General for his personal commitment to remain seized
of the situation in Lebanon and for the sympathy and
interest he has shown with respect to that situation,
which has been among his highest priorities, owing to
his unswerving commitment to the establishment of a
tribunal. We wish moreover to thank his colleagues for
their efforts.

We commend the positive atmosphere that has
supported the cooperation between the Secretary-
General's representatives and the Government of
Lebanon. We are where we are today as a result of
long-term joint endeavours by the Lebanese
Government and the United Nations. Every opportunity
has been taken in order to adopt the Statute of the
Tribunal, to implement the agreement between the
United Nations and the Government of Lebanon in
accordance with the provisions of the Lebanese
constitution - and to ensure that that is done also by
the Lebanese parliament.

We worked for the establishment of the Tribunal
because unanimity existed within Lebanon, as reflected
in the resolution and in our national dialogue. There
was also international Arab unanimity regarding the
establishment of the Tribunal, but the path that led us
to the adoption of the resolution was strewn with
obstacles. Parliament was unable to meet to discuss the
establishment of the Tribunal, despite the fact that a
majority of parliamentarians appealed for such a
meeting.

This is now an opportunity for the Lebanese to
recover their fundamental rights, first and foremost
their right to embark on the path towards the truth. The
truth must be raised up against those who have been
involved in any way in terrorist crimes against our
leaders, beginning with the assassination of former
Prime Minister Hariri and including the murders of
journalists, parliamentarians, writers and illustrious
academics.

The Special Tribunal for Lebanon will certainly
act as a deterrent to terrorist activities, and today's
resolution will therefore serve to protect the Lebanese
people, enhance our freedom, allow us to rid ourselves
of such threats, and thus move forward.

Today's resolution does not reflect the victory of
one party over another. Justice is the victor. Nor does it
mean that one group of Lebanese now believe
themselves to be stronger than the others or to enjoy
the support of the international community to the
detriment of others. On the contrary, the resolution will
07-36208

help to strengthen the rule of law and to bolster the
foundations of democracy. It will enhance the
independence of the judiciary vis-a-vis the political
sphere, as sought by all the Lebanese people. It is
therefore in the interests of all Lebanese who seek to
advance justice hand in hand with stability.

No one can hope to compel the Lebanese to
choose between their quest for justice and their right to
peace, security and stability, nor is it acceptable under
any standard for the Lebanese to be forced to choose
one path over another or for responsibility for crimes
perpetrated against Lebanese to be ascribed to the
victims. Under the resolution adopted today and
previous resolutions, the Council has expressed its
commitment to justice and stability. It also recalls all
the assassinations that have taken place in Lebanon and
the prevailing situation there, which threatens peace
and security not only in the region, but throughout the
world.

Today, therefore, we can only commemorate the
victims throughout Lebanon, the martyr Prime Minister
Hariri and all martyrs brought low by the hands of
terrorists. We say to them that truth is the path to
freedom, justice and reconciliation. Therein lies the
salvation of Lebanon.

