Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this public meeting
of the Council on the present volatile situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. I also offer formally
our warmest congratulations to you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council.

Bangladesh is deeply concerned at the escalation
of violence in the occupied territories and the excessive
use of force against Palestinian civilians by Israeli
troops, resulting in heavy casualties. This is most tragic
and totally uncalled for. The image of terror-stricken
12-year old Muhammad al-Durrah before he was shot
dead continues to haunt us. We condemn such brutal
acts perpetrated by the Israeli forces.

We extend our heartfelt condolences to the
families of all those killed and wounded in the recent
violence. We also call for an appropriate inquiry into
the events, including the possible violation of the
Geneva Convention, to ensure that those responsible
are brought to justice. We urge all parties to act with
the utmost prudence and restraint, to refrain from acts
of provocation and to make all efforts to restore calm.

We believe that the cycle of violence in the region
can only end through a just and comprehensive peace
agreement based on the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the various international agreements
signed between the parties concerned in the Middle
East. In this connection, we emphasize the need for
immediate and full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions regarding the withdrawal
of Israeli occupation from all Arab territories,
including eastern Jerusalem, as well as regarding the
return of the refugees.

It is in this context that Bangladesh extends
unreserved and unswerving support for the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people, including their right to
establish an independent State with Jerusalem as its
capital and the right of the Palestinian refugees to
return to their ancestral homes to live with dignity and
honour. We urge Israel to refrain from all activities,
including building new settlements in occupied Arab
territories, that seek to alter the religious, political and
ethnic character of these territories.

It is most unfortunate that, just when the peace
process in the Middle East had reached a crucial stage,
an Israeli leader's calculated provocation resulted in
the recent escalation of violence in the occupied
territories, putting the whole process in jeopardy. We
reiterate the call for putting the peace process back on
track and, in this context, welcome the initiative of the
United States to convene a meeting between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel in Paris tomorrow.

