Mr. Kandangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
I thank Mr. Jan Kubis for introducing the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/721) and for his excellent
work as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), despite the extremely harsh
conditions. I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his intervention.

Afghanistan continues to face many challenges,
despite enormous efforts that have led to tangible
progress. The situation concerning security and human
rights and the narcotics issue have not fared any better.
The political situation has shown little improvement,
in particular, the peace process and dialogue remain
deadlocked. Given the situation, we call on all political
actors to recommit to that process. We urge the
Chairperson of the High Peace Council to continue
to take initiatives towards a successful conclusion,
and we call on UNAMA to continue efforts to reduce
inter-ethnic and intertribal tensions.

Nevertheless, on a positive note, tangible progress
continues in Afghanistan's relations with the other
countries of the region. The same holds true with regard
to implementation of the Kabul process concerning the
coordination of development assistance.

The presidential and provincial elections to be
held next year remain a focus of attention for Afghan
politicians and the entire international community. The
technical and institutional preparations under way, the
publication of candidate listings, as well as the naming
of the Independent Electoral Complaints commissioners
and the provision of substantial logistical and financial
resources towards the effective fulfilment of their
mission, illustrate the Government's commitment to
holding the elections on time and in better conditions.

Effective measures are needed to ensure security
for voters and election officials alike, during that
important phase in Afghanistan's history. Violence
clouding the process, namely, the killing of a Kunduz
provincial election official, reminds us that the Taliban
and other armed factions will make every effort to
sabotage the electoral process in order to prevent voters
from fulfilling their civic duty.

The violence punctuating the electoral preparations
is indicative of an even graver climate of insecurity in
the country, such that, in the past three months, security

incidents increased by 74 per cent and armed clashes by
48 per cent.
We deplore the fact that the number of civilian
casualties, including women and children, is steadily
rising - it is up by 13 per cent compared to last year. We
are particularly disturbed by the situation of children,
who are subjected to indiscriminate, untold suffering.
Faced with that tragedy, the end of which is far from
sight, we are determined to express our gratitude to all,
particularly the Government's technical working group
on children and armed conflict, UNICEF and UNAMA,
and their tireless efforts to end violence against women
and children.

Factors leading to insecurity will eventually be
overcome through strengthened human resources
and security institutions as the International Security
Assistance Force withdraws. In that regard, we urge
the continuing establishment of Afghan local police
forces, despite the persistent attacks against them.
Unfortunately, those attacks have not spared the
United Nations, relevant partners and humanitarian
organizations, as well as diplomatic missions. We
condemn those unjustifiable, despicable acts, and again
request that the authors be identified and prosecuted in
accordance with applicable laws.

In that context, we welcome the bilateral security
agreement between the Afghan authorities and the
United States Government that was recently signed and
ratified by the consultative loya jirga, and hope that it
will help strengthen security throughout the country,
thus reducing violence.

The United Nations and international partners are
working with the Afghan authorities to create conditions
conducive to peace and reconstruction ofthe country in
the conditions of insecurity that we mentioned above.
One of the major challenges it needs help in dealing
with is drugs. The fact is that the fight against drugs
is still a serious headache for Afghanistan, despite the
adoption and implementation of a national strategy to
combat drugs. Poppy cultivation in the country has
reached unprecedented levels, with an increase of 49 per
cent. Given the situation, we call on Afghanistan's
neighbours and other international partners to support
the Government's efforts and provide it with the
assistance necessary for dealing effectively with this
scourge, which also has negative repercussions for
peace and security in the region.
Afghanistan is changing, happily and despite
everything, in a favourable regional environment
where trade with other States, bilaterally and through
regional entities, is getting stronger, particularly in
the framework of the Istanbul Process. We encourage
all the countries concerned to continue to work with
Afghanistan to meet their shared challenges. We hope
that the commitments made within the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework and aimed at implementing
the Kabul process will continue to be honoured, with
UNAMA's help.

Finally, I should commend the unwavering support
that the United Nations and its programmes and funds
have continued to give Afghanistan. I would like
to reiterate my country's gratitude to Mr. Jan Kubis,
who has shown exemplary leadership at the head of
UNAMA. Nor should I omit to commend Ambassador
Gary Quinlan of Australia and his whole team for the
admirable role they have played in taking over the
management of this issue from Germany.

While Togo will be leaving the Council in a
few days, we remain ready, within the framework
of the international community's efforts, to support
Afghanistan in its quest to regain definitive peace and
national harmony.

