Mr. Elnour (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I take this
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month. I wish you
every success. I am sure that we will cooperate fully
with you in this endeavour.

I would like to thank the Council for the spirit of
cooperation and consensus that allowed it today to
adopt resolution 2352 (2017), extending the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) for six months. We hope that the same spirit
will characterize the discussions of the Council in a
manner that will allow it to confront all challenges to
international peace and security.

My country is committed to implementing the
resolution adopted today and any subsequent relevant
resolutions. I take this opportunity to stress my
country's commitment to cooperating with UNISFA in
order to allow it to implement its mandate under the
resolutions of the Council.

I note the security and stability prevailing in Abyei
and the significant progress achieved towards ensuring
peaceful coexistence between the Misseriya and Ngok
Dinka communities. This is a fact noted in all the
reports submitted to the Council and is the direct result
of thejoint efforts of the Government and society and of
the positive role played by UNISFA since its inception.

The Sudan has never contributed to disrupting the
work of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JVBMM) or restricted its movements.
The Council has received the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/312), which notes that the Mechanism
cancelled 18 of its air patrols due to delays in receiving
authorization from the South Sudanese authorities. This
clearly shows that the Sudan, unlike the other party,
cooperates fully with the Mechanism.

My country believes that the Mechanism is
necessary to ensure peace along the borders between
the Sudan and South Sudan and to normalize relations
between the two countries. Therefore, we cannot
understand why UNISFA would end its support for
the Mechanism. If we are to activate the Mechanism,
we need to launch dialogue and discussion with the
Government of South Sudan, pressure it to honour
its commitments in order to operationalize the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone, and remove any obstacles
to the work of the J BVMM.
The Government of my country is fully committed
to implementing the decisions the Joint Political
and Security Mechanism, which met today and
yesterday in Addis Ababa. We are also committed
to implementing any decision resulting from future
meetings, especially those relating to the activation
of the JBVMM, the creation of additional team sites
and the implementation of the Agreement between
the Government of the Republic of Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of
the Abyei Area. My country hopes that the decisions
of these meetings will constitute a new start towards
normalizing relations between the two countries and
addressing any concerns, especially security concerns.

My country is committed to all agreements signed
with the Government of South Sudan, including the
2004 Abyei Protocol, the 20 June 2011 temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area, and the 27 September 2012 Agreements on
Cooperation and Security Arrangements. We call on our
brothers in the Government of South Sudan to engage
seriously with the Government of the Sudan and with
the African Union in establishing the Abyei institutions
provided for in the 20 June 2011 Agreement in order
to determine the final status of the Area, which is the
sole prerogative of the President of the Sudan and the
President of South Sudan, according to the agreements
signed between the two parties.

Until then, we stress that the Abyei Area is
Sudanese territory. The Republic of the Sudan has
full sovereignty over that territory according to the
provisions of international law and the decision of the
Permanent Court of Arbitration in the Hague. We enjoy
full sovereignty in line with the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That status cannot be altered other than
through a referendum between the two countries or
mutually agreed upon measures.

My country believes that sustainable peace and
security in Abyei and along the border between the
Sudan and South Sudan can be achieved only through
the two pillars of implementation of the temporary
arrangements for the administration and security of the
Abyei Area and the implementation of all provisions of
the 27 September 2012 Agreements on Cooperation and
Security Arrangements.

The 20 June 2011 Agreement provides for the
establishment of the Abyei Area administration, the
Abyei Joint oversight committee and the Abyei police
service, which are important institutions for ensuring
the administration of the area so as to provide the
necessary services and ensure peaceful existence
among all communities. Those institutions would also
contribute to generating the necessary conditions to
determine the final status of Abyei in a win-win manner
that would satisfy the aspirations of all parties.

Moreover, the 20 June 2011 Agreement laid
strong foundations for normalizing relations between
the countries and ensuring cooperation in all areas.
The Agreement covers every important area so as
to ensure a normal relationship between the two
countries. The Agreement also provides for certain
security arrangements, which call for ending any
support to insurgent movements and the establishment
of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone. However, the
Government of South Sudan continues to support
and harbour insurgent Sudanese movements in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states and the Darfur region
despite the substantial cooperation offered by my
own Government, which has been praised by all our
international and regional partners. My country hopes
that the Government of South Sudan will honour its
commitments by fully implementing the necessary
security arrangements so as to improve relations
between the two countries and meet the two countries'
aspirations to peace, stability, development and good-
neighbourliness.

With regard to the deployment of the police unit
to protect the oil facilities in the Diffra oil complex,
my country believes that the establishment of such a
unit resulted from the failure to establish the Abyei
police service and the presence of Sudanese insurgent
movements in South Sudan that would attack the oilfield.
Such was the case in 2012 when the Heglig oilfield near
the Abyei Area was occupied and destroyed.

To conclude, I would like to extend my thanks
and appreciation to all our partners who contribute
to facilitating the work of UNISFA, in particular the
Government of Ethiopia and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, as well as the African
Union Commission and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan and South Sudan
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Sudan and South Sudan. The Sudan is fully committed
to cooperating with UNISFA so that it can smoothly
carry out all its tasks pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

