Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
following countries align themselves with this
statement: Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Croatia, The
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, Iceland,
Norway, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova.

We recently marked the fifth anniversary of the
horrendous terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. Just
before that, we received the disturbing news of yet
another threat to international transport networks.
Thanks to effective police work and international
cooperation, the plot was foiled. That is strong
testimony reminding us that we need to remain
vigilant. As terrorism requires a global response, we
should lend the United Nations our keen support in
order to sustain and continue improving the counter-
terrorism efforts made since 9/11.
The European Union applauds the adoption of the
unique Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the
General Assembly on 8 September 2006 as its
resolution 60/288. Its adoption by consensus is a strong
political signal to the world. It demonstrates the
determination of the General Assembly to overcome
disagreements and to unite its members behind our
shared goal of preventing and combating terrorism. For
the first time, manifold efforts and activities in the
field of counter-terrorism are highlighted in a single
United Nations document. The European Union stands
ready to cooperate with all Member States in
effectively implementing the Strategy.

In the same spirit of compromise and
cooperation, we should continue our efforts to bridge
the differences that still exist. We believe that the
General Assembly should make every effort to reach an
agreement on a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, based on the coordinator's draft
text, without further delay.

The European Union condemns all acts of
terrorism as criminal and stresses that terrorism can
never be justified, irrespective of its alleged
motivations, objectives, forms or manifestations. At the
same time, we stress that respect for international law,
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law is an essential element for effective and
legitimate action to counter terrorism. Our action must
be firmly based on due process and the rule of law.

The Security Council has a pivotal role to play in
international action against terrorism. We thank the
three Committee Chairmen for their briefings and take
this opportunity to recognize their dedicated
involvement in their work. Allow me to briefly
highlight some important aspects of their ongoing
work.

The European Union strongly supports the work
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its
Executive Directorate (CTED) in guaranteeing full
implementation of the commitments laid out in
resolution 1373 (2001). We also attach importance to
the implementation of the measures laid out in
resolution 1624 (2005) and welcome the CTC's recent
report (S/2006/737) on the status of implementation.
We encourage those who have not yet reported on their
national measures to do so as soon as possible.

The European Union Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the European Union Strategy for Combating
Radicalization and Recruitment to Terrorism were
adopted in December 2005. They highlight the need to
disrupt the activities of the networks and individuals

that draw people into terrorism, and to ensure that
voices of mainstream opinion prevail over those of
extremism.

The European Union remains committed to the
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and has
welcomed the extension of the mandate of the 1540
Committee. We encourage all Member States that have
not already done so to submit their reports to the
Committee.

The European Union recognizes the practical
progress achieved by the 1267 Committee in improving
the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime and making
the information contained in the Consolidated List
more useful and accessible to all Member States.

The European Union takes a keen interest in the
discussion on the Committee's guidelines concerning
the listing and de-listing procedures. Let me highlight,
in that context, the European Union's current work
concerning listing and de-listing issues, including the
joint workshop between the European Union and the
United States presently taking place in Helsinki,
Finland. We reiterate our call to deal expeditiously
with that issue, as mandated by resolution 1617 (2005)
and the 2005 World Summit, taking note of the input
provided by the Secretary-General.

The work of the Committees is underpinned by
adequate reporting on the part of Member States. The
European Union attaches great importance to full and
timely reporting. We support the ongoing efforts to
consolidate States' reporting requirements.

The European Union supports the active outreach
of the Committees aimed at enhancing States'
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. The visits conducted by the Committees
and their experts with a view to information-sharing,
cooperation and interaction with Member States, as
well as their contacts with international organizations,
have proved most useful. Such visits and contacts need
adequate preparation and follow-up. In that respect, the
European Union sees possibilities for synergy in the
activities of the various Committees. The European
Union has participated in a number of visits by the
CTED and is prepared to continue to do so. The Union
is also providing financial support to the three regional
seminars organized by the 1540 Committee, in Beijing,
Accra and Lima.
The European Union recognizes the importance
of technical assistance in the work of the Committees
and of the CTED. In terms of technical assistance, the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime plays an important role.
The Union and individual member States have made
assistance available and continue to be ready to
provide assistance to build capacity. The European
Community already provides several hundred million
euros' worth of assistance to some 80 countries around
the world in fields such as border management,
counter-terrorist financing and police cooperation. The
European Union emphasizes the role of regional and
subregional organizations in creating synergies through
assistance programmes and in promoting best
practices.

