Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Let me
thank Mr. Serry for his briefing and the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer
for Palestine for their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union.

Since the beginning of this year the Arab world
has found itself at the heart of historic turmoil from
which the region will emerge transformed. These

developments are the sign of the Arab societies'
aspirations to freedom. France has commended the
movement and reaffirms again its support for all efforts
for democratic transition that are peaceful and
negotiated.

We believe this regional momentum provides a
unique opportunity to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. To do that, the position of France is based on
certain straightforward convictions.

First, the status quo is untenable. Secondly, only
dialogue will make it possible to achieve the sole
legitimate solution, which is two States for two
peoples. Further, the resumption of the peace process
must be based on balanced parameters agreed between
the two sides. We stated those parameters here on
18 February (6484th meeting). Let me recall them.

There must be an agreement on the borders of the
two States, based the lines of 4 June 1967, with
equivalent exchanges of territory on which the sides
will have agreed. Security arrangements are needed
that for the Palestinians respect the sovereignty of the
State of Palestine and show that the occupation is over,
and for the Israelis protect their security, prevent the
resurgence terrorist acts and take into account new and
emerging threats. Thirdly, there must be a just,
equitable, realistic and agreed solution to the issue of
refugees. Lastly, the aspirations of both sides with
respect to Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be
found through negotiations to resolve the status of
Jerusalem as the future capital of two States.

It is in that spirit that France has proposed an
initiative aimed at resuming negotiations on the basis
of these clear, balanced parameters, which reflect a
broad international consensus and are in keeping with
the primary expectations of both sides. We regret that
the Middle East Quartet, at its meeting of 11 July, did
not endorse these parameters and did not issue an
appeal for a resumption of the peace process. Despite
that setback, we call on the parties to refrain from any
action that could prejudice the resumption of bilateral
talks and to not resign themselves to the dangerous
stalemate in which we currently find ourselves.
We commend the progress achieved by the
Palestinian Authority in building institutions for the
future Palestinian State. We call on all donors to
continue their efforts in terms of budgetary assistance.
The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
continues to be of concern. We call again on the Israeli
authorities to change their policies with regard to Gaza,
without compromising their legitimate security
concerns.

Our position on settlements continues unchanged.
They are illegal from the standpoint of international
law and are an obstacle to peace. They are based on
despoiling the Palestinian people, and they undermine
the confidence between the sides. They pose a threat to
the possibility of achieving the two-State solution. We
condemn ongoing settlement activities on the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem and call on Israel to
abandon its building projects.

Lastly, we cannot ignore the regional context of
the peace process. In Lebanon there are developments
along the border that have sparked concern in the
international community. We condemn the attack on
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon on
27 May and, just a few hours ago, once again, against
the French contingent. In that context, France calls on
all parties to meet their obligations set out in Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).

The formation of the Lebanese Government by
the Prime Minister of Lebanon, Mr. Mikati, is an
important step for Lebanon and the Lebanese. The
Government must continue to implement Lebanon's
obligations and international undertakings, particularly
with respect to the Special Tribunal for Lebanon and its
funding, in accordance with resolution 1757 (2007) and
the commitments undertaken by the Lebanese Prime
Minister.

We are further concerned by the deadly events
that took place on 15 May and 5 June on the Golan
Heights, along the Syrian-Lebanese border. France
again underscores the absolute need for the Syrian
authorities to ensure compliance with the separation
zone between Israel and Syria, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 350 (1974).

For more that four months now, the Syrian regime
has been involved in systematically repressing peaceful
demonstrations, ignoring the appeals of the
international community. The Syrian organizations for
the defence of human rights are today listing nearly
1,500 killed and 12,000 political arrests. Each week we
see civilian victims. The Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide and
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect
said on 21 July that crimes against humanity may have
been committed and continue to be committed in Syria.

On 11 July the embassies of France, the United
States and Qatar in Damascus were attacked without
Syrian security forces attempting to defend them.
France condemns such schemes, which run counter to
Syria's obligations under international law. Such illegal
initiatives, such crude manoeuvres will not enable the
authorities in Damascus to divert attention from the
substance of the problem: ending the repression of the
Syrian population and implementing a democratic
transition. We hope the Security Council will finally be
able to take up its responsibilities to condemn the
violent repressions to which the Syrian people are
subjected.

The events today in the Arab world, including the
Palestinian territory, demonstrate to us the urgency and
the strength of the aspirations of Arab societies for
liberty and democracy. In a few weeks we will see the
deadline set in the Fayyad plan. The expectations of
the Palestinian civil society have never been so high.
We should not ignore that signal and risk falling back
into an impasse with the always-present threat of
further escalation of violence. We need to find an
opportunity to resume dialogue under the auspices of
the international community. It is from the standpoint
of the proposals of the parties, from the standpoint of
their initiatives to resume the peace process that France
will shoulder its responsibilities in steadfastly working
to advance peace.

