Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to congratulate Turkey on such a
successful presidency of the Security Council this
month. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for your
outstanding contribution. The presidency of the
Security Council is something that all diplomats aspire
to. We hope that your work and life during this month
will be a long-lasting legacy for you. We also wish you
every success in all of your future endeavours.

The Chinese delegation would like to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/323). We
would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kai Eide for his briefing. We
appreciate the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under
difficult conditions for the peace, stability and
development of Afghanistan. We also wish to welcome
the statement made by the representative of
Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin.

The upcoming elections will be a major event in
the political life of Afghanistan this year. We are
pleased to see that, despite multiple challenges,

preparations for the Afghan elections have been on
track thus far. We trust that the Afghan people will
apply their wisdom to the proper resolution of issues
relating to the elections and, through the elections,
promote social cohesion and stability and enhance the
Government's capacity for governance in all fields.
Ensuring a smooth election process will be of critical
importance. This will lay an important foundation for
maintaining political stability in Afghanistan and
achieving peaceful reconstruction.

Recently, the Afghan peace process and domestic
reconstruction have registered good progress and are
moving towards the goal of steady development. But
the security situation remains worrisome. We hope that
the Afghan Government, the Afghan National Army
and the Afghan National Police will, with the
assistance of the international community, continuously
enhance their capacity-building so as to independently
assume the responsibility of safeguarding national
security and social stability.

The key to securing lasting peace in Afghanistan
is economic development. The international community
should increase its input in Afghan economic
reconstruction; provide assistance to Afghanistan in
agriculture, education, health and other fields; support
improvements in its infrastructure; advance positive
social development; and effectively help the Afghan
people improve and raise their living standards so as to
address the factors causing social instability at their roots.

We support the continued leading and
coordinating role of the United Nations in assisting the
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We support UNAMA in
further enhancing its relationship with the Government
of Afghanistan, the International Security Assistance
Force and all donors, and in further advancing its
monitoring and coordinating role.
Having gone through so many trials and
tribulations, the Afghan people eagerly look forward to
embarking on the road to peace, stability and
development aspirations that are shared by all countries
of the world. That calls for continued painstaking
efforts on the part of the Afghan Government and
people, as well as vigorous support from the
international community.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
stands ready to continue to assist Afghanistan to the
best of its ability, actively engage in the Afghan
reconstruction process, and work tirelessly for lasting
peace in Afghanistan.

