Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): First of all, Mr.
President, let me thank you for organizing this open
debate on Kosovo. We believe that the exchanges that
have taken place so far have been very useful. Those
exchanges were preceded by a very extensive and
useful briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Guehenno, and we thank
him for it.

As we are having this open briefing today, we see
that the international community remains committed to
stability and peace in the Balkans. That is reassuring
for us all, including the peoples of the Balkans and the
inhabitants of Kosovo.

We in the Security Council should continue to
remain actively involved in pursuing the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).
The Council should remain attentive to the support
needed by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to carry out its mission
successfully.

There have also been positive developments. We
welcome the increased cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia: the handing over or surrender of the
indictees. The remaining persons wanted for war
crimes and crimes against humanity need to be brought
before the Tribunal in The Hague. The wounds of the
Balkan wars will not be healed without accountability
and justice.

Having been in the area only recently, having
confronted the realities, hearing the views of all sides,
we Council members have together drawn certain
conclusions. We presented these formally on 19 June
here in the Council and deliberated on those important
issues during our public meeting on 22 June. It is
important that we continue to flag those points and
underscore the need to follow up on them.

I would like to recall some of the main findings
and conclusions of the Council mission, as follows. It
is important that UNMIK continue to receive sustained
support and resources from the international
community. The political process has to be taken
forward, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). The promulgation of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government has been an important step in the
implementation of that resolution.

The 17 November Kosovo-wide elections are of
crucial importance. The elections will enhance the
democratic process in Kosovo and the stability of the
region. Secure conditions for the elections should be
ensured. The participation of all communities in the
elections, the return of refugees and displaced persons
and their participation in the elections should be
encouraged. The Kosovo Force (KFOR) should
regularly provide detailed information including about
the origin, type and quantity of weapons seized, in
order to enable the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1160 (1998) to pursue any possible
violations. Intensified efforts should be made regarding
the issue of detainees and persons of all communities
who are missing, which continues to be a major
impediment to reconciliation. A comprehensive
strategy should be developed to resolve the complex
situation in Mitrovica, with emphasis on the need for
multi-ethnic initiatives in the social, economic and
religious areas in order to start rebuilding confidence
between the communities. As economic development
would make a major contribution to stabilization,
additional funding needs to be found to continue the
projects of the village employment and rehabilitation
programme, which have proved an effective tool for
inter-ethnic economic cooperation.

It is important that the majority ensure that the
rights of the minority communities are respected. In
turn, minority communities, too, must realize that there
is no alternative to establishing a multi-ethnic society.
The Kosovo Serb community in particular must
integrate into the structures being set up by UNMIK,
rather than attempt to set up parallel structures.
UNMIK must continue and enhance its dialogue with
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Whose influence in Kosovo is crucial for the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

Today these important elements remain as valid
as when they were presented. It is important that all
Kosovars, irrespective of their ethnic backgrounds,
accept the framework established under resolution
1244 ( 1999) and contribute to the full implementation
of the resolution. They should learn to live together.
This means reconciliation, tolerance and mutual
accommodation. It means they have only one option:
building a multi-ethnic Kosovo through a culture of
peace. To this end, the representation of different
communities in the interim institutions is essential.
Therefore, the successful holding of elections in
Kosovo is a most important challenge for UNMIK. The
process should be owned by the people of Kosovo. The
civil registration process must receive the necessary
cooperation.

The role of civil society in building confidence,
helping reconciliation and fostering greater tolerance is
well recognized. In this connection, I recall our
meeting with the representatives of women's non-
governmental organizations in Kosovo. As part of civil
society, they are engaged in reaching people across the
ethnic divide. They should receive the support of
UNMIK and encouragement from the international
community. This would not only help in the effective
implementation of 1244 (1999); it would also be in
conformity with Council resolution 1325 (2000).

Let me conclude by commending UNMIK, under
the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haekkerup, for its very important
work for peace and stability in Kosovo.

