Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Salame and Ambassador Schulz, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya,
for their briefings.

China has been closely following the developments
in Libya. We welcome the international meeting on Libya
held in Palermo in November 2018. We condemn the
December terrorist attack on Libya's Foreign Ministry
and express concern about the recent hostilities that
targeted Tripoli once again. Libya continues to face
a fragile security situation, rampant terrorist activity,
large flows of refugees and migrants and many other
challenges. As always, the international community
should step up its support for Libya, help the country
complete its transitional phase as soon as possible and
restore national stability and effective governance.

First, while adhering to the overarching aim of
resolving the Libyan issue through political means,
the international community should respect Libya's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity and
the leadership of the Libyan people, while resolutely
advancing a Libyan-owned and -led political process.
All Libyan parties must strictly observe the ceasefire
agreement, resolve differences through dialogue
and negotiations by considering the interests of their
country and people and continue to build mutual trust
so as to reach a political solution that is acceptable to
all sides.

Secondly, in striving to create a favourable security
environment to facilitate the political process, countries
and regional organizations with influence need to urge
the parties concerned to refrain from the use of force,
achieve reconciliation through confidence-building
measures, build a unified national security apparatus
as soon as possible, achieve national unity and establish
effective governance. The international community
should intensify its efforts to combat terrorism and
support the proactive role of countries of the region in
combating terrorism and organized crime, among other
things, and help the Libyan Government deal with the
issue of migrants and refugees.

Thirdly, with regard to strengthening the United
Nations mediation role, China supports Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame' as
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
to continue implementing the United Nations action
plan, prepare for the holding of the national conference,
support Libya's efforts in drafting its constitution,
amend the Libyan Political Agreement and properly
hold the presidential and parliamentary elections,
among other tasks. We call on the Libya's neighbours,
the African Union, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and all other relevant parties to bolster
coordination and collaboration with the United Nations
in a joint effort to facilitate the implementation of the
United Nations action plan.

Fourthly, with regard to properly addressing
the issue of sanctions, which are not an end of and
in themselves but a means, should always serve the
political settlement of pertinent issues. As sanctions
against Libya continue to be enforced, caution should
be exercised to avoid any negative impact on civilians or
third countries. Sanctions should not jeopardize Libya's
overall national interests or compromise the everyday
lives and humanitarian needs of its people. With regard
to Libya's concern about the continued devaluation and
losses incurred by the freezing of its assets and other
issues, the Sanctions Committee needs to expedite
research on how to respond to Libya's legitimate
concerns appropriately. China supports any and all
efforts to help stabilize the situation on the ground and
promote a political settlement process for the Libyan
question. We will continue to play a constructive role in
completing Libya's transition and restoring its security
and stability.

