Mr. Kolby (Norway): First of all, Mr. President, I
would like to commend your delegation and yourself
for the initiative to have this important debate on the
Working Group on Africa. Your presence here
throughout the day is certainly a testimony to your own
commitment. I would also like to commend my friend
Ambassador Koonjul for his initiative in establishing
and chairing the Working Group. The Working Group
has had a number of meetings. I think the idea of
listening at this meeting to non-members of the
Council, particularly our African friends, is highly
appropriate. I think we have had a very rich discussion.

The hour is late, and I shall not make very
specific points. A number of very interesting proposals
have been put forward, and it will now be up to the
Working Group to act on them. I would just like to
highlight a few approaches that Norway thinks are
important.

We strongly agree with the many speakers who
urged closer consultation, interaction and cooperation
both within the Security Council and with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and subregional
organizations. In what concrete form should this take
place? That is something I think we need to think
about. But I think it should be clear to all of us that we
need to pursue this avenue.

The second approach I would like to highlight is
the need for closer interaction between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. I feel
that for conflicts in Africa we need a very broad
approach. As Ambassador Kumalo stated this morning,
these conflicts cannot be resolved by only using the
tool of peace and security. We need to add other
components. We need to deal with the root causes if we
are to achieve durable peace.

The third approach I would like to mention is that
we need to work for regional solutions. This was
highlighted by several speakers from West African
countries, and I think it is appropriate for other parts of
Africa also.

In conclusion, I have one specific point. The
representative of Mali and many other speakers made
specific reference to the role of small arms. There is no
doubt that small arms are fuelling these conflicts, so
we really need to find a way to come to grips with that
problem.

