Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Today the
American people mourn the loss of President George
H. W. Bush, the forty-first President of the United
States of America. We thank the Security Council and
the many delegations and colleagues who have offered
their condolences since his passing. Allow me now to
make a short statement in his memory.

President Bush exemplified a fearless sense of duty
to his nation through his lifelong commitment to public
service. On his eighteenth birthday, he enlisted in the
United States Navy to serve his nation. From his time
as a member of Congress, United States Ambassador to
China, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and
as President of the United States, he guided our nation
to peace and prosperity. He also shaped a freer, safer
world, including with the United Nations, as Secretary-
General Kofi Annan's Special Envoy for the South Asia
Earthquake Disaster and in this very Council as the
United States Ambassador to the United Nations. Here,
he worked selflessly to defend justice and promote
peace.

On a personal note, I had the honour and privilege
to work for President Bush. He was the first sitting
President of my country whom I met personally. I
met him for the first time in New York 27 years ago,
in 1991, during the high-level week of the General
Assembly. He made an indelible impression as a man of
great decency and great dignity. He also left a legacy of
towering foreign-policy achievements. We honour the
legacy of President Bush. His unwavering commitment
to public service and his accomplishments in both war
and peace will continue to inspire generations to come.

I would like to thank the President of Cote d'Ivoire,
Mr. Alassane Ouattara, for having gathered us today to
identify concrete ways in which the Security Council
can support peacebuilding and sustaining peace around
the world. This meeting provides an opportunity to
identify best practices in peacebuilding. It also allows
us to reflect on peacekeeping missions that still have
a long road to travel before peace is restored. It is our
hope that we will leave today with a renewed collective
commitment to working with the United Nations
peacebuilding community to support each country
seeking to transition to a post-conflict environment.

The Council spends much of its time addressing
conflicts marked by open fighting, active violence
and significant loss of life. But once the hard work of
achieving a ceasefire has taken hold, such conflicts
often fade from the front pages and from the Council's
agenda. It is precisely at that moment when the quieter
and arguably harder work begins to heal a society torn
apart by conflict. While that work has historically
been the responsibility of national Governments or
non-governmental organizations, the United Nations
has recently scaled up its capacity to play a leading
role in peacebuilding. The Secretary-General's move
to integrate the Peacebuilding Support Office into the
Department of Political Affairs was a signal that the
United Nations is seeking to break down institutional
silos and marshal the full expertise of the United
Nations system to complete that task.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2018/43) lays
out a number of important recommendations, including
the development of integrated strategic frameworks,
United Nations Development Assistance Frameworks
and greater United Nations cooperation on the ground.
While some progress has been made, we encourage
the United Nations to push forward on the full range
of proposals. Some of those proposals may require
new resources. We encourage countries to provide
additional voluntary contributions to the Peacebuilding
Fund, but we do not support efforts to tie a percentage
of the peacekeeping budget to the Fund. On the whole,
greater coordination and communication across the
United Nations peacebuilding system should not require
additional financial outlays.

We face a collective challenge in our approach to
peacebuilding. Our statements today will all support
the peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations.
However, we may all have different, undefined visions
of what that work should encompass in each context. To
remedy that, we encourage the United Nations, in each
specific instance, to identify a vision for an achievable
end-state and align resources and stakeholders to get
there. Optimally, the United Nations would identify
that desired end-state at the start of a peacekeeping
mission and pair it with an achievable exit strategy.
In that scenario, once the mission had fulfilled its
mandate, United Nations efforts would transition to
peacebuilding support. Cote d'Ivoire and Colombia are
two models of United Nations peacebuilding that have
benefited from a clear vision of a more peaceful future.

In June 2017, the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) closed its doors after having
successfully provided support to the peace agreement
of 2003 and having helped to address the 2010 political
unrest. We made the right call as the Council to
terminate a mission whose objective to stabilize a post-
conflict country had largely been accomplished. Cote
d'Ivoire also recognized that the closure of UNOCI
meant not that its task had been completed, but that the
hard work of peacebuilding was just beginning. The
Peacebuilding Commission has been actively engaged
across the country, from standardizing identification
documents and formalizing citizenship rights, to
organizing election-focused civil-society dialogues.
The strong coordination among the Security Council,
the United Nations peacebuilding community, the
Government and local citizens has enabled Cote
d'Ivoire to overcome conflict and restore peace.
President Ouattara, we recognize the difficult task that
you faced, as well as your critical leadership in building
a more peaceful society.

With regard to Colombia, the Council approved
a narrow and specific mandate for a United Nations
special political mission tasked with the monitoring
and verification of the ceasefire between the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the Government of Colombia.
As a result, the FARC-EP relinquished thousands of
weapons and explosives, became a political party and
participated in recent elections. The successor mission,
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
now monitors security guarantees and the reintegration
of FARC-EP members into Colombian society.
Colombians in the Mission are now working towards
the full implementation of a comprehensive peace plan.
They are embracing a collaborative, inclusive approach
that is already delivering dividends for peace.

In our support for post-conflict reconstruction
efforts, the United States has identified several
common best practices. First, the international
community should treat a peace deal or a ceasefire as
only the first step in a long process. Secondly, post-
conflict reconciliation takes time and cannot be rushed.
Thirdly, local actors in societies as a whole must buy
into the transition. President Ouattara, you worked with
those goals in mind as you supported your country's
transition. The Peacebuilding Commission understands
those dynamics and is well positioned to support that
critical work elsewhere.
