Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for the efforts made during
the Russian Federation's presidency of the Security
Council to deliver on the Security Council's mandate
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
I would also like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his
comprehensive briefing. In that regard, I express my
appreciation for his ongoing tireless efforts to reach a
political solution to the Syrian crisis, which culminated
recently in the announcement of the formation of the
Constitutional Committee.

Since the start of the Syrian crisis, the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan has stressed that there is no
military solution to the crisis. We have worked with
the international community to find a peaceful solution
that would spare Syria and its people destruction
and displacement, put an end to the humanitarian
repercussions and mitigate the suffering of the fraternal
Syrian people. Jordan will continue to support all efforts
to achieve a political solution of the Syrian crisis, in
line with resolution 2254 (2015), by engaging positively
with the international community both through our
membership of the small group and as an observer to
the Astana meetings.

My country emphasizes its support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy for Syria to reach a political
settlement based on resolution 2254 (2015). We also
welcome the announcement by the United Nations
of the agreement reached by all parties regarding the
formation of the Constitutional Committee, which will
launch the political process (see S/2019/775, annex).
This is a positive and long-awaited step to which all
relevant parties contributed and merits success. That
requires cooperative efforts so as to build on the
agreement rapidly and effectively in order to reach a
comprehensive solution to the crisis that is acceptable
to Syrians and that will restore security, stability
and unity to Syria and free the country of terrorist
gangs, while creating a climate conducive to the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. All the
aforementioned also requires greater efforts ensure the
necessary funding so as to restore stability throughout
the Syrian territory.

My country hosts 1.3 million Syrian brothers
and sisters. Despite the fact that the capacity of the
Kingdom has been exceeded, we spare no effort in
responding to the needs of the refugees and assisting
them, notwithstanding the resulting enormous pressure
on our national economy. In that regard, we reiterate that
the refugee crisis is an international responsibility and
therefore requires a collective solution. International aid
to date has not been commensurate with all the needs of
the refugees and host communities, for whom we need
a more coordinated effort. The Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan encourages the voluntary return of Syrian
refugees to their homes. However, we stress the need
for all parties to coordinate their efforts to that end by
creating a climate conducive to the voluntary, dignified
and safe return of our Syrian brothers and sisters.

I am fully confident that the Security Council
appreciates the serious task and daunting responsibility
for our brothers in Syria, who hope that the Council
will restore stability, peace and normalcy. That requires
the international community to spare no efforts to serve
the interests of the fraternal Syrian people.

