The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Viet Nam.

I should like again to thank Under-Secretary-
General Holmes and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Eide for their briefings. I should
also like to thank the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Afghanistan and Pakistan for their participation in the
Council's debate today.

The security overview of the special report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/434) suggests that, despite
the relentless efforts of the Afghan people and the
international community, serious challenges to peace
and stabilization in Afghanistan remain. We strongly
condemn the terrorist attack in Kabul on 7 July 2008
that killed over 40 people. We share the widespread
concern over the increased level and complexity of
insurgent and terrorist activities in Afghanistan in
recent months, which have claimed a number of
civilian casualties, as detailed in the report.

Together with terrorism, widespread drug
trafficking, natural disasters and food insecurity
continue to pose a serious obstacle to post-conflict
reconstruction in Afghanistan and the improvement of
the living conditions of the Afghan people. Against that
background, we commend the endeavours of the
Afghan Government to overcome the various
difficulties in keeping its national peace and
development on track, especially with the launch of the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy.

We would like to reiterate our support for the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact and the
Afghanistan National Development Strategy under
Afghan leadership and through an efficient partnership
with the international community. In that context, we
welcome the outcome of the Paris Conference on
12 June 2008, whereby international donors pledged
around $20 billion for Afghanistan. That record figure,
along with the large number of stakeholders present at
the Paris Conference, provide further evidence of the
international community's continued commitment to
the security, development and prosperity of
Afghanistan. We are convinced that such international
donor conferences are very helpful to post-conflict
countries, such as Afghanistan.

As regards the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), we appreciate the work
done by Mr. Kai Eide and his staff within a short time
to propose prioritized actions to fulfil the Mission's
mandate. We take note of the recommendations in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/434) on a
greater coordinating role for UNAMA, which would
require further personnel and resources. We agree that

UNAMA will have a key role to play in promoting and
coordinating international assistance to Afghanistan in
the construction of institutions and capacity-building,
especially in implementing the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, which covers a broad range of
issues from security to economic and social
development. We consider that to be a very important
task for UNAMA because it will help to improve the
living conditions of the Afghan people, thereby
addressing the root causes of violence and conflict in
Afghanistan.

Current community-based problems in
Afghanistan require a comprehensive solution,
including not only military and security but also
political, development and economic activities. We
therefore welcome a comprehensive approach to those
challenges and support the Afghan Government and
people in taking the leading role in the process.
UNAMA should work closely with the Afghan
Government in carrying out the existing programme to
ensure respect for Afghan ownership in the country's
development process.

In that connection, we welcome UNAMA's plan
to provide integrated support to the Afghan authorities
in the coming electoral process, as requested by
President Hamid Karzai. We also welcome the
commitment of international donors at the Paris
Conference to improve aid effectiveness and ensure
that the benefits of development become tangible for
all Afghans.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Viet
Nam's consistent support for the promotion of peace,
stability and development in Afghanistan. We are
willing to work with the Government of Afghanistan
on further assistance to the country in some specific
areas in which Viet Nam has an advantage, such as
agriculture, education and health care.

Finally, we wish the Government and the people
of Afghanistan success in the newly launched National
Development Strategy, which is an important stage on
the path to development and prosperity in Afghanistan.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

