Mr. Rinkevics (Latvia): The topic of foreign
terrorist fighters is a matter of serious concern for
the international community in its entirety, and it is
very timely that the Security Council is addressing it.
Undoubtedly, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) poses a serious threat not only to the people of
Iraq and Syria but also to the international community
as a whole.

As a responsible member of the international
community, Latvia is willing and ready to contribute to
the fight against terrorism. We have joined the efforts
of the international community in the fight against
terrorism and have expressed the strongest support for
the United States of America's coordinated actions in
countering the threat posed by ISIL.

Foreign fighters are not a new phenomenon.
Thousands of people from countries outside the region
are fighting and committing terrorist attacks in Iraq and
Syria. Foreign fighters participate in many conflicts
all over the world, be it in Afghanistan, Somalia or
Ukraine. It is an increasing challenge to deal with these
fighters moving from one conflict area to another, thus
becoming professional fighters. There is a high risk
that they can use their new experience wherever they
go. There is no place for glorifying these mercenaries.
It is imperative to understand that these people are not
fighting for peace; they are creating war and feeding
conflict. They should be prevented from doing so by
the international community.

The United Nations has a very important role to
play in streamlining international efforts. In that
context, we strongly welcome the resolution on foreign
terrorist fighters that was adopted by the Security
Council today (resolution 2178 (2014). States Members
of the United Nations should take concerted action to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, as
the resolution urges.

We recognize this issue as an emerging threat to our
national security as well. Therefore, Latvia is actively
working to ensure that all the necessary measures are
taken domestically to prevent the recruitment of foreign
fighters on our territory and discourage residents of
Latvia from illegal involvement in military conflicts
abroad or in providing any support to terrorists wherever
they are. That is something that certainly requires our
united, firm action, and I applaud the joint action of the
Security Council in addressing the issue.

