Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): My delegation
welcomed the request for this urgent meeting of the
Security Council by the Group of Arab States in response
to the rapidly worsening situation in the occupied
territories. My delegation is hopeful that our consideration
of the situation in Palestine will lead to the elimination of
the obstacles being faced in the peace process.

The question before the Council today - that of
settlements in the territories occupied by Israel since 1967
and related matters of peace and security in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank - concerns issues with a
profound bearing on the peace process formally
undertaken by the Israeli and Palestinian authorities
through the peace accord signed in Washington in
September 1993, namely, the historic Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements. My
delegation notes with satisfaction some encouraging
developments that have taken place in the search for a

 

peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine in the
context of a comprehensive Middle East peace process. The
Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area,
together with the 1993 Washington accord, also indicates
that the parties concerned have taken up their solemn
responsibilities with a View to achieving positive outcomes.

Despite these developments, the situation in the
occupied territories continues to be fraught with difficulties
and may well jeopardize the peace process, owing primarily
to the continuation of untenable settlement activities. We
are aware that our principal obligation is to try to enable
the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
cooperate in working out a systematic, tightly-phased
formula and a plan for dealing with Israeli settlements in
the territories occupied since 1967. The Agreement on
Preparatory Transfer of Powers and Responsibility signed
by the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel on
29 August 1994 might be seen as a precursor to other
future agreements.

Meanwhile, we note that both Palestinians and Israelis
have been working to improve the political and security
environment and have repeatedly sought to achieve progress
towards peace. My delegation has been hopeful that both
the parties have the necessary will and determination to
resolve the myriad issues in a way that will not adversely
prejudice the interests of either party.

But we cannot fail to note that certain untenable
policies and practices by the Israeli Government have
impeded further progress towards comprehensive peace.
The continuation of settlement activities is indisputably
among the most important, with its attendant grave security,
economic and social repercussions. Thus, noting the
applicability of the Hague regulations of 1907 and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, my delegation strongly
urges the Israeli Government to honour the provisions of
those legal instruments scrupulously and to desist from
planning, constructing and establishing settlements
anywhere in the occupied territories.

There can be no doubt that the unending creation of
settlements in the occupied territories has already created
major impediments during the transitional period of
Palestinian self-rule, and could have a negative impact on
the outcome of the agreed-upon final status negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians concerning the occupied
territories. Thus, these activities in themselves run counter
to the peace accords and other agreements which have
already been reached between the two parties.

 

My delegation therefore calls upon the Government
of Israel to embark upon the speedy dismantlement of
settlements, leading to a mutually supportive and
positively reinforcing approach, such as that which
resulted in important breakthroughs in the past and which
ought to be renewed and sustained.

