Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Ms. Hiroute Sellassie, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Sahel, for her briefing.

Since the joint high-level visit to the Sahel region,
led by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in November
last year, the international community has scaled up
the political commitments and resources to respond to
a multitude of threats across the Sahel. The countries
of the Sahel and their partners have also pursued closer
cooperation and coordination. However, the Sahel
region continues to face persistent challenges in the
security, political and humanitarian sectors. Porous
borders and political instability facilitate transnational
organized crime, such as the flow of illicit arms and
drug trafficking, often providing a safe haven for
terrorist groups. In this regard, we believe the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is instrumental
in tackling the multifaceted challenges.

I would like to make a few observations regarding
the implementation of the strategy. First, with
regard to security, building security capabilities and
strengthening regional security cooperation is essential.
Increased threats across the Sahel, such as those coming
from the precarious situation in northern Mali and the
impact of Boko Haram on the whole region, are all
aggravating the vulnerability of the Sahel region. More
effective border controls, as well as counter-terrorism
cooperation, are necessary to meet such challenges.
In this vein, we take note of the recent joint efforts
undertaken by Nigeria and its neighbouring countries,
Benin, Cameroon, Chad and the Niger through the
framework of the Lake Chad Basin Commission. We
also recognize the meeting on the issue of Boko Haram
held in Abuja last September. We support more effective
security cooperation, including information-sharing
andjoint patrols among the countries in the region.

Secondly, with regard to resilience, in order to
ensure lasting peace and stability in the region it is
imperative to tackle the chronic problems, such as
widespread environmental degradation, food insecurity
and the lack of opportunities for the youth. We are
especially concerned about growing displacement
caused by extremists, as demonstrated by more than
1.5 million people fleeing Boko Haram. In the Sahel,
millions of people remain at risk of food insecurity,
including children suffering from acute malnutrition.
Long-term and sustained solutions to this humanitarian
crisis must be solved to address the root cause of in the
instability in the region.
Lastly, coherence and coordination should be
improved for the various initiatives in the Sahel.
Avoiding overlap and prioritizing resources is
important to ensure assistance for the Sahel in the most
efficient and effective way. We note the efforts of the
Group of Five Sahel to ensure coordination with the
United Nations, including the holding of the ministerial
coordination platform meeting in Bamako last month.
We look forward to continued coordination through the
central role of that platform.

The international community should maintain
its commitment to advancing governance, improving
security and carrying out long-term plans for resilience
in the Sahel region. The Republic of Korea will continue
to support these efforts for peace and development in
the region.

