Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): Let be begin by
recording my thanks to the Council for once again
enabling this discussion of the peace process on the
Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville to take place
in an open meeting. This appropriately allows for input
from the countries in the Pacific region that have been
supporting this process for the last five years,
politically, through the provision of personnel to the
Truce Monitoring and Peace Monitoring Groups, and
through the provision of development assistance.

Let me also express New Zealand's thanks to Mr.
Sinclair and his team at the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), and to thank Mr.
Sinclair for his presentation and update here this
morning. Mr. Sinclair and his small Office have played
a key supportive role in cementing peace on
Bougainville, most recently by declaring that stage II
of the weapons disposal process, that of secondary
containment under a dual-key system, has been
completed. This is a welcome development. Much is
yet to be done, however, and it is crucial that Mr.
Sinclair and UNPOB use their remaining five months
on Bougainville to best effect.

New Zealand is pleased to learn of the plans to
hold a meeting to discuss the final fate of the weapons,
stage III, on Nissan Island off the Bougainville coast.
That meeting should take place as soon as possible.
The devastating effects of the ready availability of
small arms have been felt for too many years in
Bougainville; the damage that they can do to a society
is now readily apparent in Papua New Guinea's
neighbour, the Solomon Islands. To enhance future
security for all Bougainvilleans, New Zealand urges the
factions to agree that the final fate of the weapons
contained should be no less than total destruction.
UNPOB should strongly reinforce and encourage that
approach.
New Zealand welcomes efforts to bring Francis
Ona and his small group of followers into the peace
process. However, I should stress, as I did when I last
addressed the Council on this issue in March, that the
peace process cannot wait for Mr. Ona. He has chosen
to remain on the sidelines, and the process has
progressed without him. If Mr. Ona wants to play a
future role in the new Bougainville, the best way for
him to do that is to engage in the peace process. But he
should not be allowed to hold a veto over it; nor should
his remaining outside of the process become a pretext
for choosing a course other than the total destruction of
weapons at stage III.

Like others, I should draw the Council's attention
to the establishment of the Bougainville Transition
Team, which was created to provide ongoing support to
the peace process following the departure of the Peace
Monitoring Group (PMG) on 30 June. As Council
members are aware, Team members from Australia,
New Zealand and Vanuatu are now in place and are
working well with the Bougainville community, and
they will shortly be joined by personnel from Fiji.
While much smaller than the PMG, the Transition
Team demonstrates, as others have said, the ongoing
commitment of regional States to the peace process.
New Zealand's support for the Transition Team
complements our ongoing commitment of other
assistance to the people of Bougainville delivered
through the New Zealand Agency for International
Development.

The enduring support for the Bougainville peace
process from States in the Pacific region has
demonstrated our commitment to assisting neighbours
in difficulty. The Pacific Island Forum-endorsed
Regional Assistance Mission in the Solomon Islands is
an extension of this approach, and New Zealand's
commitment to assisting the Solomon Islands will be
similarly long-term. Bougainville, for its part, is well
on the road to lasting peace. The momentum now
established by the declaration of the completion of
stage II needs to be maintained while the United
Nations Political Office works towards the completion
of its mandate at the end of this year.

