Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and thanking
Ambassador Puri and the Indian delegation for their
leadership last month. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his report and briefing today.
We appreciate his continued leadership as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Director General,
released just last week, once again highlights Iran's
failure to comply with its international nuclear
obligations and its violations of several Security
11-48797
Council resolutions. Iran refuses to address outstanding
issues related to its nuclear programme.

The Director General reports that Iran is
continuing enrichment and heavy water-related
activities, in defiance of both the Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. Iran still refuses to respond
substantively to information regarding possible
military dimensions to Iran's nuclear programme.
Iran's reported installation of centrifuges at Qom
constitutes yet another intentional violation of Security
Council resolutions and a clear provocation. This is
unacceptable.

We condemn Iran's persistent refusal to fulfil its
international nuclear obligations. Iran's actions
underscore the continuing necessity of full
enforcement of sanctions by the international
community in order to motivate Iran to comply with
those obligations and to deny it the ability to advance
its proscribed programmes.

The United States encourages the 1737
Committee to enhance its efforts to actively implement
its mandate. We are pleased that the Committee has
concluded its review of the Panel of Experts' useful
and informative final report. We are also pleased that
the Committee has started to act on a number of the
Panel's excellent recommendations. However, much
work remains to be done. We urge the Committee to
take steps to complete this work and implement the
Panel's recommendations as soon as possible.

I should also like to stress that my Government
remains seriously concerned at the fact that the Panel
of Experts' final report has not yet been posted to the
Committee's website. We strongly believe that this
report must be made available to all States Members of
the United Nations as soon as possible, as it highlights
information and best practices that can help States
carry out their obligations. Furthermore, failure to
circulate these documents contravenes the Committee's
commitment to transparency and undermines the entire
purpose behind having a Panel of Experts. We urge a
prompt solution to this impasse.

Since we last met, the United States, along with
France, Germany and the United Kingdom, reported
Iran's violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929
(2010), which prohibits Iran from launches using
ballistic-missile technology. My Government stands
ready to cooperate fully with the Committee and its
Panel of Experts in their investigation of this violation.
We encourage all Member States to report sanctions
violations to the Committee and the Panel of Experts.

The United States remains dedicated to
preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.
Iran's nuclear intentions are a major concern, not just
for the United States but for the region, the Council
and the world. Let there be no doubt that the United
States is committed to a dual-track policy of applying
pressure in pursuit of a diplomatic resolution of
international concerns regarding Iran's nuclear
activities.

We also remain committed to working closely
with our partners in the 1737 Committee, the Panel of
Experts and the Council on this important issue. Our
joint efforts will demonstrate the international
community's resolve to address Iran's continued
disregard of its international nuclear obligations. We
have made important progress in strengthening our
implementation and enforcement of United Nations
sanctions on Iran. We must now redouble our efforts to
sharpen the choice for Iran's leaders to abandon their
dangerous course.

