Ms. Thunyani (Malawi): Allow me, Mr. President, to
congratulate you and wish you well on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. I also congratulate your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, who was President
for the month of November.
We meet once again today to consider the situation in
Angola, a matter of great importance to my delegation and
all who come from that part of the region. We welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), as contained
in document S/ 1996/ 1000 of 2 December 1996, as well as
the interim report of 19 November 1996 contained in
document S/1996/960.

We are encouraged by the progress achieved since
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1075 (1996)
on 11 October 1996. We have no doubt that the clear
message contained in that resolution played an important
catalytic role. It is, however, clear from the two reports
that many aspects of the Lusaka Protocol remain to be
accomplished for peace to be fully established and for the
war-tired people of Angola to resume their normal lives.
Since time is of the essence, the days ahead are critical,
requiring magnanimity and the extra resolve of all the
players concerned. We urge all the parties, particularly
UNITA, to carry out all their obligations under the
Lusaka Protocol, in good faith and within the agreed time
schedules. We also implore them to desist from making
any moves that would affect negatively the gains already
achieved and, indeed, jeopardize the whole peace process.

My delegation is, however, pleased to note the
declaration by UNITA that it has quartered all
combatants, except for a few police officers. We further
welcome the announcement made by the Government of
Angola regarding the formal incorporation of nine UNITA
generals into the national army.

We take note of the plans of the Secretary-General
regarding the downsizing of the UNAVEM. III military
units. We find paragraphs 30 to 33 of his report
particularly informative. We have every confidence in the
Secretary-General's judgement, and look forward to his
further elaboration of these issues in his next report to the
Security Council.

The reports of the Secretary-General are also quite
clear on the resources required to carry out the many
activities aimed at bringing Angola back to normalcy.
While thanking the international community for the
assistance so far rendered to Angola, we join the
Secretary-General in inviting the donor community to
fulfil the pledges made at the 1995 Brussels Round Table
Conference. In the short term, such assistance can only
assist in ensuring that the peace that currently exists in
Angola holds.

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 1087 (1996) and support the extension of the

 

mandate of UNAVEM. III to 28 February 1997. We also
wish to acknowledge, and pay tribute to, the untiring efforts
of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, the personnel of UNAVEM. III,
and all those whose humanitarian work has once again
demonstrated that in togetherness much can be achieved in
the service of peace in Angola.

