Mr. Kastrup (Germany): Mr. President, I should
like to commend you and the Dutch delegation for
having convened this thematic debate and for resuming
our discussion punctually.

This debate is indeed timely. The
recommendations of the Brahimi Panel on the reform
of UN peacekeeping are on everybody's mind these
days. The Security Council has just completed its work
on its implementation document, and the General
Assembly is still deliberating on the recommendations

and will - hopefully - soon come up with a
substantive document. Many of the report's
recommendations are related to today's
brainstorming- the quality of Security Council

mandates, the comprehensive definition of peace
operations, the timely deployment of adequately
equipped troops, the efficient coordination of all actors,
and a better flow of information.

In talking about an exit strategy, one should first
define and agree on the term itself. What does it mean?
The Withdrawal of a mission in case of emergency?
The transition from one type of peace operation to
another? The gradual handover from United Nations to
national or local responsibility? Or the assessment of
the successful fulfilment of a mission's mandate?

Other multinational organizations or national
bodies may have their own definition of "exit
strategy", but the Security Council must have a clear
one of its own. Workable mandates are not possible
otherwise. There is no magic formula to ensure a
perfect Security Council mandate, but there are
elements which should be taken into account when
drafting, changing or ending a Security Council
mandate. It is clear that there are no standard models
and that each actual or potential conflict requires its
own analysis and response, as was rightly pointed out
by our colleague, the representative of Bangladesh, this
morning. Nevertheless, lessons learned have led to the
following preliminary conclusions, which I should like
to sum up in 10 points. Of course, as I am the 15th
speaker, certain repetitions cannot be avoided.

First, before setting up, altering or ending a
mandate, it is essential to have a clear, reliable
assessment of the situation on the ground which is
agreed upon by all important actors. The tools to
achieve this objective include a special representative
of the Secretary-General; close consultations with the
affected Member States and potential or actual troop
contributors; a strengthened capability on the part of
the Secretariat - as pointed out by the representative
of France this morning - to gather information,
analyse and plan strategically; and close contacts with
civil organizations on the ground. This requires a better
linkage between the Security Council, troop
contributors and countries contributing to policing and
civilian operations.

Second, an integrated approach also means taking
into account the repercussions for neighbouring
countries of a mandate that is new, altered or has
ended. This is a point that has not yet been touched on.
In this context, I should like to remind the Council of
the impact that the Security Council's mandates for
Kosovo, Bosnia and Sierra Leone had on neighbouring
countries in the respective regions.

Third, when altering or ending a mandate, a clear
scenario and analysis of options must be put together to
evaluate the consequences of the intended action.

Fourth, the provisions of the mandates have to be
clear, credible and achievable, and they must provide
for adequate resources.

Fifth, when a mission is to be reduced, withdrawn
or terminated, a transparent and proper assessment of
the achievement of the mission's goals must be
undertaken.
Sixth, heads of any mission and their staff should
remain focused and concentrated on achieving the
defined goals and objectives of their mandate, resisting
any temptations to gradually extend their authority and
jurisdiction into areas that are not explicitly covered by
the mandate. The experience of the United Nations-
mandated operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
good case to study to this end.

Seventh, mandates must include enough built-in
flexibility so that corrections, adaptations to changing
situations and fine tuning during the mission
implementation is possible. Close cooperation and
coordination between "ground zero" forces and
headquarters is indispensable.

Eighth, while understanding the reasons for quick
pull-outs, it is important to set high threshold criteria
for withdrawals. The fact that the first elections have
been held can seldom be the concluding point for peace
operations. Elections can be held too soon in conflict-
ridden societies or can result in even increased
fragmentation of the societies. International monitoring
must therefore often continue throughout the electoral
process and even beyond in order to enable a smooth
transition. Criteria for the achievement of a lasting,
self-sustained peace are vague. However, they should
include the rule of law and functioning of civil
institutions.

Ninth, peace missions must be seen as a multifold
continuum of tasks. Complex peace processes are
getting more and more multidimensional. It is
important to address the integrated tasks that stretch
from conflict prevention all the way to peace-building.
It is clear that in practice such clear distinctions do not
occur. Overlapping tasks and multi-functional
operations are the norm. The need for effective
coordination of all potential actors and for integrated
actions is therefore evident.

Tenth, specific components of post-conflict
peace-building should therefore be included early on in
peace agreements, when setting up new peace
missions, but especially when concluding mandates.
Without those elements the lasting success of peace
missions cannot be expected. In preventing violent
conflicts from re-emerging and in rebuilding the
capabilities of a society to resolve conflicts without
fighting, peace-building measures apply to situations
where the worst has already happened, leaving behind
traumas to heal, minefields to clear, infrastructure to
rebuild, former combatants to disarm and refugees to
repatriate. Other elements might include post-conflict
governance, emergency assistance, first steps towards
economic stabilization, health care and the
coordination of international and local actors.

In concluding I would like to underline what I
have said at the beginning. It is very encouraging that
the Brahimi Panel and its implementation plan
presented by Deputy Secretary-General Louise
Frechette have addressed many of the above-mentioned
elements. We are looking forward to a speedy
implementation of those recommendations. We also
welcome the Security Council's resolution (resolution 1327 (2000)) on the implementation of those
recommendations adopted last Monday. Germany has
already, at the national level, started to implement a
number of the Panel's recommendations: conclusion of
a stand-by agreement, international training facilities
for civilian peacekeepers, financial contribution to the
trust fund on crisis prevention, strengthening of the
Lessons Learned Unit and active contributions to
peace-building. We are strongly committed to using the
Brahimi Report (8/2000/809) to bring about major and
much-needed changes in the way the United Nations
carries out its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and stability.

This morning the United States representative
said that he would pray to continue this discussion in
private meetings. Please, dear colleague, include us in
your prayer.

