Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): First, allow me to
congratulate Croatia on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the first time and thank you, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to address the Council in this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East.

It is distressing, in the year of the sixtieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, to witness the dire humanitarian and human
rights situation in the occupied Palestinian territories
and to see that the self-determination of the
Palestinians has not yet been realized and that the
occupation has intensified.

While we await results from the continuing
negotiations, changes must take place on the ground.
This includes the lifting of the access restrictions on
the Gaza Strip and the closure regime established in the
West Bank, which puts severe restrictions on the
freedom of movement of the Palestinians and also
affects every aspect of their lives, including their
property rights and their right to education, health and
employment. This also includes the cessation of all
settlement expansion and of the creation of other such
stumbling blocks on the ground that are contrary to
international law and make it more difficult to realize a
two-State solution.

On the Palestinian side, the clashes between
Hamas and Fatah must end. There must also be a total
cessation of rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip, which
mainly target civilians and create terror among the
Israeli population. We urge both Hamas and Israel to
maintain the ceasefire and avoid a resumption of
hostilities.

As a strong supporter of resolution 1325 (2000),
Iceland believes in the importance of women's
participation in peace processes. I would like to draw
the attention of the Council to the International

08-6603]
Women's Commission for a Just and Sustainable
Palestinian-Israeli Peace (IWC), a tripartite body
involving Israelis, Palestinians and prominent
international women leaders with experience in
diplomacy and political negotiations. The IWC
operates under the chairmanship of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women. The main parties in the
peace processes would benefit not only from the
substantive input that the IWC could give to the
process, but also from the effective working methods
the members of IWC have developed to reach
agreements among themselves on the major issues.

The importance that women have given to the
role that a just and sustainable two-State solution could
play in the process cannot be overstated. The solidarity
among women across the lines of conflict can offer
inspiration and hope for their societies as a whole.

A just and peaceful resolution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is essential to peace and security
throughout the region and worldwide. The main role of
the Security Council is the maintenance of
international peace and security. Accordingly, Council
members have a responsibility to do their utmost to
resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Resolution 1850 (2008), adopted by the Council
on 16 December, provides for the continuation of
bilateral negotiations. We welcome the Council's
resolution. However, the lack of progress in these
negotiations, in parallel with a deteriorating
humanitarian and human rights situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, demands changes in
approach to the negotiations.

In this regard, I call attention to the remarks made
by the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari,
during the recent Nobel Prize ceremony in Oslo, where
he called for the Quartet and the international
community as a whole to accord high priority and a
serious commitment to this most challenging
peacebuilding project ahead of us.

