Mr. Fonseca (Brazil): We are gathered here today
to consider a draft resolution which Brazil hopes will be
the first step towards the return of normalcy in Iraq. By
normalcy I mean the assurance that Iraq does not pose a
threat to regional and international security. Iraq has to
abide by its commitment to fully disclose its programmes
of proscribed weapons and accept the reinforced
mechanism of ongoing monitoring and verification.

But normalcy also means the free flow of trade to
and from Iraq and the sovereign control of its resources
- that is, the end of sanctions and the reintegration of
Iraq into the community of nations on an equal footing.

Paragraphs 21 and 22 of resolution 687 (1991)
clearly spell out the conditions for the return of normalcy
in Iraq. They remain the standard for the lifting of
sanctions. However, it does not seem possible to achieve
that objective immediately. Although its goals remain, the
system established by resolution 687 (1991) seems to
have exhausted itself. No sign could be more eloquent
than the lack of inspections in Iraq for almost a year.

Such paralysis has made it necessary for the Security
Council to define new parameters for its action in Iraq,

 

without departing from the existing framework of rights and
obligations laid down in previous resolutions.

It is very important that we look critically at the past
in order to learn the lessons that may pave the way for the
implementation of the draft resolution on which we are
about to vote.

The text before us has as one of its main merits a
forward-looking approach. It renews the legal basis for our
action in Iraq and creates a new political reality based on
the idea of a process.

Progress and suspension are important milestones that
can be achieved in the medium term. Nevertheless, it seems
imperative to recognize that they will have to be politically
built. Such a building process, which is above all a
confidence-building process, is conceived in the present
draft as a continuous process of decision-making. At each
particular step, the Security Council is asked to take
concrete decisions that will require careful political
judgment. We hope that this will be done and that the draft
resolution will be fully implemented.

For almost a year now, the Security Council has been
grappling with the question of how to reconstitute a unified
stance on the Iraqi question and how to restore United
Nations authority in Iraq.

The first meaningful step has been the establishment
of the three panels. My predecessor, Ambassador Celso
Amorim, dedicated a great deal of energy to the task of
redefining some of the parameters for United Nations action
in Iraq. This was a serious and important endeavour that
was recognized by all members of the Security Council.
The reports of the panels offered viable technical solutions
for political consideration by the Security Council.

Last June, Brazil joined the group of sponsors of the
Anglo-Dutch draft, with the main objective of helping to
build consensus in the Security Council. At that time,
different views were presented in the French-Russian-
Chinese draft. We regret that it was not possible to achieve
consensus. But after eight months of negotiations, I believe
that we have a balanced text. It also incorporates many -
albeit not all - of the recommendations of the three
panels. We are grateful to the British delegation for all the
efforts that they have devoted to this process, and we
commend its results.

The draft may not be ideal for each and every
delegation. But it is surely very close to the best possible
result, taking into account the profound differences of
opinion with regard to the question of Iraq. The
alternative is the status quo, which, seen from the United
Nations perspective, is a precarious balance of
non-compliance and absence. Clearly, it cannot be
acceptable, since Security Council resolutions are not
being implemented while the Iraqi people continue to
suffer from all sorts of deprivations. Brazil wants to see
the Security Council in full control of a process that can
lead to the implementation of its resolutions and to the
return of normalcy in Iraq.

Finally, the question of how to engage Iraq has to be
addressed, sooner rather than later. This will certainly not
be an easy task, given the attitude of the Iraqi authorities,
particularly after the events of December 1998 and the
incidents of a military nature that continue to occur. It is
our opinion that an effort of healing diplomacy will have
to be made. The Security Council will need the help of
all those with the capacity of holding dialogue with and
influencing the Iraqi Government. The assistance of the
Secretary-General may be needed.

The adoption of the draft resolution today will also
send to the international community a clear sign of our
resolve to address the Iraqi issue solely through peaceful
means. All actions that fall outside this legal framework
should be avoided. Brazil will vote in favour of the draft
before us in the firm belief that it represents the start of
a new phase in relations between the United Nations and
Iraq.

