Mr. Gonzalez Serafini (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): 1 would like to thank Malaysia for its
initiative in organizing this debate and for the concept
note (S/2015/402, annex) it distributed to guide today's
discussion. Iwould also like to acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Malaysia and to
recognize the work of his country in its leadership of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his statement and his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, as
well as the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF and
Ms. Eunice Apio, for their briefings.

A few days from now it will be 10 years since the
adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which Argentina
firmly supported as a member of the Council at that
time. That resolution was particularly significant
because it authorized the creation of an oversight
and reporting mechanism to monitor, document and
systematically report grave violations of children's
human rights. It also created the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict with
the aim ofrecognizing, guaranteeing and protecting the
rights of children in situations of armed conflict.

In that framework, it bears repeating that Argentina
decisively supports the work of the Council to prevent,
avoid and halt grave violations of the rights of children
in the context of armed conflicts. That commitment
has been repeatedly demonstrated, as we were one of
the first States to ratify the 2002 Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and to have
actively promoted the adoption of resolutions 1261
(1999), 1612 (2005) and 2143 (2014). By the same token,
we joined in co-sponsoring resolution 2225 (2015),
which the Council adopted this morning.

Moreover, we highlight the progress achieved
in the area of prevention and protection of the rights
of children through the coordinated activities of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF and
other United Nations organs. We firmly support the
need to agree and implement measures to increase
the pressure on both State and non-State actors who
continue to commit violations. In that connection,
we repeat that there is need for greater coordination
between the system for the protection of children in
armed conflicts and the different sanctions regimes so
that sanctions can be imposed on the perpetrators of the
most flagrant violations committed against children in
conflict situations.

The protection of children from a human rights
perspective must continue to be our priority. For that
reason, it must be taken into account in defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, as well as in the Council's
endeavours in the area of peacebuilding, by integrating
more specialists into the different missions this body
authorizes. It is also important for States in this
Organization to ensure that training and preparation
for the adequate protection of the rights of children in
situations of armed conflict is not limited exclusively
to personnel who are directly responsible for protecting
children on the ground.

In fact, it is Vital to incorporate in training
programmes for military, police and civilian personnel
comprising the missions of the United Nations a focus
on human rights and full awareness of the rights of
children and adolescents, as well as knowledge and
understanding of strategies and processes for the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
children in situations of armed conflict. We also agree
on the need to involve various stakeholders in order
to advocate for an end to the involvement of children
in armed forces and groups, including, among others,
human rights activists, teachers, representatives of
civil society, family members, health workers, religious
leaders and other community actors.

Beyond the legal advances on the issue and the
accomplishments of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, there is still
much room for improvement. We must fight impunity in
an unequivocal way for all those groups or individuals
who commit these crimes. In that connection, this
Council established two international tribunals - those
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. Today we
have a system of international justice for the most
serious crimes, including war crimes, no longer based
on ad hoc tribunals but on a permanent court: the
International Criminal Court established by the Rome
Statute in 1998. In March 2012, the Court issued its
first judgement, which found Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
guilty of the war crime of recruiting children under
15 years to participate in hostilities in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo. With that ruling, the Court made
a significant contribution to the doctrine of protecting
children in armed conflicts.

Argentina, like the international community, is
fully aware of the devastating effects on children of
armed conflicts as a result of their recruitment, their
abduction, indiscriminate attacks against civilian areas
or direct attacks against civilians by explosive weapons,
air strikes, or the use of terror tactics that cause an
unbearable number of casualties among children.
We recognize the outstanding work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, during the last year, particularly the United
Nations Children, Not Soldiers campaign, to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children by security
forces of Governments in conflict situations before
the end of 2016. We welcome those Governments that
have already joined that campaign to ensure that in the
near future we end the inconceivable practice of having
child soldiers.

In closing, we also express our concern over and
strongly condemn the increasing use of schools for
military purposes and the increase in attacks against
schools and hospitals. We believe this matter merits
particular attention from the international community
since it radically affects the right to education and the
health of thousands of children worldwide. Therefore
Argentina is committed to the process of the Lucens
Guidelines to Protect Schools and Universities from
Military Use during Armed Conflict.

To that end, we wish to highlight in particular
the adoption last May of the Oslo Declaration on Safe
Schools, which was promoted by Norway and Argentina,
among other countries. To date 39 countries have joined
it. That Declaration commits States to implement the
Lucens Guidelines to Protect Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict, thereby
ensuring the right to education and protection of
children and young people in armed conflicts. We call
on States Members of the United Nations, particularly
members of the Council, to endorse the Declaration.

Finally, we stress once again the need to adopt an
unequivocal focus that sees children as victims and not
as perpetrators, because their alleged involvement in
armed conflict has been forced through recruitment,
kidnapping and other methods, including physical,
sexual, psychological and economic violence and
subjection to sexual slavery. In that regard, we wish
to highlight and to welcome the adoption tomorrow
by the General Assembly of a resolution establishing
19 June, the date of adoption of Security Council
resolution 1820 (2008), as the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
believe that the establishment of such an international
day will contribute in a significant way to raising the
international community's awareness of the need to
combat the crimes of sexual violence in conflict, and
also to provide multisectoral and multidimensional
assistance to victims and put an end to the impunity
of the perpetrators of such crimes through an effective
system of accountability before the relevant national
and international legal systems.

