Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): May I
begin by thanking all members of the Council who
participated in this mission. Their commitment and
solidarity made it a particularly useful and timely visit.
I am also grateful to the Secretariat for its assistance
and participation.

The report which follows is made under my own
responsibility.

It is now almost three years since the Council
first began to debate whether the Sudan was an
appropriate subject for its agenda. Grave problems had
emerged in Darfur, and relations between Khartoum
and the periphery were increasingly difficult. Much has
happened since then. To date the Council has adopted
seven resolutions on the Sudan and two presidential
statements. Those of us who visited the region can be
in no doubt as to the appropriateness of the Council's
attention to the Sudan and the wider region. For me,
the question is not whether we should be involved in
2

the Sudan and Darfur, but, rather, whether we have
been able to do as much as we ought. That view was
reinforced by the visit to Chad.

The Sudan, the biggest country in Africa, is very
complex. Darfur has rightly seized the attention of the
world, but the situation there is very complicated.
During its visit, the mission found that the conflict was
not fully understood by the international community. It
found, for example, that the terms "Government",
"rebel", "Arab" and "African" were often
oversimplifications of a more complex situation on the
ground, where alliances between tribes and groups
often shift. The porous - or non-existent - border
with Chad exacerbates this. A number of the Council's
interlocutors described the situation in Darfur as a
traditional conflict between herdsmen and farmers over
limited national resources. They outlined the
challenging nature of governing a region with its
particular and peculiar tribal complexities and lack of
public services.

A lasting solution to the problem in Darfur can be
found only on the basis of the traditions and the
customs of the peoples of the region. Indeed, the
Government of the Sudan's support for an African
Union (AU) rather than a United Nations force in
Darfur is partly motivated by its belief that African
States possess a similar heritage to that of the people of
Darfur. We will need to continue to stress to the
Government of the Sudan that any United Nations
force in Darfur must have a strong African
participation and character.

In the north-south context, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement marked the cessation of hostilities,
but the Government of National Unity is still a young
body.

It was important that the mission begin its work
in Khartoum and emphasize its respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan. We
stressed that the Security Council wishes to work in
partnership with the Government and the other main
actors in the Sudan to help tackle the range of
problems which the country faces. That assistance
today is expressed in the United Nations peacekeeping
Mission in the south - the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS) - by the work of Special
Representative Jan Pronk, which I commend, and by
the huge involvement of the United Nations agencies
delivering support to the people of the Sudan. But if it
06-38895
is the Security Council's role to promote international
peace and security, correspondingly it is the obligation
of the Government of the Sudan to protect its citizens
and to respond positively to the offers of help from us
and from others.

The situation in Darfur has deteriorated this year.
Humanitarian access has not been consistent and has
diminished. Attacks on individuals, particularly
women, have increased. The Wali of north Darfur told
the mission that there are 129,000 internally displaced
persons in camps in north Darfur, with another 279,000
internally displaced persons outside them. A further
622,000 people have been affected by that conflict,
bringing the overall total affected by the conflict in
Darfur to 1.31 million people. On a positive note, the
African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) has been
on the ground for 12 months, and its peace troops have
been delivering improved security to the people of
Darfur in exceptionally difficult circumstances. Thanks
in particular to the African Union, and with the support
of others, the Darfur Peace Agreement was signed in
Abuja on 5 May. Support for that Agreement is not
homogeneous among the different groupings in Darfur,
nor is opposition consistent among those parties that
have declined to sign the Agreement.

Two truths seemed clear to the mission: first, the
Agreement needs to be sold urgently to those living in
the region and those displaced elsewhere; and,
secondly, its implementation is key to peace in Darfur,
peace in the Sudan, and peace in the wider region. We
heard many interlocutors describe what was wrong
with the accord. It is not perfect, but it is the only
agreement that we have, and, in the view of the
mission, it needs to be implemented robustly. We
encouraged those who had not joined the Agreement to
do so as soon as possible.

In support of the Agreement, the United Nations
family, particularly the World Food Programme, has
now the largest food support operation in the world in
Darfur. Hundreds of tonnes of food are delivered daily
by convoys coming all the way from Port Sudan and up
from the south, much of the time on unmade roads -
the line of white trucks visibly delivering life-saving
relief.

In Addis Ababa, the mission found itself in full
agreement with the African Union that, at the earliest
opportunity, the United Nations should take over the
peacekeeping role in Darfur. President Konare and the
06-38895

Peace and Security Commissioner, Mr. Djinnit,
emphasized that this was the wish of the African
Union. The AU, for its part, has done a very good job,
starting from scratch in difficult circumstances. We
emphasized that fact in our meetings with the
Commander of AMIS in Darfur. But sustaining such a
force; rotating its troops; providing the necessary
capacities, including command, control and
communications; delivering financing; implementing
the more robust post-Abuja mandate - they are all
difficult challenges. Hence the agreement that it was
time for the wider international community to share the
burden and provide a United Nations force in Darfur.

A primary purpose of our visit and of our
discussions was to persuade the Sudanese Government
that this was the best option for Darfur and for the
country. In Khartoum, we found many hostile
perceptions of a United Nations deployment, fuelled in
part by concern at the adoption of resolution 1679
(2006) under Chapter VII. That Chapter is clearly a
major irritant for the Government, the President and
parliamentarians in Khartoum.

For our part, we explained that Chapter VII was a
technical, not a political, issue. A Chapter VII mandate
is likely to be required for any United Nations force in
Darfur, to enable the force to give the necessary
protection to civilians and to itself. Chapter VII would
help the United Nations implement the Darfur Peace
Agreement, which is what the Government wants.
Chapter VII would only mean that the United Nations
mission in Darfur has the same mandate as nearly all
United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa,
including, at the moment, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - which the Council visited after the
Sudan - Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia.

It was always likely that the Government of the
Sudan would not agree during the visit that this
transfer should take place. But the mission had an
important role in explaining why we thought this was
in the interests of the Sudan and encouraging them to
take on our view.

The process to get agreement from the
Government of the Sudan may be tortuous. By the end
of our visit, the mission felt we had edged further
towards the probability of the Government of the
Sudan accepting such a deployment.

Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and his
colleagues from the African Union are now in
3
Khartoum and in the region as a technical assessment
mission. Our mission considers that they should have
two objectives. First, to secure the agreement of the
Government of the Sudan to strengthening the African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) so that it is better able
to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement and thus
protect civilians until a United Nations force is
deployed. And secondly, to then identify with the
Government of the Sudan the transition arrangements
if AMIS is to be gradually replaced by a United
Nations force. That is the intention, and in my View it
is crucial that it be agreed upon very quickly and the
necessary planning completed urgently.

Security in Darfur must be quickly improved in
order to cope with the present array of attacks.
Civilians must be afforded protection, their rights
assured and impunity for abusers ended. That is why
we need to implement the Darfur Peace Agreement and
quickly strengthen the role of AMIS. To secure the
agreement of the Government to the transfer, I assume
that the AMIS mandate must first be strengthened to
reflect the need to implement the Darfur Peace
Agreement, and that the United Nations should then
take over that same mandate. If that is agreed, then it
will be for the Council to draft and agree the necessary
resolution to provide the mandate for the United
Nations force.

President Bashir made it clear that he did not
think external troops should be mandated to attack
Sudanese. He therefore accepted that control of the
Janjaweed - long sought by the Council and a
precondition for the security of persons in Darfur -
was the responsibility of his Government. We look to
them to fulfil that responsibility now.

But while the international community's attention
is rightly focused on the problems of Darfur, the
mission left with a clear sense that we should not lose
sight of the wider problems in the Sudan, in particular
in the south. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
which marked the cessation of hostilities, is being
taken forward. But the mission found that
implementation is slow. International donations to the
South are also drying up.

In one of the more sobering comments made, a
member of the southern Sudan parliament reminded the
mission that were southern Sudan a country, it would
be the poorest in the world. Yet Darfur's future is
inexorably linked to that of the south and the south's to
that of Darfur. A holistic solution is required, that
addresses all of the countries problems through a
coordinated response of the range of bodies in the
United Nations family. Security is of paramount
importance. But it cannot be viewed in isolation from
the humanitarian or social initiatives.

The Council, in November 2004, travelled to
Nairobi, and in its work there contributed to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement concluded in January
2005. Our mission was united in pressing for the
implementation of the Agreement. We visited the
United Nations Mission in Sudan (UNMIS) and were
impressed by the work it carries out on the ground. We
met with President Kiir of southern Sudan - who is
also Vice-President of Sudan - and with his
ministerial colleagues, and discussed implementation
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

It was clear that the Agreement remains fragile,
and that there is a continuing risk to civilians outside
the main towns. President Kiir also stated clearly that
implementation of the Agreement was essential.
Without it, there would be no Agreement, and, with no
Agreement, war would be probable. Those were the
words of the President of southern Sudan: a stark
warning of the crucial importance of moving forward
on the full implementation of the Agreement. As we
left Juba, we paid our respects at the tomb of Mr. John
Garang, who negotiated the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, whose death has been such a loss to the
peace process and to southern Sudan.

In the south, we also discussed the problems
caused in the region by the attacks launched by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). That scourge is present
in southern Sudan, and also in the Garamba Park in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as affecting
northern Uganda. Its activities over 19 years have led
to more than 1.7 million internally displaced persons
and to many deaths. The need to overcome this small
group of people who are causing such havoc
throughout the region is only too obvious. The
Government in the south is making overtures to the
LRA, hoping that it can persuade them to negotiate
peace with the Government of Uganda. Clearly, there is
a need for a political process to entice the bulk of LRA
members away from the leadership and to try to
reintegrate them into their societies. But there must be
real doubt about the extent to which Kony and the
other indictees are in any way prepared to work for
peace and to put aside their appalling record.
06-38895
In my view, they need to face justice in The
Hague. I have separately asked the Secretary-General,
in following up the mandate in resolutions 1653 (2006)
and 1663 (2006), to provide the Council with a written
report on the regional dimension of the LRA, because
we need to put in place a comprehensive response by
the international community, given the obvious threat
to regional peace and security which the LRA still
poses.

In Addis Ababa, we had a full exchange, not just
on Darfur, AMIS and a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, but on wider issues. President Konare set
out his deep concern about the situation in Somalia and
described the African Union approach to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to Cote
d'Ivoire, in both cases in terms very similar to those of
the Security Council.

But we also noted the importance of the wider
relations between the United Nations and the African
Union. With foresight, Chapter VIII of the Charter
addresses the role of regional organizations. Our
cooperation with the African Union is a positive and
timely development which has many possibilities.
Peacekeeping and demobilization, destabilization and
reintegration and security-sector reform are obvious
candidates for cooperation. I think the United Nations
has a particular responsibility to seek to help develop
the capacities of the African Union and of its regional
manifestations. But that responsibility goes wider. I
hope that other regional groupings can increase the
support that they are already giving, and that the
bilateral donors will also help develop essential
capacity. It is crucial in its own right, but it is
particularly important that we help African initiatives
to tackle African problems. Indeed, more widely, the
entire United Nations family should develop closer
relationships with the African Union and its various
components.

We were able to have four meetings with
representatives of non-governmental organizations
working in the Sudan and in Chad. I would like to pay
tribute to their immense contributions. They, the
United Nations agencies and the peacekeepers, are
carrying the burden for us today in Africa. They are
tackling humanitarian concerns, providing water and
sanitation, delivering medical assistance and
educational support and providing an essential basis for
longer-term development.
06-38895

Nowhere was this more apparent than in the work
being done with women. We could only admire the
courage of women confronting the immense burdens of
life in Darfur and in the camps of Chad. With quiet
dignity, they have to carry water, search for firewood,
face attack and violation - not just from the
Janjaweed - and, at the same time, bring up families,
often without male support. Our resolution 1325 (2000)
was much quoted, and so it should be. It was a
landmark resolution which addressed the role of
women as the particular victims of conflict, suffering
disproportionately from attacks and from HIV/AIDS,
often wrongly disowned by their families and with
little access to medical assistance, counselling, and so
on. At the same time, they lack the empowerment to
play the role in political life which is not only their
right but would introduce a degree of sanity into much
of the activity in the region.

Thus, the need for full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) seems to me obvious. That
requires a comprehensive strategy to secure the rights
of women, to provide them with relief, assistance and,
above all, with security, and to empower them to play
their just role in society. For their part, Sudanese
women have already identified a series of actions to
help achieve these goals, which include urgent
political, economic and social legislative reform;
access to and ownership of property and land; full
involvement in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) processes; the protection of
women and girls from gender-based violence, and the
prosecution of the perpetrators; and the establishment
of women's resource centres for refugee and internally
displaced women. Responding to these priorities is, in
my View, essential if we are to achieve sustainable
peace in the Sudan. I hope that the United Nations
family, and not just in Darfur and Chad, can better play
its part in working with host Governments to develop
strategies which deliver these goals. Then, as
effectively as possible and without duplication, the
individual agencies should work to secure
implementation of that strategy.

It was right that we should end our visit in Chad.
After Darfur we flew to N'Djamena and then on
10 June back eastwards to the Sudanese border, where
we visited the camps at Goz Beida. The scale of the
camps is huge and President Deby said that he thought
that 700,000 Chadians had been displaced due to the
raids being undertaken daily from Darfur.
That is the scale of the challenge, which must be
met in extremely hostile climate conditions. The
mission was immensely moved by the dedication of
United Nations workers and non-governmental
organizations as they tackle that massive task of
bringing relief and assistance to so many people.
Worryingly, despite being in camps, individuals,
particularly women, are at risk of attack. Within the
camps, we were alarmed to learn that recruitment and
intimidation of persons are regularly carried out by
rebel groups.

Yet the local community has embraced displaced
persons and refugees as guests. It is a stark reminder of
the poverty of the region to discover that local people
visit camps in order to receive some medical attention,
particularly to give birth, and to be guaranteed food.
That is the scale of the challenge in that part of Africa.

The Security Council has primary responsibility
for international peace and security. Our visit
demonstrated the importance of Council action on the
ground in the Sudan and in the region. But it also
reminded us of the wider United Nations interest in
Africa. The year 2005 was a good one for development
assistance. Substantial additional resources were
pledged. The Sudan and Chad underline why these
resources are so desperately needed, why the
Millennium Development Goals are crucial, and how
their implementation is so far behind schedule today.
The need to move from humanitarian to longer-term
assistance is all too apparent. But Chad is the seventh-
poorest country in the world. Delivering the Goals and
ensuring a partnership with the international
community and an accountable relationship between
donor and recipient are basic to the development
contract. With it goes governance, the rule of law and
essential rights for the people of the region, rights
which must include the protection of women and the
right to development.

This was a successful visit by a united Council.
We delivered messages of support and partnership but
did not shirk the tougher arguments where those were
necessary. The Sudan demands an integrated approach
to secure the implementation of the two agreements
and then to move on to tackle other issues, such as
eastern Sudan. But the Sudan cannot be considered
alone. It needs to be seen in a regional context. Its
relationships with Chad and the situation there should
be of particular concern to the Council. Of course, the
Governments concerned have overall responsibility for

the security and protection of their people. But it is all
too apparent that the United Nations will have to
strengthen its assistance, not just for security, and be
prepared to do this for some time, if fragile agreements
are to be implemented. Peace in Darfur is closely
related to peace in the Sudan, and in turn is vital for
regional peace and security.

That means that the United Nations must be
prepared to provide essential support until sustainable
peace and development are achieved.

