Lord Ashdown: I hope that members of the
Council will have found that helpful and useful. I am
very conscious of the time and have no wish to keep
representatives here, so I will try to make my
comments extremely brief.
I am very grateful indeed for the support that we
have received from the Council. It is a huge bonus for
us, and, believe me, I am extremely grateful for its
generous support.

May I in particular thank Pakistan and China for
making a point I would have wished to make - that
that support does not go to me or to my colleagues in
the international community, but that it goes, as the
representatives of Pakistan and of China said, to the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am the Council's
servant, but I am also their servant, and it gives me
great pleasure to record that the real heroes of this
peacekeeping are the ordinary people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who have borne their terrible pain with
such dignity and, I must say, such courage. To watch
them reconstructing their lives and their houses in
shattered communities is to understand that, although
the international community is close to having a
success in hand, the real heroes of this operation are
the ordinary, decent people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The representative of Pakistan said that he
wondered whether we would be able to reconstruct the
prewar tapestry. An unhappy fact of ethnic wars is that
areas become more ethnically pure after them. My
earliest childhood memory was, at the age of five,
driving through what is now Pakistan, as my family left
the Indian subcontinent after 200 years. I can still
recall, in my mind's eye, what tortured me in
nightmares as a child - an entire station covered with
the dismembered bodies of people who had been killed
because they were of the wrong religion.

As an Irishman of mixed parentage - Protestant
and Catholic - and as a soldier who has fought in
campaigns against ethnic wars and ethnic Cleansing
around the world and now has this task to do, I
understand only too well how difficult it is to construct
ethnic tolerance after such an event.

But if you had been with me only two weeks ago
at the opening of Srebrenica-Potocari, if you had
watched 20,000 Muslims - Bosniacs - burying the
first thousand of their 7,000 dead from the Golgotha of
Srebrenica, in the presence of Serb policemen from
Republika Srpska, in the middle of a Serb majority
area, all done with unbelievable dignity on both sides, I
must say, and absolute peace, you would, I think,
believe that although certain areas of Bosnia will not
retain their prewar ethnic tapestry, the nation as a
whole will remain a multi-ethnic nation - something
that I think cannot be said of the other countries of the
former Yugoslavia, unhappily, after the war. I believe
that that essential quality will remain, owing in large
measure to the extraordinary courage of the people.

The representatives of the United Kingdom,
Mexico and Bulgaria are entirely right: the Council
will know when we have succeeded, because I will no
longer be here making reports to it. My job is to get rid
of my job, and the closer I get to that, the more I will
count it a success. I merely say this: as we now track
towards the tenth anniversary of Dayton, that moment
should not be very far away.

Dealing with the dysfunctionality mentioned by
the representatives of Germany, Guinea and the United
Kingdom is one of our big tasks in the year ahead. I
must say about the present Government that I do not
detect any ill will, any lack of determination or any
lack of genuine sincerity about the need for reform.
There is, however, a desperate dysfunctionality in some
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's institutions, some of it
inherited from Dayton. It is very difficult to be the
Prime Minster of a country when you cannot choose
any of the ministers. They have no loyalty to you; they
have only loyalties to their party; and you cannot sack
them and take the difficult decisions that you must take
in the light of some of the problems Bosnia and
Herzegovina faces.

Nevertheless, I think more must be done to
increase the functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
institutions, at the top and at every lower level. On that
measure, I think the representatives of France, the
United Kingdom and Angola are entirely right: we now
judge by implementation, not by words. One of the
slogans I use is that I do not judge people by what they
say; I judge them by what they do.

In that respect, the representative of Spain asked
when we would join the Partnership for Peace (PFP).
Prime Minister Terzie and I have agreed that, with
respect to the Defence Reform Commission's
recommendations, now passed by the Government to
Parliament, our target - a very tough one to meet -
will be that the legislation should have passed through
the Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the next
North Atlantic Council meeting, on 17 December. If it
is through by then, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have
met what many regarded to be the impossible deadline
of achieving PFP membership conditions this year.
Then 4 Bosnia having made itself a credible PFP
candidate - it will be up to the North Atlantic Council
to decide when that should happen. The North Atlantic
Council may well decide that, legislation having been
achieved, it will be necessary to achieve
implementation. But I hope that that will not be a long
time off. It set a very high bar, but Bosnia and
Herzegovina jumped over it. It is now important that
that fact be recognized, and I hope it will be.

The representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Cameroon and Chile mentioned the question of
refugees, and they are entirely right to do so. On 1
January, we hand over from the international
community to the Bosnian authorities what is arguably
the most difficult task of all: refugee return. Here there
has been a remarkable success, with a million returned
to their homes. For the first time in history, the
theoretical human right of refugees to return to their
homes after war has become a practical reality; it is
now becoming a competence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It would be a disaster if that success was
not supported by the funds for the job's continuation
and completion in Bosnian hands. That is why the
Minister for Human Rights and Refugees, Mirsad
Kebo, and I went to Geneva to speak to all the major
representatives there and appeal for a continuation of
the flow of those funds.

Ownership - mentioned by the representatives
of Germany; France; Russia; and Italy, speaking on
behalf of the European Union - now comes from the
fact that I cannot use the Bonn powers extensively if
Bosnia and Herzegovina is to get into Europe. That is
the self-defeating factor: if I use the Bonn powers,
Bosnia and Herzegovina automatically disqualifies
itself from getting into Europe. That is why I should
like to say - making the point made by the presidency
of the European Union - that increasingly, as we track
down the next two years, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
future lies in the hands of its own Government and its
own people, not in those of the High Representative.
The pull of Euro-Atlantic institutions is now more
important to Bosnia and Herzegovina than the push of
the Bonn powers.

Spain asked when and how NATO might give
way to the European Union leadership. That, I fear, it is
beyond my pay grade to pronounce on; it is up to the
international community to decide. But, as someone
who considers himself a passionate European-
Atlanticist - and by the by, I see no contradiction
there - I believe Europe should take more of a lead,
provided that it can be done in the right way, a way
which reassures the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
that their security will be properly dealt with and
which, crucially, allows other third parties -
especially the United States and Canada - to feel that
they have a part to play in the process. In my view, that
should happen sooner or later.

My final point is to reassure the representative of
the Russian Federation that his Government's View is
my view. My powers stop at Dayton; they cannot go
further. That is the legal basis and limit of my powers.
If Bosnia and Herzegovina wants to amend Dayton, it
can do that only through its own people, by the process
of consensus. That has been my policy, and it will
remain my policy.

