Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): I would like to
thank the Chilean presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this very important and timely meeting
on the topic of the maintenance of international peace
and security. I am also grateful to Ambassador Antonio
Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), and Nobel Peace Prize winner Ms. Leymah
Gbowee for their insightful briefings.

Peace and security have increasingly and invariably
become a development issue. Conflicts bring about
casualties whose consequences extend far beyond those
killed and wounded. The cost of armed conflict and
insecurity throughout the world is enormous, whether
in terms of human suffering, loss of social capital or
economically. Conflicts undermine the basic political,
social and financial institutions required to maintain
stability and promote inclusive development. It is
important that the Council continue to promote peace,
security and development as mutually reinforcing
pillars. For other countries suffering from conflict and
foreign occupation, drawing lessons from the work of
the PBC, we strongly believe that conflict resolution
and post-conflict peacebuilding are dependent on a
number of underlying principles.

First, there can be no peace without justice. No
peace settlement can be reached that is inconsistent
with international law, particularly where pre-emptory
norms are concerned, such as the prohibition of
aggression, genocide and racial discrimination and
the obligation to respect the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of States.

Secondly, the violation of the rights of civilians,
in particular in connection with ethnic cleansing, has
become a widespread problem in the context of armed
conflicts. The need to develop tools for egregious
violations of international law, including violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
the provision of effective and adequate reparation to
victims and the need for institutional action to prevent
recurrence of such violence are all necessary adjuncts
to true conflict resolution.

Thirdly, the fight against impunity for past crimes
should be at the core of the peace and reconciliation
agenda.

F ourthly, the protracted displacement of populations
as a result of aggression and foreign occupation is
another obstacle to inclusive development. The impact
of conflict on housing, land and property, as well as the
violation of the principle of non-discrimination with
regard to internally displaced persons and refugees,
including forced demographic changes, require a
more consistent approach in order to put an end to
illegal practices and policies and to ensure a safe and
dignified return of those displaced to their homes. It
is important that the international community facilitate
opportunities in order to ensure that the rights of
forcibly displaced people are guaranteed and protected.

Fifthly, in the case of foreign occupation, the
exportation of natural resources and other illegal
activities are pursued with the sole objective of
consolidating military gains, preventing the expelled
population to return to their homes and obstructing
ongoing efforts aimed at achieving peace. It is crucial
that the impact of natural resources on inter-State
conflicts, particularly the illegal exportation of such
resources by States in violation of international law,
also receive the Council's due consideration within its
thematic work.

We firmly believe that an effective peacebuilding
process in the post-conflict context can take root and
succeed if a genuine peace, based on the generally
accepted norms and principles of international law, in
particular those pertaining to respect for the territorial
integrity and political independence of a State, are
established on the ground.

