Mr. Than Swe (Myanmar): At the outset, I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate.
I also wish to extend my thanks to Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes for his valuable and
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Over the past several decades, we have witnessed
a decline in the number of armed conflicts around the
world. However, armed conflict, with all its
complexity, continues to rage in some parts of the
world. The grim reality we face today is that the
protection of civilians in armed conflict remains a
daunting challenge for the international community.
The easy availability of illicit small arms and light
weapons exacerbates the situation. Modern warfare and
armaments, even with their deadly precision, result in
collateral damage and massive destruction.

Myanmar believes that the most effective way to
protect civilians in armed conflict is to address the root
causes and put an effective end to it. In order to
establish durable peace and stability, reconciliation
between the parties to a conflict needs to be reinforced,
along with the promotion of sustainable development,
the eradication of poverty, good governance and the
protection of human rights.

With that in mind, the Myanmar Government has
embarked upon a national reconciliation process by
engaging in peace negotiations with armed insurgent
groups. As a result, 95 per cent of armed insurgents,
numbering some 100,000, have returned to the legal
fold. The former insurgents have also joined the
national convention process, participated in the
drafting of a new constitution, taken part in the
national referendum and endorsed the new constitution.
Peace and stability therefore prevail in almost all parts
of Myanmar.

Myanmar also believes that the easy availability
of illicit small arms and light weapons adds complexity
to the nature of armed conflicts. It not only prolongs
and deepens a conflict, but it also has severe
implications for the social fabric. It breeds terrorism
and transnational crime such as trafficking in human
beings, drugs and illegal contraband. Myanmar
therefore believes that a legally binding international
instrument that prohibits the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons with non-State actors will go a long
way to protect civilians in armed conflict.

Over the past nine years, the United Nations has
made significant progress in strengthening its role in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The four
thematic resolutions of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians form an effective comprehensive
framework for action in that area. It must be stressed
that the implementation of the resolutions should be
implemented in faithful conformity with the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations and while
upholding and respecting the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence. National
sovereignty and territorial integrity should also be
respected, in order to foster a spirit of cooperation and
confidence-building for the promotion of durable peace
and stability.

My delegation is fully committed to a peaceful
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. We are convinced
that there is no military solution to it. We strongly call
for the protection of civilians. In that connection, my
delegation wishes to express its profound concern
about the destruction and loss of innocent life as a
result of the ongoing military attacks in the Gaza.
Myanmar joins the international community in urging
the cessation of all military activities and violence in
order to find a peaceful solution to the escalating
conflict.

The United Nations and the international
community have a legal and moral obligation to work
for durable peace. The principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 1860
(2009), and the relevant international humanitarian and
human rights law must be upheld in a balanced, non-
discriminatory and transparent manner if we genuinely
wish to protect civilian populations from armed
conflict and promote peace and stability.

