Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I did not intend to take the
floor again, but the assertions by the representative of
Israel leave me no alternative. What I cannot permit
is his questioning of Bolivia's position with regard
to terrorism. Bolivia will always condemn any act of
terrorism, whatever the circumstances and wherever
it may occur. But now that it is an issue - I am
referring to Israel's occupation of the Palestinian
territories - on the Security Council's agenda, it is
also our duty, as members of the Council, elected by
the membership of the General Assembly, to condemn
State terrorism, terrorism that is conducted through
Israel's Government institutions and that is designed to
benefit the Government of Israel, not the Israeli people,
for whom we have the greatest respect and concern.

It seemed extremely strange that the representative
of Israel should cite the situation of Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon, Jordan and Syria as an example,
considering that those refugees' right of return to their
homes has gone unacknowledged for the past 70 years.
Those 6 million refugees are living far from their
own homes because of Israeli policy. That is not what
Bolivia says; it is what international law says. How long
will they continue to prevent those millions of refugees
from returning home? The Ambassador of Palestine
recalled that today a Palestinian paramedic was killed
by a sniper. Is she also a member of Hamas? Are the
five-, six- and seven-year-old children who have died in
various attacks on Gaza also members of Hamas?

We commend the Human Rights Council's adoption
on 18 May of resolution S-28/1, providing for the
urgent establishment of an independent commission of
inquiry so that the presumed violations of international
humanitarian and international human rights law can
be investigated. We hope that this will happen and that
Israel will allow the commission to enter Israel and
the occupied territories, with every assurance that it
will be able to conduct an independent and impartial
investigation, because, ifI may say so, we do not trust
the occupying Power's version, which attempts to cover
up the essential underlying reason for the situation,
which is Israel's illegal occupation of Palestinian
territories. That is what lies at the heart of the matter.
When the occupation comes to an end, the refugees can
return and the wall of annexation is dismantled, then,
and only then, will the Security Council's resolutions
be implemented.

