Mr. Hernandez-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for convening this
important debate and for your leadership of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. We hope that this open meeting
will establish the practice of reviewing Security
Council working methods regularly with other States
Members of the Organization, as we have suggested in
the past and has been stressed by the representative of
Australia, a country which, among others, has
supported that measure.

Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
made this morning by the Permanent Representative of
Liechtenstein on behalf of the group of five small
countries. My delegation, as an active member of that
group, is contributing with a sense of responsibility to
the consideration of various elements of Security
Council reform, and specifically of its working
methods.

During its recent tenure as an elected member of
the Council, Costa Rica contributed to the significant
progress made by this organ in the implementation of
the note contained in document S/2006/507. Our
country welcomed the increase in the number of open
meetings compared to previous years. This trend
should be extended because we are still far from
complying with the provisional rules of procedure
establishing the public nature of Council meetings as a
general rule. As we have said on other occasions, the
Secretariat has the duty to facilitate the application of
this rule, offering open formats for all meetings as the
first option in the draft programme of work that it
prepares for each presidency. It would be for members
of the Council to argue for and convince the Council of
the need to use the private format on an exceptional
basis, when necessary.
The Council has also made greater efforts to
interact in greater depth and a timelier manner with
troop- and police-contributing countries. The Council
should maintain the new practice of holding private
meetings with those countries at least one week before
it considers an item so that their points of view can be
taken into account in decisions. We urge troop-
contributing countries to make greater and better use of
these meetings, to contribute with information and the
views of their mission personnel, and to refer to
specific issues relating to the implementation of
mandates in the field.

The Security Council has committed to
implementing the measures contained in the note
contained in document S/2006/507. My country
considers that the progress made in these and other
fields should not depend on the will of each individual
presidency, but should be affirmed in the daily practice
of the Council.

Costa Rica also has first-hand experience of some
other ways in which this organ still does not comply
with agreed measures. The desire for all Council
members to participate in the preparation and drafting
of resolutions and other Council products is reafflrmed
in note S/2006/507. However, in practice some very
sensitive issues are somehow removed from the
Council's purview and essentially defined by the
permanent members, other States that are not members
of the Council and the so-called groups of friends. As
recommended in note S/2006/507, Costa Rica is in
favour of consultations with interested States.
However, these should never be to the detriment of the
full participation of the elected members of the
Security Council. All issues of international peace and
security are of interest to and within the competence of
all members.

We welcome the Secretariat's ongoing internal
review of its reporting mechanisms in response to the
reiterated concerns of Member States on the tardy
circulation of the reports of the Secretary-General. As
stated in paragraph 11 of note S/2006/507, these
reports "should be circulated to Council members and
made available in all official languages of the United
Nations at least four working days before the Council
is scheduled to consider them", including Council
meetings with troop-contributing countries. Should
there be significant changes in the situation in the field,
these can be communicated via an addendum to the
reports. The fact that reports need to be updated should
not be an excuse for circulating them late.

Although my country welcomes the practice of
holding monthly open debates, it is important to
consider the use the Council makes of such debates.
This format can be very useful not just in addressing
thematic issues, as is currently the case, but also in
learning about situations in various countries, whether
they are new or familiar to the Council. We are also
concerned about the message sent when decisions
adopted by the Council in such debates are agreed
upon before they take place. This would seem to
indicate that the Council is not interested in hearing the
points of view of the broader membership before
making decisions. We invite the Council to change this
practice and to initiate the negotiation of resolutions
and presidential statements after having heard from the
rest of the members, and not to adopt them on the same
day, as has been its custom to date.

Beyond the contents of note S/2006/507, in
December last year my country submitted a draft note
by the President to the Informal Working Group on
Documentation, with the aim of ensuring the inclusive
and uniform participation of all members in Security
Council missions to the field. Our intention in doing so
was to clarify a number of administrative and
procedural aspects of Council missions. We hope that
this proposal will receive the attention of the Informal
Working Group, and my country remains fully
available to contribute to this process. I take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegation of Japan for
its leadership on this issue.

Finally, it is important to mention a mandated
task on which the Security Council still falls short,
although it is established in the very Charter of the
United Nations. We refer to the submission of special
reports to the General Assembly, a tool which could be
of use in such situations as the establishment of a new
peacekeeping operation or sanctions regime, or the
non-action of the Council due to the use of the veto,
among others.

Our delegation reaffirms its conviction that
working methods are a fundamental component of the
process of comprehensive Security Council reform.
The implementation of the measures already agreed to
improve its working methods and the adoption of new
measures would lead to greater effectiveness in the
work of the Council and thus to greater transparency
and accountability. We believe that progress on
working methods should not hinge on progress or
success in other areas of reform. We are convinced

that, through substantive reform of the working
methods, we can help to remove the obstacles that
occasionally impede the smooth running of the
Security Council and its relations with other bodies.

