Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): My delegation is
gratified that the Security Council agrees that it is
necessary to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia by three months - although
some of us would have preferred a longer extension.

 

The report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Liberia is informative. My delegation is pleased with it and
would like to thank the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative for their tireless efforts in the search for
peace in Liberia. We should also like to thank and
congratulate States members of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) - particularly its
Chairman, President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana - in respect
of the current breakthrough in the peace process in Liberia,
as envisaged in the Accra Agreement.

The Accra Agreement offers perhaps the brightest ray
of hope for the people of Liberia. It has brought about a
cease-fire, which took effect on 28 December 1994. It also
contains a clear programme of action for the peace process.
Granted, Liberia has in the past seen the signing of cease-
fire agreements that were never respected. It is our fervent
hope, however, that this time the leaders of the parties to
the Accra Agreement will not renege on their commitment
to a peaceful solution to the Liberian crisis.
It would be disheartening and disappointing for my
delegation if any of the Liberian parties were to dishonour
their commitment to yet another cease-fire. Unfortunately,
we are already disheartened and disappointed by the
suspension of the talks in Accra. But by their own
agreement the Liberian parties are obliged fully to
implement and honour the Accra Agreement. It is their
bounden duty to uphold the cease-fire, ensure the
installation of the Council of State and commit themselves
to the demobilization, encampment and disarming of their
militias. They should see to it that humanitarian assistance
reaches its intended target groups by ensuring the security
of organizations involved in distributing relief supplies to
displaced persons.

The crucial role that has been and continues to be
played by the countries contributing troops to the ECOWAS
Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) cannot be
overemphasized. In his report the Secretary-General has
highlighted the need for assistance to be given to these
Member States. We appeal to the international community
to render all the necessary assistance to ECOMOG so that
it can continue its work without interruptions caused by
financial, logistical and other problems. They are doing a
difficult and very important job on behalf of all of us, and
they deserve the support of the international community.

By resolution 788 (1992), the Security Council
imposed an embargo on all deliveries of weapons and
military equipment to Liberia. The continued proliferation
of weapons into Liberia not only violates the provisions of
that resolution, but also has a destabilizing effect on both
the peace process in Liberia and stability in the subregion
at large. It is important that the enforcement of that
embargo should continue to be tightened. In addition, my
delegation believes that the idea of a summit meeting for
ECOWAS member States is a brilliant one which should
be brought to fruition in the near future in order to bring
about, among other things, the harmonization and
consolidation of a subregional approach to the Liberian
question at this important juncture in the peace process.

Let me conclude by repeating that durable peace can
come to Liberia only if the Liberians themselves are
ready - sincerely and seriously ready - to work for it.

