Mr. Sharma (India): Mr. President, it is a great
pleasure to see you presiding in the very first month of
Singapore's current tenure on the Security Council.
This is truly a remarkable inauguration of Singapore's
service on the Council. Your wisdom in identifying the
topic of strengthening co-operation with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) has also come not a day
too soon, as troop contributors have been assisting the
Council in this key activity of the United Nations for
over half a century. We have the hope that this
excellent initiative of Singapore in holding an open
debate will be the harbinger of a new culture of
mutually constructive association and interaction
between troop contributors and the Council, which has
been prominent by its absence. We commend you for
identifying this pivotal theme, centrally related to the
Council's work, on which a debate could have been
held much earlier, in preference to some others we
have seen here.

In its last presidential statement on enhancing
consultations with TCCs, in March 1996, the Council
agreed to keep this issue under review and stood ready
to consider further measures and new mechanisms to
further enhance the arrangements in the light of
experience. It has taken another major crisis in
peacekeeping and a panel of external experts to remind
the Council that all was not well with existing
arrangements, even though this is a subject on which
we have spoken repeatedly for the past few years in
relevant bodies such as the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the Fourth Committee and
the Open-ended Working Group on Security Council
Reform.

The issue of meaningful consultations between
troop contributors and the Council is not a question to
be determined by preserving status or privilege, but by
necessity. Troop-contributing countries put at risk the
lives of their soldiers in the service of the United
Nations, in upholding and preserving the cherished
ideals of the Charter, strikingly more than do many
members of the Council who hold primary
responsibility in this regard. These members should at
least take the lead in ensuring that troop contributors
have an effective say in the conduct of peacekeeping
operations.

The Brahimi Panel had made a specific proposal
on strengthening consultations with TCCs in paragraph
61 of its report. Unfortunately, perhaps due to
oversight, this recommendation did not find its way
into the summary of recommendations of the report.
The Council, which otherwise rushed to embrace the
Panel's recommendations, found it expedient to ignore
this recommendation in its resolution 1327 (2000) of
13 November 2000. Instead, it came up with an
ingenious formula of an improved system of
consultations with the TCCS by "significantly"
strengthening the existing system of consultations by
agreeing to the holding of private meetings.

Why should the laudable attempt to arrive at an
appropriate mechanism of mutually advantageous
communication between the troop contributors and the
Council, of which the larger United Nations
membership is entirely supportive, apparently be seen
as root canal work by the Council, particularly when
this is an obligation on the Council and not an
indulgence by it?

The Council held its first such private meeting
with the TCCs on the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) in early October last year, when
faced with a crisis on the withdrawal of India and
Jordan, the two leading contributors to UNAMSIL.
This was a case of too little, too late. If experience is
any guide, results in future with such an approach will
be no better. We need to learn from experience so that
errors of the past are not repeated and the lessons
learned are given practical expression.

To illustrate the gulf between precept and
practice, let us recall that on 7 September 2000 the
Council, meeting at the level of heads of State and
Government, solemnly declared in its resolution 1318
(2000) its determination to strengthen consultations
with TCCs, and yet four days later it put out a draft
resolution on UNAMSIL in blue, ambitiously
expanding its tasks, impervious to the serious
reservations expressed by two of the largest troop
contributors to that mission, precipitating their
withdrawal.

Indeed, even earlier in the spring, when these
troop-contributing countries formally sought to
participate in a meeting of the Council on UNAMSIL,
they were denied the opportunity and not even shown
the courtesy of being sent a written response. Those
who actually contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security through their
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, as against those who are primarily
responsible under the Charter to do so, should not be
kept at arm's length, when they are the arm of the
Council.

Let us for a moment consider what has transpired
since the adoption of resolution 1327 (2000) on 13
November 2000. Last month, a meeting was called of
the TCCS on UNAMSIL, just a day after the eighth
report of the Secretary-General on the mission was
issued. It was not surprising that, in spite of the
briefing from the Secretariat, troop contributors were
not in a position to contribute meaningfully to the
discussions. Notwithstanding the presidential
statements of 1994 and 1996, such meetings have
indeed become pro forma and ritualistic and not an
occasion for fruitful deliberations and enabling forming
of shared perspectives, as they should be.

It is instructive to read the records of the
Council's meetings in the early 1960s, when the first
operation in the Congo was set up. That was a conflict
within a State, with the regional Powers involved,
mercenaries deployed, the United Nations invited in
and then spurned by some of the parties to the conflict,
a massive humanitarian and refugee crisis, a collapse
of administration which the United Nations had to
replace, a Security Council agonizing over whether it
should mandate a Chapter VII operation, a Secretary-
General and a mission blamed for not doing enough
and the Secretary-General responding that the Council
had not given him either the mandate or the means to
do more - in other words, all the hallmarks of what is
believed to be the new peacekeeping.
The significant difference was that all this was
played out in open meetings of the Council, at which
all countries with an interest, including the troop
contributors, participated whenever they felt it was
needed. At one stage, India had 6,000 of the 16,000
troops deployed and the Indian Defence Minister spoke
more than once to the Council. Permanent
Representative C.S. Jha spelt out, in words just as
relevant today, why India wanted to be not only heard
by the Council, but to have an influence on its
decisions:

"We cannot forget, nor should the Council
forget, that at very great sacrifice we have
involved ourselves in the Congo, and that
involvement does not mean merely the
discomfort, the inconveniences and sometimes
the loss of life to our young men serving in the
Congo. It has a deep connexion with the whole
state of public opinion in our country and,
ourselves being a democratic country, this
naturally has a great influence on our Parliament
and on our Government." (S/PV982, p. 7)

Unfortunately, though the TCCs could speak far
more often than they can now, their views on what
needed to be done were ignored, with the same
consequences then as now. As things started to go sour,
more than half a dozen of the troop contributors
withdrew from the Congo operation because they did
not agree with the way it was being run by the Council
and by the Secretariat. Nothing really has changed. The
Council has to be aware at all times that it is acting on
behalf of the membership and not to safeguard its own
preferences.

The General Assembly and the Secretary-General
used modalities in the Congo that might usefully be
revived where needed. The Assembly set up a
Conciliation Commission, to which it appointed mostly
representatives from the TCCs, who were the only ones
in close touch with ground realities and with all the
parties to the conflict. The Secretary-General set up an
Advisory Committee comprising TCCs to help him
tackle the crisis. Groups of friends of the Secretary-
General have sometimes been set up for later crises and
have played a useful role. These are modalities worth
considering by the General Assembly, which, under
Article 11 of the Charter, retains a responsibility on
these issues if the Council and the Secretariat do not
take them up.

Drawing on our experience in peacekeeping from
the Congo to Sierra Leone, I will make some
recommendations on when and how there should be
closer consultations between the Council, troop
contributors and the Secretariat.

These consultations should start when the
Council mandates an operation. By then, the Secretariat
has decided which countries should be TCCs and it has
a concept of operations. At that stage, there should be a
meeting or meetings of the Council, the Secretariat and
the potential troop contributors to explain in some
detail what the scope of the tasks is, what the likely
problems are, what the TCCs will be expected to
provide and what to do. TCCs must commit themselves
to an agreed set of tasks with resources and problems
identified, and establish that they have the means to
discharge their obligations. This is the stage at which
those who are considering participation can assess their
readiness in terms of the challenge of the task.

Participants in these meetings should share
operational information which some permanent
members have and do provide on an ad hoc basis to
some TCCs. This information is often invaluable in
helping prepare for a difficult mission in unfamiliar
terrain.

The meetings should introduce TCCs to
Secretariat bodies that they do not interact with, but
which are often prime movers in some operations. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
comes to mind, but there are others. The TCCs need to
know what these bodies and agencies are doing in the
mission area and what sort of support they expect from
the military, and do their own assessment of whether
this can be offered and at what cost, because quite
often there is a tension involved between different
areas of a peacekeeping operations work.

These meetings must in particular consider the
concepts of operation, which may bear the stamp of
concepts developed by military alliances proposing
deployments and tasks that can be carried out by
relatively small numbers of troops only if, as their
national or alliance strategic doctrines also require,
they have limitless mobility, seamless cooperation
between units, interoperability of the most modern
equipment and a range of force multipliers in close
support. What the United Nations gets is the same plan,
but only the small numbers. Staff officers from the
developing countries that have to execute these plans in
a peacekeeping operation can explain why they will not
work, as they so often do not in practice.

There must be close consultations in the
preparations for deployment. All responsible TCCs
send a reconnaissance mission out to the area of
operations before deploying their troops. This is a basic
professional requirement, which any army foregoes at
its peril. Amazingly, the United Nations refuses to fund
these visits, though the benefits come to the operation.
We recommend that, as a standard policy, the United
Nations require all TCCs to mount these missions,
which the Organization should pay for. On its return
from the reconnaissance, the TCC team should come to
New York to share its findings with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and, if necessary, with the
Security Council. Quite often, until a TCC with a
professional army has sent out its team, no
multidisciplinary military team will have gone over the
ground to try to match a Council mandate with local
realities. A professional reconnaissance team can give
early warning of dangers and problems that might
arise.

If a tripartite meeting between the Council, the
Secretariat and other TCCs cannot be arranged, at the
very least the Secretariat should record faithfully and
circulate to all concerned what a reconnaissance team
has returned with. Even if mandates are not changed,
which would mean the Council's having to adopt a
resolution, a faulty concept of operation or pattern of
deployment must then be corrected. In Sierra Leone,
for instance, a battalion was being split between two
contiguous towns. This seemed logical, except that the
plan had forgotten that there was a rather large river
dividing them, without a bridge on it. These errors can
be corrected early and quickly through professional
reconnaissance and proper consultations.

Consultations must be immediate whenever there
is a change of situation on the ground. TCCs are not
only the first to know that things are going wrong; they
also have the keenest interest in being told what the
Council and the Secretariat have in mind, because it is
their troops who will get the blame for failure or take
the casualties. The Secretariat and the Council, as
required, cannot evade the hard decisions needed. For
instance, when a party to an agreement tests out the
peacekeepers, when do they use force, and how much?
It is known that provocateurs want to prove that the
United Nations is taking sides and that the use of force
by the United Nations might be taken as an excuse to
resile from the agreement it is there to monitor.
Throughout the crisis in Sierra Leone, TCCs were
bedevilled with this problem. The Secretariat refused to
take a decision, leaving it to the Mission leadership to
exercise local judgement. This was foolish, since the
consequences for failure were shared, reflecting at least
as badly on the Council and the Secretariat and
tarnishing the image of the United Nations as a whole.
Collective decisions, not just consultations, are
essential.

Consultations must be held with TCCs before the
Council changes a mandate, which it is often tempted
to do when things go wrong. TCCs are often the only
ones that can properly advise if a change is needed, if
what the Council has in mind will make matters worse
or better, if it can be done militarily with the resources
available and, if it can, what the outcome is likely to
be. The Secretariat may have this information too,
relayed from the field, but be diffident about opposing
powerful voices in the Council. On other occasions,
when its own predilections may be shared by these
members, the advice from the field is suppressed. It is
the Council that must make the decisions, but its
members would agree that they can only make
informed decisions if they are given the information
they need. As we discovered in Sierra Leone, most
members of the Council were as clueless about what
was going on there as any non-member; they were
being persuaded to take decisions, which were faulty,
essentially on trust. The TCCs could have told them,
but the TCCs were kept away from them.

TCCS must know about, and accept in advance,
material changes to the terms and conditions under
which they committed their troops. This is obviously
essential when there is a formal change from a Chapter
VI to a Chapter VII mandate, but the Council tends to
finesse this by laying down Chapter VII tasks under
Chapter VI mandates. This collective agreement is
essential for the United Nations because it must satisfy
itself that troops trained and equipped to carry out a set
of agreed tasks can in fact take on, and do well, a set of
radically altered tasks. For the TCCs it is just as
important, because their Governments and Parliaments
want to know why their soldiers have been sent into
situations not anticipated when the United Nations
request for forces was accepted.

When force is authorized- and when things go
wrong, this is the first instinct- the Council must
implement Articles 43 and 44 of the Charter. As we
have repeatedly pointed out, Article 44 stipulates that
TCCs must participate in the Council's decisions, not
just be consulted on them.

Consultations must be held before the Council
changes the legal framework within which
peacekeepers operate. In Sierra Leone a special court
was set up, with an impact on the operation and
dangerous new tasks on which TCCs were not
consulted. Those consultations should be mandatory
under the procedure I have spelled out. But as TCCs
will now see, the Council is proposing that the statute
of the Special Court should give it residual powers to
try peacekeepers, although under the status-of-forces
agreements under which TCCs send their troops abroad
they enjoy complete immunity. The Council cannot
bind them through decisions to which they are not a
party, and which conflict with and undermine their
agreements with the United Nations; if it does,
traditional TCCs will find it difficult to continue to
support the United Nations.

How are those consultations at various stages to
be held? The Council is the master of its own
procedures, but there are several possibilities, some of
which are listed in the President's paper. Private
meetings are welcome as an interim measure, but they
cannot be a solution. Resolution 1327 (2000) seeks to
formalize that practice, but we need to go beyond this.
In particular, instead of resorting to ad hoc measures, a
regular body should be created that comprises members
of the Council and contributors of formed units to a
particular mission, to interact on various aspects of the
conduct of that particular operation.

In addition, I want to remind the Council that
Article 47, paragraph 2, of the Charter, which set up
the Military Staff Committee, stipulated that the
Committee could include officers from any Member
States

"when the efficient discharge of the
Committee's responsibilities requires the
participation of that Member in its work."

Why not revive that Committee, which is moribund,
give it the mandate to follow peacekeeping operations,
and use it as the forum for consultations with TCCs on
purely military aspects?

There are some other ways in which these
consultations and the performance of peacekeeping
operations can be improved. I will list three. It might
be useful if Council missions to a peacekeeping
operation, which are now quite common, took with
them representatives of TCCs. Apart from boosting
morale among the troops, it would ensure that, on
return, there was a common understanding among both
Council members and TCCs about what was conveyed
to the mission by the troops on the ground. The
practice, started in Sierra Leone, of meeting with TCCs
before and after a Council mission should continue,
though these meetings would now be much more in the
way of joint preparations to consider the way forward.

The Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions (ACABQ) also undertakes its
own field trips, sometimes to the site of peacekeeping
operations. It, too, should be encouraged to meet with
TCCs before its trip, and brief them on return. The
ACABQ looks at the seamy side of the United Nations
life, and what it turns up is useful for all of us to know.
Its published reports must necessarily be sanitized. An
informal discussion with Council members and TCCs
might be much more productive.

The Secretariat briefs donors on activities
executed through trust funds in peacekeeping
operations. Often, this is the most sensitive part of a
peacekeeping mission, where conflicts of interest are
the sharpest and where the most onerous duties are
placed upon troops. Quite often, TCCs are not even
aware that these are tasks that they have to do until
their troops arrive in theatre. TCCS must be associated
with these briefings to donors. As the Secretariat
explains what has or can be done, TCCs can explain
the operational, and sometimes the political, costs of
what the donors propose.

Publicity is an area where most TCCs believe the
Secretariat lets them down shamefully, and where
much closer consultations are essential. The Secretariat
believes that the United Nations needs to promote itself
in the developed world, where the criticism comes
from. The Secretariat has an obligation to do justice to
the performance and accomplishments of TCCs where
merited, if necessary through special media briefings.
The media in developed countries are independently
fed the spin desired by the interests of developed
countries. The Council very rarely, except through the
odd presidential statement to the press, refutes the
often false criticism that operations endure. In a crisis
there must be a way for the Council, the Secretariat and
TCCs - perhaps through joint briefings preceded by
consultations - to put out a common point of view.

The international media batten on the failures of
an operation. They by and large ignore the successes
unless they can be described as the developed world
riding again to the rescue of an inept developing world.
It would be good if the United Nations would do a bit
more than it does now to project the success stories of
peacekeeping operations, both to the developed world
and in the developing world, from where it gets its
peacekeepers. That might make TCCs feel more
appreciated and encourage their Governments to
continue to be responsive to the United Nations
requests for their support.

Some of the other important issues raised in the
paper circulated by the President are the commitment
gaps in the contribution of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, the previous failures and
shortcomings of such operations and the problems
concerning the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers. On the issue of commitment gaps, the
Brahimi Panel notes that in the last few years 77 per
cent of the troops in formed military units deployed in
United Nations peacekeeping operations were
contributed by developing countries. This is a sad
commentary on the willingness of others to share in the
collective responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security, and especially on those who believe
they carry the primary responsibility in this regard as
enshrined in Article 24 of the Charter.

Volumes can be written on the previous failures
and shortcomings of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. However, even a cursory reading of the
Rwanda and Srebrenica reports, and that of the Eisele
assessment team that visited Sierra Leone last year, is
revealing. I have had occasion to address this issue in
my statement on peacekeeping before the Fourth
Committee on 9 November, as well as before the
Council on 15 November last year during the open
debate on the subject of "No exit without strategy".
The lack of political will, an unrepresentative Council
distanced from ground realities when mandating
peacekeeping operations without taking the views of
troop-contributing countries into account, unwise
reliance on regional solutions, a commitment gap
resulting in the United Nations accepting inadequate
units as a matter of political expediency, and a
financially burdened Organization trying to overreach
itself are, in summary, the crux of the problems
confronting United Nations peacekeeping.

The safety and security of United Nations
peacekeepers is an issue of crucial importance to all,
particularly to troop contributing countries. More than
100 Indian peacekeepers have made the ultimate
sacrifice in the service of the United Nations.

Troop contributors deploy their personnel in
peacekeeping missions aware of the risks involved. But
it is our bounden duty to ensure the safety and security
of our peacekeepers, and we should leave no stone
unturned in this regard. The best insurance against such
risks is a properly planned and mandated mission,
comprising well-trained, equipped and disciplined
contingents that are not deployed in a void in which the
political process is either non-existent or compromised
for lesser interests, expressing the priorities of a few.

These problems can be tackled comprehensively
only through a sustained and meaningful dialogue
amongst the principal actors - the Council, the TCCs
and the Secretariat. An institutionalized mechanism,
comprising the main players, would provide an
appropriate forum to seriously address these issues.

We are confident that under your active
leadership the Council will not merely listen to the
views that are being expressed by troop contributors
today, but will seriously consider them in formulating a
thought-through and result-seeking approach in
addressing some of the most glaring lacunae in the way
this Organization conducts peacekeeping operations.

