Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): | would like to thank you, Sir, for your efforts during your country's presidency of the Security Council this month. I would also like to thank the Permanent Representatives whose statements have focused without deviation on the essence of today's topic, namely, the Palestinian question and ending the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, while the Palestinian question has been an issue on its agenda for 73 years. We had hoped that the Organization would play an effective role in helping us achieve a just solution that would uphold Palestinian rights and return security and stability to the Middle East. However, we have seen positions of the Organization that have never been implemented. It is as though those positions were simply a smokescreen. The Palestinian question and ending the Israeli occupation of occupied Arab territories have been issues on the agenda of the largest number of meetings, resolutions and statements allocated to this topic. However, under the pressure of some permanent members of the Council, our Organization remains unable to implement its resolutions and statements, achieve the hopes of the founding fathers to uphold the values of justice, based on respect for international law and the Charter of the United Nations, or put an end to the aggression, occupation and domination. What is worse is that Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, has violated his mandate and neglected to mention the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan in his briefings, with the aim of diverting attention from the dangerous crimes committed by Israel there. Given the fact that decades have passed since the Israeli occupation started, we have the right to ask: Has the time not yet come for our people in the occupied Syrian Golan, Palestine and Lebanon to enjoy freedom and liberation from the yoke of occupation? Has the time not yet come to implement the resolutions of our Organization? Has the time not yet come to establish an independent Palestinian State, as affirmed by General Assembly resolution 181 (II) of 1947, which was adopted 73 years ago? Has the time not yet come for the Security Council to uphold its responsibility to maintain international peace and security and establish a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East, instead of wasting its energies and resources and turning the Chamber into a place where certain prominent countries further their own agendas? The inability of the United Nations to find a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question has encouraged some to shirk their legal commitments and the agreed terms of reference, seek to twist the facts and entrench the occupation. That has been seen over the past few months through unilateral and provocative actions, such as the United States Administration considering occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its declaration of what it referred to as recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and its attempt to legitimize settlement activity. My country strongly condemns those decisions and considers them unilateral conduct on the part of a party that lacks the legal, moral or political authority to determine the fate of the peoples of the world or of the territories that are part and parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. My country also reiterates its call on the Security Council to compel Israel, the occupying Power, to cease its practices of defiling the history of the occupied Syrian Golan while stealing its antiquities and plundering its wealth, including Syrian oil, which it seeks to pillage with the cooperation of companies, such as the United States Genie Energy, whose Board of Directors includes people known throughout history for plundering the wealth of our countries. They include former United States Vice President Dick Cheney, Jacob Rothschild, Rupert Murdoch, former Central Intelligence Agency Director James Woolsey, former United States Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson and others. We also demand that Israel put an end to its crimes in the Golan and its attempts to change the demography and Syrian national identity there. Israel must end its confiscation of land owned by Syrian citizens in the Golan with a view to expanding illegitimate settlements and establishing new occupation projects, including the wind energy project. Israel must refrain from forcingour people in the Golan to register their land, which they inherited from their fathers and grandfathers, with Israeli State authorities, threatening to confiscate the land of those who refuse to do so, and falsely conducting so-called local elections. All that constitutes flagrant violations of international law and _ international humanitarian law, which some parties address with double standards and hypocrisy that exceeds all limits. My Government stresses that the occupied Syrian Golan is part and parcel of the Syrian Arab Republic. It must be returned in conformity with the 4 June 1967 borders, as per international law. That is the main priority of Syrian policy and the compass that we will never divert from. Syria underlines its support for the right of the Palestinian people to determine their own destiny and establish an independent State on all their national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital, while guaranteeing the right of return to refugees, in accordance with resolution 194 (IID) of 1948. My country reiterates its demand that Palestine be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations.
