The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for the kind words he addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Indonesia.

My delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution
before us today to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) for

 

a period of six months. Extending the Mission will help
Angola continue to work towards solutions to its difficulties
and will continue to bring the nation closer to a lasting state
of security and peace.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his informative report on the
progress made by UNAVEM. III in facilitating the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. We were
encouraged to read about the many accomplishments of the
Mission, which have created a solid framework for the
reconstruction of Angola. We were pleased to learn that
many aspects of the humanitarian situation have improved,
and that services by humanitarian agencies, including much
needed medical care, have expanded to cover previously
inaccessible areas. Furthermore, the initiation of the
implementation of agreements for the resettlement of some
40,000 displaced persons, and the demobilization and
integration of the armed forces, are indeed important steps
towards peace in that war-torn country. We expect that
owing to the success of past emergency relief there will be
a shift in focus from emergency relief to the rehabilitation
of the nation.

These and other successes have been facilitated by the
regular and continuing contact between President Jose
Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Jonas Savimbi. We encourage
the continuation of cooperation and dialogue to further the
effective and timely implementation of the peace process,
which will bring lasting peace and reconciliation to Angola.
It is essential to promote mutual trust and confidence so as
to ensure the parties' continued commitment to solving the
challenges that still lie ahead.

Despite the many advances of the Mission, my
delegation was disheartened to learn that the pace of
progress in some areas remains slow, due partly to a lack
of adequate resources. Although the recent agreements
between the parties to accelerate the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol have demonstrated political will, we must
underline the importance of international assistance so that
the Mission can accelerate the pace of its plans to address
Angola's needs adequately. One of the most crucial tasks
is an acceleration of demining efforts. Mine clearance not
only is of the utmost importance to the deployment of
peace-keeping forces in all regions, but is indispensable for
the long-term reconstruction of the economy.

We also believe that there is room for improvement in
terms of the security of the delivery of humanitarian aid.
Attacks along humanitarian routes, although isolated and
rare, have resulted in some civilian casualties, and have
hampered the delivery of much-needed supplies. We echo
the call for the parties to ensure the safe passage of
humanitarian supplies.

Although there has been an overall increase in the
level of safety and security, my delegation believes that
the attacks on humanitarian-assistance routes are evidence
that there are still some outstanding security-related
problems. We note with concern the incident in which a
United Nations military observer sustained serious injuries
as a result of an ambush by unidentified gunmen. We
cannot overstate the need for all parties to respect the
safety, security and freedom of movement of all civilians
and United Nations staff in Angola. Another security
concern is the monthly number of cease-fire violations,
which has remained constant from May to June. Although
none of the violations constituted a major breach of the
peace in the eyes of the Mission, the fact that the number
of violations remained steady is an indication that, despite
progress in other areas, acts of Violence continue to play
a role in Angola.

One person who has certainly furthered the goals of
the Mission is the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to Angola, Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, whom we would
like to thank for the tireless and skilful diplomacy he has
repeatedly demonstrated in striving towards a solution to
Angola's difficulties. We also pay tribute to all of the
Mission personnel, who have been instrumental in the
consolidation of the cease-fire and in many other
achievements in the overall process of restoring lasting
peace and stability in Angola.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the Permanent Representative of Angola.

