Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open meeting of the
Security Council to examine the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Political
Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) (S/2003/345), which
allows members to closely follow recent developments
and to be kept informed on progress in implementation
of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. We thank
Mr. Danilo Tiirk for his update on recent developments.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome the
presence in the Council of the Permanent
Representative of Papua New Guinea. That clearly
attests to the positive role that that country has been
playing in the process and in the success that we have
achieved.

We welcome the assessment made in the
Secretary-General's report of the progress made thus
far in this process and of the work that has been done
by the Bougainville Constitutional Commission in
drafting the Constitution. We deem it very important
that the people of Bougainville have been consulted
with regard to the future of the territory. That is a
fundamental step towards democracy. Implementation
of the agreed weapons disposal plan is also an
important step towards achieving stability in the region
and a very crucial element in promoting the conclusion
of the peace process and the holding of elections,
which are planned for later this year.

My delegation would like to encourage the parties
to move forward with meaningful talks for a peaceful
solution and for good relations with the countries in the
region. In particular, we welcome the efforts of the
Government of Papua New Guinea and its commitment
to implementing the Bougainville Peace Agreement.

We should like to stress the role of the United
Nations Political Office in this process. It is our view
that the Office should continue to play the pivotal role
that it has played up to the end of the mandate that has
already been defined. We recall with appreciation the
valuable and sustained support provided by regional
donors, which have facilitated the implementation of
the Action Plan for the Completion of Weapons
Collection.

In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for the
conclusions contained in the Secretary-General's
report. We hope that the finalizing of this process will
continue as reported thus far and that the Security
Council will achieve another success story.

