The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Czech Republic, Malaysia,
Norway and Somalia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Omaar
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia; His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union; and His Excellency
Mr. Samir Hosni, Director of African Administration
and the Afro-Arab Cooperation Department of the
League of Arab States.

It is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia, document S/2009/132.

Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1846 (2008), document S/2009/l46.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. 1
now give him the floor.


