Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
wishes to align itself with the statement delivered by
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

My delegation wishes to congratulate Poland on
assuming the presidency ofthe Security Council for the
month of August and on convening this open debate. We
would also like to thank Special Representative Virginia
Gamba for her remarks this morning and for presenting,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, the annual report
(S/2019/509) on children and armed conflict.

We would also like to extend our sincere
appreciation to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for her valuable insights. My delegation
thanks Mr. Majok Peter Awan, from South Sudan, for
sharing his experiences as a former child soldier and for
his testimony on the effects of child abduction.

Malaysia shares the deep concern expressed by
the Secretary-General on the scale and severity of
the grave violations committed against children in
2018. These continued violations against children
shock our collective conscience, which demands a
concerted and collective response. A vital component
of a comprehensive approach to child protection
is accountability. In that respect, Malaysia urges
that affirmative action be taken under national or
international justice mechanisms, where appropriate,
against parties that commit violations and abuses
against children. That has become more relevant
this year as we celebrate the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1882 (2009).

The Security Council has developed various
tools to ensure the accountability and compliance
of conflicting parties, including through the listing
mechanism contained in the annual report. Malaysia
wishes to reiterate the importance of integrity and
impartiality in the listing of all perpetrators of grave
violations of children's rights. We believe that facts
should be the determining factor that guides our actions
under this mechanism.

Malaysia supports the call of the Secretary-
General on Member States to allow safe, timely and
unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance and the
protection of humanitarian personnel and assets, in line
with resolution 2417 (2018). Believing that the United
Nations would gain by it, Malaysia would suggest
that the Organization develop practical guidance for
data collection on the denial of humanitarian access.
Such an effort would help to standardize and support
the work of country task forces on monitoring and
reporting of the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
Further, Malaysia believes that United Nations peace
operations and political missions should maintain
dedicated child-protection capacity to ensure that
child-protection concerns are prioritized even in the
context of the downsizing, consolidation or transition
of such operations.

With regard to reintegration, Malaysia believes that
the process of reintegration is a long-term effort that
requires the shared responsibility of all stakeholders. In
this regard, we call on Member States, United Nations
entities and other parties concerned to integrate
child-protection provisions in the community-based
reintegration programmes that foster a spirit of unity
and reconciliation among communities ravaged by war.

To further support the children and armed conflict
agenda, my delegation encourages all Member States to
consider endorsing the Safe Schools Declaration, which
would deter the military use of educational facilities
in armed conflict and preserve schools as mainstays
of learning, in line with the Vancouver Principles that
further operationalize child protection within United
Nations peacekeeping, with a focus on preventing the
recruitment and use of child soldiers.

Malaysia reaffirms its commitments to ensuring
that children around the world affected by armed
conflict are given the greatest consideration and
attention, which is what they truly deserve.
