The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Solomon Islands in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Manele
(Solomon Islands) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 10 November 2000 from the Charge d'affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Solomon Islands to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2000/1088).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly supports the
Townsville Peace Agreement, concluded on 15
October 2000 (S/2000/1088), for the cessation of
hostilities between the Malaita Eagle Force and
the Isatabu Freedom Movement and for the
restoration of peace and ethnic harmony in
Solomon Islands.

"The Security Council encourages all
parties to cooperate in promoting reconciliation,
so that the objectives of the Townsville Peace
Agreement can be met, and urges all parties to
continue to cooperate in accordance with the
Townsville Peace Agreement, namely, to restore
the

and maintain peace and ethnic harmony, to
renounce the use of armed force and Violence, to
settle their differences through consultation and
peaceful negotiation and to confirm their respect
for human rights and the rule of law.

"The Security Council commends those
countries in the region that have supported the
resolution of the conflict, and welcomes the
establishment, as outlined in the Townsville
Peace Agreement, of the International Peace
Monitoring Team composed of unarmed military
personnel and civilian police from Australia and
New Zealand, the mandate of which is based on
Annex II of the said Agreement and agreed by the
parties. It also encourages other nations, in
particular those in the region, to participate and
assist in the implementation of this peace
agreement."

This document will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2000/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.

