The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Croatia in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 21 January 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/1997/62.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1997/27,
letter dated 13 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council; S/1997/64, letter
dated 22 January 1997 from the charge d'affaires a. i. of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council; and
S/ 1997/78, letter dated 27 January 1997 from the charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting the text of a letter dated 25
January 1997 from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the letter
of the Secretary-General of 21 January 1997
(S/ 1997/62) concerning development with respect to
the United Nations Transitional Administration for
Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium
(UNTAES), and welcomes his evaluation.

"The Security Council welcomes the letter of
13 January 1997 (5/1997/27, annex) from the
Government of Croatia on the completion of the
peaceful reintegration of the region under the
Transitional Administration, which guarantees the
local Serb community representation and a voice at
various levels of local, regional and national
government, provides for a limited deferment of
military service, and affirms the intention of the
Government of Croatia to provide the local Serb
population with the protection of their legal and civil
rights under Croatian law. The Council calls upon
the Government of Croatia to implement fully the
commitments contained in that letter and the oral
guarantees made by Croatian officials to UNTAES
as specified in the letter of the Secretary-General of
21 January 1997 (S/1997/62).

"The Security Council also notes the letter of
the local Serb Executive Council and Regional
Assembly on this matter of 16 January 1997
(S/l997/64, annex).

"The Security Council recalls the statement of
its President of 15 August 1996 (S/PRST/1996/35)
and again underlines the importance of the holding
of elections, the organization of which is the
responsibility of UNTAES, in accordance with the
Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex)
signed on 12 November 1995 (the Basic Agreement). The Council shares the view of the
Transitional Administrator that the rights and
guarantees outlined in the letter from the
Government of Croatia, if fully implemented,
constitute a solid basis for the holding of elections
simultaneously with nationwide elections in Croatia,
and offer substantial progress towards the
completion of the process of peaceful reintegration
of the region. In this context, the Council
emphasizes that the holding and certification of

 

elections, upon a decision by the Transitional
Administration, within the envisaged time-frame will
only be possible if the Croatian authorities fulfil their
obligations with respect to the completion of the
issuance of citizenship and identity documents for all
eligible voters and relevant technical documents, and
provide all information as required by UNTAES for
certification of the elections. The Council underlines
the need for full cooperation by the local Serbs.

"The Security Council reiterates the importance
of confidence-building measures which could benefit
residents of the region beyond the expiration of the
mandate of UNTAES. In this regard, it encourages the
Croatian authorities to maintain the present
demilitarized status of the region.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
of effectively implementing the rights of all residents
in the region to equal treatment with respect to
housing, access to reconstruction grants and loans, and
to property compensation, as guaranteed by Croatian
law. It reiterates the right of all refugees and displaced
persons to return to their places of origin. It also
reiterates the right of residents of a State to choose
freely where they wish to live. The upholding of these
principles is of vital importance for the stability of the
region. In this connection, it strongly encourages the
Government of Croatia to reaffirm its obligations
under the provisions of the Croatian Constitution,
Croatian law, and the Basic Agreement, to treat all its
citizens equally regardless of their ethnicity.

"The Security Council stresses that the
restoration of the multi-ethnic character of Eastern
Slavonia is important to international efforts to
maintain peace and stability in the region of former
Yugoslavia as a whole. The Council encourages the
Croatian Government to take such steps as are needed
to promote goodwill, build confidence, and provide
assurances of a safe, secure and stable environment to
all people in the region. These steps should include
full implementation of its Law on Amnesty, full
cooperation with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, improved cooperation with
respect to local Serbs who wish to return to other
areas of Croatia, full compliance with the Basic
Agreement, and full cooperation with UNTAES and
other international organizations. The Council
welcomes the commitments by the Government of
Croatia with regard to the establishment of a Joint
Council of Municipalities, Council of the Serb ethnic
community, and with respect to educational and
cultural autonomy of the Serb population and other
minorities in the region. The Council notes the
reassurances of the Croatian authorities that
applications for a second period of deferment of
military service for local Serbs will be considered in
a positive manner.

"The Security Council condemns the incident
that occurred at Vukovar on 31 January 1997 and
that resulted in the death of an UNTAES
peacekeeper and injuries to other UNTAES
personnel.

"The Security Council calls upon both sides to
cooperate in good faith on the basis of the Basic
Agreement. It also calls upon them to continue to
cooperate with the Transitional Administrator and
with UNTAES in order to ensure the success of the
process of reintegration. It calls upon the
international community to support fully this
endeavour.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Transitional Administrator and

his staff, and reaffirms its full support for them.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

