Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mr.
Minister, the delegation of Mali is pleased that the
Security Council, under your guidance, is studying the
Secretary-General's report on the situation in East
Timor.

It is a pleasure once again for my delegation to
welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I thank him
for his comments in complement to the excellent report
of the Secretary-General before us.

My delegation associates itself with the words of
welcome addressed to the remarkable delegation from
East Timor, led by Mr. Mari Alkatiri, Chief Minister of
the Second Transitional Government of East Timor. We
are, of course, pleased to note the presence at this
meeting of Mr. Mats Karlsson, Vice-President of the
World Bank, and of Mr. Zephirin Diabre, Associate
Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme, and we thank them for their contributions
today.

I will heed your appeal for brevity, Sir, and
simply make two comments. First, I wish to emphasize
that Mali is pleased to note the political progress made
to date towards the establishment of an independent
State of East Timor through the election of 88 members
of the Constituent Assembly, the creation of an all-East
Timorese Council of Ministers, the establishment of a
Timorese Administration, the enhancement of security
measures, the provision of public services and the
reconstruction of infrastructure. These results have
certainly been obtained thanks to the efforts of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) to bolster the contribution and direct
participation of the people of East Timor in the
administration of the country. They also attest to the
great political maturity of the people of East Timor as
they move towards independence.

My second comment relates to the most important
challenge before us: guaranteeing the viability of the
future independent State. We hope that all will be done
to help East Timor embark on independence. In that
context, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that a substantial international
presence be maintained in East Timor after it accedes
to independence. Indeed, the international community
is duty-bound to accompany the new State in its first
steps, particularly by providing it with all necessary
assistance in administration and finance and by
guaranteeing its security.

In the same vein, we encourage the relevant
international and bilateral partners, particularly the
Bretton Woods institutions and United Nations funds
and programmes, to provide increased assistance to
East Timor after it accedes to independence. The
information provided by Mr. Karlsson and Mr. Diabre
is encouraging in that regard.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to Mr. Vieira de
Mello, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for East Timor, and to the entire UNTAET team for
their dedication in conducting this operation,
unprecedented in United Nations history, to its proper
conclusion. We appreciate their impressive efforts to
build an independent, democratic and economically
viable East Timor. We fully endorse the presidential
statement to be issued at the conclusion of this
meeting.

