Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. President, it is a great pleasure for us to see
you, the Foreign Minister of Malaysia, as President of the
Security Council as we take up this important item on the
initiative of your country.

Today's discussion in the Security Council confirms
the relevance of the question of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants as an
essential, integral part of peacekeeping operations and
post-conflict peace-building. The Russian Federation
shares the view that, in many cases, the disarmament of
ex-combatants and the collection and the destruction of
their weapons are important conditions for normalizing
regional crisis situations. We agree that the issue before
us today requires a comprehensive approach and the
coordination of efforts by the international community.
Otherwise, it will not be possible to establish firm
guarantees that conflicts will not be resumed.

The Security Council is always aware of the issue of
demobilization of regions in crisis, including, when
appropriate within peacekeeping operation mandates,
provisions on assistance in the process of disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating ex-combatants. At the
same time, however, such good decisions are frequently
confined to the paper on which they are written and never
actually implemented. One does not have to look far for
examples. Suffice it to recall some issues regularly
considered by the Security Council. One particularly
obvious example of the grave consequences of failed
efforts to disarm combatants is the collapse of the peace
process in Angola. As is well known, and as was just
pointed out by Ambassador Greenstock, the main reason
for the situation is the failure of the Angolan opposition
UNITA to implement its commitments under the peace
agreements, primarily as they relate to the demobilization
of all its forces. The Security Council could usefully draw
the appropriate lesson from the Angola situation by
stepping up its search for ways effectively to ensure the
full implementation of its resolutions.

 

The issues before us today arise acutely and directly
within the context of a settlement of the Kosovo situation.
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) clearly provides for
the demobilization of the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA)
and other armed groups of Kosovar Albanians. This task
was given by the Security Council to the international force
for Kosovo, KFOR. It calls for the genuine disarmament of
the KLA fighters and the full dismantling of all the military
structures of that organization, which may not be re-
established in any form whatsoever. As a first step, it also
calls for the halt to all acts of violence by the KLA. Unless
this task is performed as quickly and effectively as possible,
it will be impossible to stabilize the situation in and around
Kosovo, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, or to ensure a
strong and lasting settlement of the Kosovo crisis.

Unfortunately, the process of demobilizing the KLA
is not progressing fast enough, and KFOR contingents from
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization member countries
are clearly not moving ahead on this very important issue.
As an active participant in the Kosovo settlement and in
KFOR, Russia expects a qualitative breakthrough in the
demobilizing of the KLA to be achieved very soon. We
will be continuing to take the necessary steps in this area,
inter alia, in the framework of the Security Council.
One further example is Tajikistan. Against the
background of the peace process unfolding in that country,
particularly egregious is the delayed implementation of the
Protocol on military issues of the General Agreement on
the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan, which provides for disarming and dismantling
the military units of the opposition. The main responsibility
for this, of course, lies with the United Tajik Opposition
(UTO). However, the United Nations Mission of Observers
in Tajikistan could have played a more active role. It is
clearly mandated to monitor the cantonment of UTO
fighters, the collection of weapons, demobilization and
reintegration and to provide assistance to the parties in this
area. Moreover, the demobilization and reintegration into
civilian life of the opposition fighters and the inter-Tajik
peace process as a whole require adequate financial and
material support from the international community, which,
unfortunately, has been quite inadequate to date. We trust
that the appeal made in Security Council resolution 1240
(1999) for contributions, including the implementation of
proposals for demobilization, and the relevant appeals of
the Secretary-General eventually will be heeded by the
international community. Otherwise, the peace process in
Tajikistan may give rise to serious difficulties.

The task of disarming and demobilizing participants
in armed conflict is indissolubly linked to the problem of
the uncontrolled proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, particularly in regions of crisis. My colleagues
this morning have also referred to this issue. Russia is
interested in stepping up efforts to combat the illicit use
of conventional weapons, particularly in conflict areas.
We support United Nations involvement in efforts to
collect and destroy small arms and light weapons when its
assistance has been requested and the States involved
have given their consent.

We must also work to enhance the effectiveness of
arms embargo regimes imposed by the Security Council.
As we have often stressed, arms embargoes with
loopholes merely exacerbate military confrontation
between conflicting parties and undermine the authority
of the Security Council and of the United Nations as a
whole. In this sense, it is necessary to draw serious
lessons from the negative experience of the Kosovo crisis,
where external support for the KLA was provided
virtually in the open, in flagrant violation of the decisions
of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I wish to confirm once again that the
Russian Federation, fully aware of its responsibilities as
a permanent member of the Security Council, will
continue to make an active and practical contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping in all its aspects, including
the issues before us today. I do not believe that there are
any differences of opinion about how to resolve this
problem. The statement prepared by Malaysia enjoys
broad consensus support in the Security Council and the
United Nations as a whole. It is therefore our view that
the task now is not so much how to systemize principles
and approaches, but to implement these principles in
practice without allowing violations of Security Council
resolutions or having to cite such examples as I cited
earlier.

