Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset warmly to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Miroslav Jenca and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi,
for their particularly illuminating briefings and for
their commitment.

The situation of the Rohingya in Rakhine state
remains a source of serious concern for France, and
I would like to thank the Kuwaiti presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this important
exchange of views.

In that context, I should like to share with the
Council three lines of thinking.

The first area relates to the central question of
the return of the hundreds of thousands of refugees
currently in Bangladesh. The considerable efforts
undertaken by Bangladesh, which is hosting almost a
million refugees, must be commended and supported
by the international community. The agreement of
23 November last between Burma and Bangladesh on
the return of refugees is a first step towards the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of Rohingya refugees to
their homes when conditions so permit.

Here we must acknowledge that the conditions for
such a return have not been met and that major progress
remains to be made. It is crucial in particular that the
High Commissioner for Refugees be fully involved in
these discussions as part of a tripartite agreement with
Burma and Bangladesh and that it be able to assist both
countries in the implementation of the return process
in accordance with international standards. Moreover,
it is vital that measures to be taken in Rakhine to
promote reconstruction, reconciliation and respect for
human rights, as recommended in the report of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by
Mr. Kofi Annan.

Secondly, I should like to stress the need to
strengthen our commitment to and our collective
pressure for the full implementation of the demands
made by the Council in its presidential statement of
6 November last (S/PRST/2017/22). If those demands
are effectively implemented, they will contribute
to creating the conditions for a safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees.

The first requirement was to put an end to the
violence in Rakhine. While it must be recognized that
the level of violence has decreased recently, hundreds
of Rohingya continue to flee Burma to Bangladesh,
and those who have remained there are still subjected
to severe discrimination and intimidation. We continue
to receive disturbing reports about the appalling living
conditions of those who remain. Many villages have
been razed and burned to the ground. Protecting the
population must therefore remain our priority.

The second significant demand from the
international community is to ensure safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors. While the
International Committee of the Red Cross and, to a
lesser extent, the World Food Programme today have
access to Rakhine, it is far from sufficient to identify
and respond to all humanitarian needs.

A third essential element of the presidential
statement adopted on 6 November concerns violations of
human rights. We welcome the adoption by the General
Assembly last December of the resolution on human
rights in Burma (General Assembly resolution 72/248)
and call for its full implementation. We condemn the
serious human rights violations that continue to be
committed in Burma, particularly in Rakhine.

A few days ago, a documented Reuters investigation
uncovered unacceptable atrocities in a Rohingya
village - atrocities that could amount to crimes
against humanity. The two journalists conducting the
investigation are currently detained. We call for the
immediate release, just as we reiterate our commitment
to the freedom of the press and the protection of
journalists, who must be able to exercise their profession
freely, without fear of being intimidated or arrested.
Respect for those freedoms is one of the foundations of
any democratic society.

It is essential to shed light on human rights violations
and to combat impunity. In that regard, we call on the
Burmese authorities to cooperate with human rights
actors, including the United Nations Fact-Finding
Mission on Myanmar and the Special Rapporteur. We
further call upon the Burmese authorities to provide
all the necessary access to the team of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and to UNICEF. Human rights are
part of the solution, and guaranteeing its full respect
will help create the conditions for the voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable return of refugees.

That brings me to the last request of the presidential
statement - which I once again underscore
today - namely, the full implementation of the
recommendations drawn up by the Commission chaired
by Kofi Annan. Burma is faced with many challenges.
Those of democratic transition and reconciliation
among communities, which make Burma such a rich
and diverse country, are arguably the largest and
most important for the future of the country. National
reconciliation will lead to a solution to the crisis
in Rakhine state. Full citizenship, the freedom of
movement, equal access to basic services and respect
for the right to property should be granted to every
person without discrimination, regardless of their
ethnic or religious origin. The report of the Rakhine
Advisory Commission provides a road map for the
Burmese authorities to address the root causes of the
Rakhine crisis and create conditions for sustainable
coexistence among communities. France encourages
the Burmese authorities to continue to implement those
recommendations, with the support of the group of
independent experts appointed to that end.

My third, and last, comment touches on the
importance of the international community, and in
particular the United Nations, remaining fully mobilized
on that subject. While the steps taken by the Burmese
authorities are a first step, the commitments must
continue to be translated into action. Much progress
remains to be made in each of the areas mentioned
in the presidential statement adopted by the Council
on 6 November. It is essential that the international
community, especially by means of the Council,
remain extremely vigilant and actively engaged. The
next appointment of a Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General will allow us to lend further support to that end.

France reiterates its support for the Burmese
democratic transition and the efforts of the Government
led by Aung San Suu Kyi in that regard. In the face of
the tragedy in Rakhine, France will continue to insist,
particularly within the Security Council, on the urgent
need to put an end to the violence and discrimination
against the Rohingya, deliver unhindered humanitarian
assistance to the population in need of it and facilitate,
when conditions are right, the safe, voluntary and
sustainable return of refugees. France will continue its
dialogue with the Burmese authorities to that effect,
proceeding the visit made to Burma by Foreign Minister
Jean-Yves Le Drian last November.

