The President: As this is the last scheduled
meeting of the Security Council for this year, I would
like to express, on behalf of the Council, our deep
appreciation and thanks to our colleagues who will be
leaving us at the end of the year: Ambassador Thomas
Mayr-Harting of Austria, Ambassador Tsuneo Nishida
of Japan, Ambassador Claude Heller of Mexico,
Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan of Turkey and
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda of Uganda. We have
been through a lot together over the past two years. We
have appreciated their seriousness of purpose, their
dedication to the work of the Security Council and
their friendship.

I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Australia, Canada, Germany, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy and Pakistan, requesting
to participate in this meeting. I propose to invite those
representatives to participate in this meeting without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Security
Council, I extend an invitation under rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

There being no objected it is so decided.

I have received a letter from His Excellency
Mr. Peter Schwaiger, Deputy Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, in which he
requests to participate in this meeting in accordance
2
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 39
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/630, the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security.

I now give the floor to Mr. Staffan de Mistura.


