Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I would like to
thank Nicholas Haysom, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings.

We want to begin by commending the Prime
Minister and Chief Executive of the Government
of Afghanistan for the progress they have made in
establishing a new representative Government for
Afghanistan. That progress is not as extensive as they
would have wanted - or we would have wanted - but
we know that they have had to deal with considerable
challenges, both internally and externally. This
morning's horrible attack on Afghanistan's Parliament
and the fighting in Kunduz and Badakhshan provinces
are saddening reminders of those challenges. So, let us
be realistic about it and acknowledge that things are
progressing pretty well, all things considered. But let
us also be realistic about the road ahead. It is going to
be difficult.

We firmly believe that Afghanistan can have a
great future, both as a self-reliant and independent
country, and as a key player in the developing political
and economic architecture of Central Asia. But for that
to happen, Afghans - both those in power and those
who empower their leaders - have to decide whether
they want to forge a national future or whether they will
revert to the pursuit of narrow self-advantage and, in so
doing, consign their country and themselves to another
bout of fratricidal introspection. We earnestly hope that
the Afghan people will choose the former course.

The trials through which Afghanistan has been
passing over the past 15 years are incredible, in the
true sense of that word. Afghanistan was the locus of
the forces that brought down the Twin Towers in New
York City, damaged the Pentagon in Washington and,
for all we know, might also have taken out the Congress
of the United States of America or the White House.
Those attacks, while centred on the United States, were
an attack on universal human values and therefore
an attack on the basic principles that underlie this
Organization.

The response of the international community to
those events was itself incredible * a marshalling
of effort both to defeat Al-Qaida and the Taliban
and to restore Afghanistan and bring it back into the
community of nations. That effort bears comparison
to the Marshall Plan and the restoration of democracy
in Europe and the economic revival after the Second
World War. We hope that the Afghan people recognize
that that was no small or narrow self-interested
undertaking. We should not lose that perspective when
we consider the Secretary-General's most recent report
(S/2015/422).

Clearly, there are things to be concerned about,
including the slow pace in the establishment of the
apparatus of Government at both the national and the
provincial levels; the postponement of parliamentary
elections; and the continued undermining of
Afghanistan's economy and social cohesion by
organized crime, especially in connection with the
opium trade. Most worrisome of all is the deterioration
in the security situation brought about, principally, by
the Taliban, who simultaneously hold themselves out as
willing to engage with the Afghan Government while
increasing their fight against the Afghanistan National
Security Forces. Such internally inconsistent efforts
are muddle-headed and betray a self-interestedness that
negates any claim to be acting for a higher purpose,
whether religious, national or local.

But there is also progress, both in the establishment
of the institutions of Government and in the maintenance
of peace in many parts of the country, despite the
efforts of those who seek to tear things down rather
build their country up. Maintaining peace in such an
environment is no small achievement, and we need
to recognize that. We want Afghanistan to succeed.
New Zealand's commitment to and investment in
Afghanistan - especially to Bamyan province - has
lasted longer than our commitment to either the First or
the Second World War. And our contribution was, we
know, mirrored and exceeded by many others.

In that context, we note, in particular, the
willingness of the United States to extend its military
and economic contribution under the New Development
Partnership.

That is why we continue to pay close attention
to Afghanistan and why we continue to support the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. It
is the means by which we, the international community,
manifest our willingness to walk with and work with
the Government of Afghanistan as it navigates the
difficult road ahead.

