Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): I would like to begin
by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen for his very
comprehensive briefing. My delegation appreciates
his efforts in engaging with all relevant parties and in
facilitating a peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.

We note with appreciation the meeting between
the Astana guarantors and Special Envoy Pedersen in
Nur-Sultan last week. Indonesia has always supported
all efforts aimed at advancing the political process,
through negotiations and peaceful means, within the
framework of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015). Indonesia sincerely hopes that the dialogue
among all relevant stakeholders will continue, with
a view to contributing to a credible and sustainable
solution to the Syrian conflict. My delegation wishes to
highlight two pertinent points.

First, on the constitutional committee, Indonesia
is of the view that the ongoing dialogues are indeed
promising. We share the view that establishing a
constitutional committee would serve to open the way
for a lasting political solution in Syria. However, all of
us in the Chamber are also fully aware that that is not
an easy task. Various actors are involved, with different
views, interests and understandings. The international
community needs to do its part by always ensuring its
support towards advancing the political process in Syria
and finding ways to create a middle ground among all
the parties involved.

Building trust is key. Distrust and suspicion are
clearly not going to lead us anywhere. My delegation
supports the establishment of an inclusive and credible
constitutional committee that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people on the basis of respect
for Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In that
regard, I would specifically like to commend the Special
Envoy's tireless efforts in building the confidence of
all parties in order to advance the process. The whole
process of political settlement must be implemented by
the Syrians and cannot be imposed from outside. There
is no way to restore peace in Syria except through a
political solution.

Secondly, on the way forward, my delegation
believes that the international community needs to
invest further in maintaining the ceasefire and in
creating a concrete road map to comprehensively
resolve the Syrian conflict in a way that is acceptable
to all. The situation in Idlib needs our special attention.
The Council must continue calling on all parties to the
Syrian conflict to abide by the ceasefire agreements and
to prevent more civilian casualties. We must prevent a
military escalation in Syria, which would disrupt any
progress on the political front. Moreover, the issue of
safe, voluntary and dignified refugee returns, including
the post-conflict reconstruction and rehabilitation of
Syria, require serious discussions if we want to bring
about stability and genuine peace.

I think that it is fair to say that after many years, there
is now a glimmer of hope for realizing a comprehensive
political solution to the conflict. Compromises are

required and delays would bring only more suffering
and lives lost.

Indonesia stands ready to support the Special
Envoy's mandate and to contribute constructively in the
process of achieving sustainable peace in Syria.
