Mr. Lacroix (France) (Spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their
presence at this meeting. We listened to both of them
very attentively. I should like to congratulate
Mr. Jeremie on his appointment as Foreign Minister in
the new Government. My delegation also wishes to
welcome, for the first time since his appointment as
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo. We welcome the impartial and pragmatic
approach that he just described to us and his resolve to
cooperate actively in this new phase with the other
international actors present in Kosovo, in particular the
European Union. I wish to assure him that he enjoys
France's full support in carrying out his mission.

Like all other members of the Security Council,
we are resolved to do our utmost to ensure that the new
era that is beginning in the lives of the people of
Kosovo will contribute to a definitive restoration of
peace and stability throughout the Western Balkans.
Following our meeting on 20 June (see S/PV.5719), the Secretary-General launched the
reconfiguration of the international civil presence
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999). He
acted both before and after that decision in a spirit of

transparency and dialogue, and he demonstrated an
irreproachable concern for impartiality regarding the
mandate entrusted to him by the Security Council.

A month after that decision, we see a security
situation that remains calm and institutions that are
working satisfactorily within a democratic framework.

Above all, the decision of the Secretary-General
to reconfigure the international presence has helped to
uphold a favourable climate for its ongoing stabilizing
action throughout Kosovo. It has thus enabled it to
carry out the vital tasks set by the Secretary-General,
namely the maintenance of stability and security and
the preservation of all that has been achieved by
UNMIK over nine years.

In the coming period, UNMIK may rely on the
full support of the European Union. In particular, the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) is to
be fully operational by autumn and is gradually taking
on a larger operational role, within the framework set
by the Secretary-General. As Mr. Javier Solana,
European Union High Representative for the Common
Foreign and Security Policy, has recently said, EULEX
operates in the framework of resolution 1244 (1999)
and under the overall authority of the United Nations
and with full transparency with regard to the
Organization.

We have just heard the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Kosovo, who have set forth
differing views on, in particular, the question of the
independence of Kosovo. Nevertheless, we note with
satisfaction their shared concern for approaching these
differences in a spirit of stability and in a spirit of
preserving the conditions of a shared future within the
framework of the European Union. Without the sense
of responsibility being expressed by the peoples of
Kosovo and Serbia and their leaders, and without the
determination of the vast majority to resolve disputes
between communities through dialogue and without
resort to force and violence, nothing will be possible.
The commitment to the rule of law, the determination
to build a multi-ethnic State with respect for
minorities, the will to form friendly relations with the
neighbours of Kosovo and pro-European undertakings
by the Kosovar authorities, as reaffirmed today by
Mr. Hyseni, are all important elements in the
progressive acceptance of Kosovo in the international
community. These commitments will need to be fully
implemented.

The international presence of the United Nations
and its partners, in particular EULEX, will help in the
achievement of this goal. The Kosovar Government
needs therefore to cooperate fully with this
international presence, with a view to establishing a
Kosovo that is democratic, multi-ethnic and respectful
of the rights of minorities.

A new Government was formed in Serbia on
7July following the May elections, which saw the
victory of the democratic and pro-European forces.
That Government has made rapprochement with the
European Union its priority. To this end, it has taken
courageous steps that France and its European Union
partners have welcomed. In particular, allow me to cite
the conclusions of the General Affairs and External
Relations Council on 22 July 2008 in response to the
arrest of Radovan Karadzic:

"This development illustrates the commitment of
the new Government in Belgrade to contribute to
peace and stability in the Balkans region. It is a
significant step on Serbia's path towards the
European Union."

The decision of the Serbian Government to
normalize diplomatic relations with all of the countries
of the European Union is also a step in the right
direction. We encourage the Serbian Government to
continue on this course and to develop a constructive
approach to the activities of the European Union in
order to help uphold peace and security in the Balkans
region. We are convinced that Serbia's path towards the
European Union, including its candidate status, could
be accelerated. France is intending to push hard in this
direction during its presidency of the European Union
by offering Serbia clear prospects. We believe that it is
certain that Serbia will become a member of the
European Union; that is its future and our hope.

Allow me to conclude by stressing this point. The
European Union is fully aware of its responsibility in
helping to resolve the question of Kosovo and in
overcoming the obstacles to a stable and prosperous
future for the Western Balkans. It is in this spirit that
the Union has deployed EULEX and it is in this spirit
that we will strive in the months to come to work
towards a common future for Serbs and Kosovars
within the framework of the European Union.

