Mr. Ould-Abdallah: I am very pleased to be here
today and to participate in these discussions on the
progress report of the Secretary-General on ways to
combat subregional and cross-border challenges to
peace and security in West Africa. Together with my
colleagues, I thank the Secretary-General for his strong
support. We also wish Benin a productive presidency
of the Security Council. We are grateful to Security
Council members for their continuous attention and
interest with regard to the challenges to durable peace
in West Africa.

My Office remains focused on the fulfilment of
its mandate. In that connection, we will continue to do
the following. First, we will facilitate coherent and
integrated approaches to peacebuilding among United
Nations entities established in West Africa. Secondly,
we will strengthen our partnership with West African
States and subregional organizations, especially with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). Thirdly, on behalf of the Secretary-
General, we will continue to carry out preventive
diplomacy and early warning missions. Fourthly, we
will continue to go beyond the news headlines, report
to Headquarters on significant developments in the
subregion and devise policy recommendations that
provide a basis for effective peaceful crisis
management. Finally, we will initiate outreach
activities, in partnership with West African
Governments, civil society organizations, the private
sector and other international actors, to address
persistent and emerging challenges to peace and
security.

Recommendations from the Security Council are
the focus of our attention. The needs and requirements
of West African States and people will continue to
motivate and guide our work.

The mandate of my Office is carried out in a
particularly complex environment with new and
recurrent crises. That makes our commitment crucial.
Working within such a complex environment also
further complicates our task. We take small steps in
emergency situations where giant leaps would be more
appropriate. Hope and faith in a better future should,
however, remain alive and vibrant.

To strengthen our action within the framework of
our mandate, we focus on three broad challenges.

The first is an institutional challenge. We must
further strengthen institutional collaboration among the
United Nations entities in West Africa. Of particular
relevance here are the meetings of the Heads of three
United Nations peacekeeping missions - in Cote
d'lvoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone - and the United
Nations Office in Guinea Bissau, which I chair on a
quarterly basis. Those meetings are aimed at
broadening inter-mission cooperation, improving the
exchange of information and experience, pooling assets
and collaborating across State borders.

Stronger collaboration between the United
Nations and other partners in the subregion -
especially the Organization's partnership with
ECOWAS, West African States and civil society - is
also a priority. We will also continue to institutionalize
our collaboration with development partners, including
the World Bank and the European Union. In that
connection, I should like to mention the ongoing
trilateral partnership among the European Union,
ECOWAS and my Office, the United Nations Office
for West Africa (UNOWA).

There is also a methodological challenge. Amid
multiple challenges, we have to prioritize issues, areas
and objectives. As suggested by a number of Council
members during the retreat last June on Long Island,
UNOWA has established a matrix for a more effective
follow-up of Security Council recommendations
contained in the presidential statement of 25 March
2004 (S/PRST/2004/7). Issues such as small arms,
child soldiers, security sector reform, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, roadblocks and
cross-border peacebuilding are among our key
priorities.

With regard to small arms and light weapons, we
are targeting the tracing and marking of small arms, the
establishment of a regional register and the
transformation of the ECOWAS Moratorium into a
legally binding instrument.

In the area of security sector reform, combating
non-military threats to the security sector is a main
priority. Specific issues to address are health -
especially the spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in
armed forces and security forces - the administration
of justice and the strengthening of customs services.

With respect to integrated borders and cross-
border peacebuilding, four clusters have been
established: Guinea/ Cote d'Ivoire/Liberia/Sierra
Leone, Mali/Burkina Faso/Cote d'Ivoire/Ghana,
Mauritania/Mali/Niger and Senegal/Gambia/Guinea-
Bissau. Specific security, humanitarian and social
development priorities are being prioritized.

Finally, in connection with our efforts to
contribute to the strengthening of ECOWAS's
institutional capacity for peacebuilding, an objective
defined in the June 2004 UNOWA-ECOWAS joint
work programme was the elaboration of an ECOWAS
peacekeeping curriculum. The curriculum, which is
aimed at informing future regional peacekeeping
operations, is currently being finalized.

There is, finally, a last challenge: the doctrinal
challenge. Our efforts to build peace concentrate on
countries at war. That is a logical course of action,
given the burning political and humanitarian
emergencies encountered in such States.

Countries not at war, however, deserve support.
They remain fragile and could be weakened by
violence in their neighbourhood. Stronger support from
the international community is needed for countries
with working democratic processes, such as Ghana or
Niger, where free and fair elections have been
organized most recently.

The challenges ahead remain daunting. Togo,
where a clumsy transfer of power was followed by
great confusion, is a clear illustration of the fragility of
peace and stability in parts of West Africa. Togo should
also remind us that unless we address small crises in a
timely and coherent manner, they could easily be
transformed into bigger and more complicated issues,
as happened in C6te d'Ivoire. Another concern is about
what will happen next October with the scheduled
elections in Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia. What might the
impact be on Sierra Leone?

However, we remain confident that ongoing
collaboration between the international community and
West African populations and States will help to
overcome some of those challenges. For the last two
years we have worked closely with the Ghanaian
chairmanship of ECOWAS. Our collaboration with
Niger, current chair of the West African organization,
is equally strong. Naturally, the support of the Security
Council remains a precious asset.

