Mr. Roed-Larsen: In the last two Secretariat
briefings to the Security Council, we painted a bleak
picture of the situation in the Middle East. A spate of
violence in the summer and early autumn led to a
stalemate in the peace process. Despite a lack of
diplomatic progress, recent months have nonetheless
been characterized by relative quiet on the ground -
with no major terror attacks by Palestinians and a
marked decline in Israeli military operations.

Once again, we have a narrow window of
opportunity, one in which the parties need to take
positive steps to truly put the peace process back on
track. Each side has reiterated its commitment to the
Quartet's road map, and now is the time for them to
fulfil their road map obligations and take necessary,
bold confidence-building measures to restore hope.

There are a number of factors behind the opening
of this window. A new Palestinian government has
taken office, led by a Prime Minister, Ahmed Qurei,
who has a long history of negotiating with Israel. Since
assuming office last month, he has reiterated the
Palestinian Authority's full commitment to the road
map and expressed a strong willingness to resume talks
with Israeli authorities. We will fully support his
efforts to implement the road map. We will also fully
expect him to take steps to deal with violent groups.
Notably, Mr. Qurei has been a consistent and forceful
critic of Palestinian terrorist attacks.

Israeli Prime Minister Sharon has also made clear
his desire to meet his Palestinian counterpart and
restart the peace process, based on the Quartet's road
map, to which he has committed himself on several
occasions. We expect that on issues such as the barrier,
settlement expansion and military actions that affect
Palestinian civilians, Prime Minister Sharon's
Government will act in ways that support the peace
process. We remain willing to provide the help Israel
might need to fulfil its road map obligations.

We applaud the Government of Egypt for its
tireless efforts to secure a ceasefire by working with
the Palestinian Authority and a variety of Palestinian
groups. Though there has been no agreement reached
as of yet, efforts continue and we hope they will soon
lead to a full and lasting ceasefire between Israelis and
Palestinians.

Two praiseworthy civil society initiatives are
under way that reflect a strong desire by both peoples
for a just, lasting and secure end to this conflict. The
Geneva Accord and the Peoples' Voice initiative have
been widely lauded. A recent Israeli poll indicates that
75 per cent of the Jewish Israeli population in Israel
supports holding negotiations for peace with the
Palestinians; 65 per cent support the establishment of a
Palestinian State in the context of advanced
negotiations; about 60 per cent agree with the
evacuation of Gaza and remote and isolated West Bank
settlements.

While civil initiatives cannot substitute for the
officials of the parties negotiating, they are significant
indications that Israelis and Palestinians can work
together to constructively bridge their differences.
These initiatives and the poll results also show what we
can all feel on the ground - an intense weariness of
the current tragic state of affairs and a desire for real
change.

Finally, the Security Council's endorsement of the
road map in resolution 1515 (2003) is an extremely
positive step that deepens the international
community's support of the peace process.

While it is tempting to be optimistic given the
factors I have outlined, the current situation remains
very fragile. So, where might it lead?
There appear to be four main possibilities.

First, if real negotiations restart but fail to revive
the peace process, the risks are grave. Hopes will be
dashed, leaders on both sides will find it extremely
difficult to re-engage, and we could recede further into
the darkness. Such a lack of progress would only
strengthen the enemies of peace.

Secondly, some Israelis have recently proposed a
unilateral withdrawal from parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory. The Israeli withdrawal from
southern Lebanon has been cited by some as a
precedent for unilateralism. I think it is timely to recall
that that withdrawal was not unilateral: it was carried
out under Security Council supervision and with
intense support from the United Nations Secretariat
negotiating with both parties over the course of several
months to draw up the so-called Blue Line. In that
process, Israel complied fully with relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The lesson from the Lebanon withdrawal is that
international support can effectively facilitate Middle
East peace efforts. Any withdrawal from occupied land
is praiseworthy, but a unilateral withdrawal would
contain problematic elements. It might be perceived by
some that only force, violence and terror can create
change and that it is not necessary to arrive at a
peaceful settlement through negotiations underpinned
by international legitimacy. It might be perceived by
others that a partial unilateral withdrawal, from only
some of the occupied Palestinian territory, would be
enough to settle the issue once and for all. But a just
and lasting peace can best be achieved by both sides
working out a resolution across a negotiating table with
the active support and involvement of the international
community.

Thirdly, an "absolutist approach" based on the
aforementioned civil society initiatives advocates an
immediate and comprehensive resolution of the
conflict. While these initiatives show us where we must
go, they are not inconsistent with the road map and
lend vital hope and sustenance to peacemaking efforts,
I believe that even their framers realize that quick
implementation is not possible, given the current
political climate. In saying this, I am not at all
dismissing the Geneva Accord or the Peoples' Voice
principles. On the contrary, this sort of track-two
activity gives vital reassurance that there may after all
be a partner for peace on the other side.
That leaves us with the only viable route - a
step-by-step approach assisted by bold confidence-
building measures. In other words, bilateral
negotiations based on the road map and facilitated by
the international community. Under such an approach,
Israelis and Palestinians need a determined and
engaged international community, led by the Quartet,
to help them return to the path to peace and, once there,
stay on it. To that end, I met on Wednesday with my
fellow Quartet envoys in Rome after an important high-
level donor meeting. The Quartet will assist the nascent
bilateral efforts currently under way and guide the
parties in their implementation of the road map.

The issue today is how to spark the process. To
do so, each of the parties will need to address the core
concerns of the other side, which can roughly be
defined as territory and terror. Israelis want an end to
terrorism, leading to lasting and true security in a fully
recognized State. Palestinians want to finally end the
occupation with the confidence that they will have a
truly viable and independent State. But to get on track,
to fulfil these desires, both parties and the international
community face fundamental dilemmas that must be
overcome.

For Israelis, the closure system in the occupied
Palestinian territory is a catch-22 situation that
developed as a response to murderous terrorist attacks.
They feel that if closures are eased, the potential for
new terrorist attacks will rise. But if the closure
persists, the living conditions and livelihood of the
Palestinian population will only worsen. Israelis need
to know that if they enter a process, they will find true
security and recognition at the end and that they are not
simply capitulating to the waves of terror attacks they
have endured.

For Palestinians, this crisis is about more than the
hardship they are enduring. Easing their plight is
simply not enough. In their eyes, this crisis remains
much more fundamental: it is a struggle for their
identity and national aspirations. They need to know
that if they enter a process, it has the end of the
occupation and a viable, independent and sovereign
State as an end goal, and that they are not capitulating
to the extremely damaging effects of Israeli security
measures on their lives.

The donor community also faces a catch-22
situation; the more than $1 billion they provide
annually undoubtedly helps alleviate the suffering of
the Palestinian people. However, in some eyes, this
money helps subsidize an Israeli occupation that
increases hardship for the average Palestinian. The
donor community needs to know that, as they continue
to provide such support, the parties will engage in a
peace process that will pave the way to a full, just and
lasting peace.

We can only proceed if these core issues and
dilemmas are recognized and accepted as a reality by
both parties and the international community. They
must be addressed in parallel, not sequentially or with
preconditions.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council, 27
people have lost their lives to the conflict - 24
Palestinians and 3 Israelis. It is a sign of the extent of
the violence that has consumed Israelis and
Palestinians that this death toll corresponds to a
relatively quiet period.

For example, fortunately and due in part to
attempts being thwarted by Israeli security forces, there
has not been a completed suicide bombing since 4
October. Yet 24 Palestinians are dead, including six
yesterday in Rafah in the Gaza Strip. As we have
consistently stated in this forum, Israel's legitimate
defence of its citizens must not contravene its duty as
an occupying Power to protect the lives and safety of
Palestinian civilians. Israeli military operations in
populated areas too frequently result in the deaths and
injury of non-combatant Palestinian men, women and
children. I must stress that both parties must do
everything possible to halt this senseless loss of life.

The bloody alternative to peace would only be
more additions to the current overall death toll since
September 2000, namely, 2,969 Palestinians and 863
Israelis. I hope we will soon be able to provide a
briefing that does not need to update these numbers.

This week in Rome, the main donors that provide
support to the Palestinian Authority met in the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians to review their
assistance and consider the current situation. The
meeting, generously hosted by the Government of Italy
and chaired by the Government of Norway, was
attended by high-level Palestinian and Israeli
delegations, including the Palestinian Ministers
Sha'ath, Fayyad, Masri and Kassis and Israeli Foreign
Minister Shalom. Their presence was the most

powerful expression yet of the fact that both parties
have a renewed desire to engage.

At the meeting, the donors discussed the extent of
the economic and humanitarian crisis that they are
continuing to help alleviate. I would like to update you
on some of the key indicators. Between 2000 and 2002,
Palestinian economic losses amounted to an estimated
$5.4 billion, the equivalent of one year's worth of total
income for the Palestinian economy. Real gross
domestic product declined some 33 per cent between
1999 and 2002. Total investment fell from $1.45 billion
to $150 million in the same period. Approximately 2.5
million Palestinians are under the poverty line, or about
60 per cent of the total population. Most Palestinians
receive some form of assistance, with approximately 40
per cent of the population food insecure.
Unemployment runs at about 30 per cent and some half
the population cannot access their usual health
services.

The donor meeting produced new proposals for
assisting the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian
people. This includes a possible new performance-
based trust fund to help alleviate the estimated $650
million shortfall in the Palestinian Authority budget
and a proposed new tripartite framework for the
donors, the Palestinian Authority and the Government
of Israel to work together in a true spirit of
cooperation. Plans for a meeting on Monday within the
new tripartite framework have been confirmed. The
donors reiterated their commitment to helping the
Palestinian people, but they also voiced serious
concerns.

The humanitarian crisis has forced donors to
redirect funding from development to emergency relief.
This in turn is often hampered by Israeli security
actions, leading to increased frustration among many
donors and aid agencies. Many donors will require a
renewed peace process in order to sustain their levels
of support.

These humanitarian and other concerns are
exacerbated by the continuing construction of the
barrier in the West Bank. The Secretariat has regularly

briefed the Security Council on the barrier, pointing out
that its construction on Palestinian land and its planned
route makes the establishment of a contiguous, viable
and sovereign Palestinian State more difficult and
increases the suffering of the Palestinian people.

The Secretary-General recently submitted to the
General Assembly a report on the barrier
(A/ES-10/248) requested by resolution ES-10/13 of
21 October 2003. In that report he said:

"In the midst of the road map process, when each
party should be making good-faith confidence-
building gestures, the Barrier's construction in
the West Bank cannot, in this regard, be seen as
anything but a deeply counterproductive act"
(para. 29).

He concluded that due to its continued building of
the barrier, Israel is not in compliance with the General
Assembly's demand that it halt and reverse
construction.

The uneasy calm that has prevailed along the
Blue Line since the last briefing to the Council was
broken on 9 December, when two Lebanese persons
armed with hunting rifles were killed by the Israeli
Defence Force after they crossed into the Israeli side of
the Blue Line, according to preliminary reports by the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Despite that
sad and unfortunate incident and although tensions
remain high, developments on the ground suggest that
the parties are exercising some restraint. Although
Israeli over-flights continue, they have been
dramatically reduced in frequency. Also, since the last
briefing, Israeli jets violated the Blue Line twice. There
were no reports of anti-aircraft fire from the Lebanese
side of the Blue Line on either of those occasions. We
are hopeful that that relative but uneasy calm reflects a
renewed willingness by the parties to avoid escalatory
actions. Nonetheless, as the incident of 9 December
shows, the potential for such escalation remains high.
It is, therefore, of great importance that all parties
continue to exercise restraint and refrain from any and
all violations of the Blue Line.

Also in the region, President Bashar Al-Assad
gave a newspaper interview, in which he called on the
United States to revive peace talks between his country
and Israel. That was a timely reminder that the
objective towards which we are working must be a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace, and that we cannot
afford to neglect any of the tracks of the peace process.

In the last briefing to the Council, Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast characterized the period
under review as a lost month in Middle East
peacemaking. During the current reporting period an
opportunity to make progress has arisen. I fervently
hope that the leaders of the two sides will avail
themselves of that chance; and I hope that the
international community will help them take up that
opportunity. In recent years we have seen too many
missed chances and squandered opportunities for
peace. It would be a pity if in the next briefing, the first
of 2004, the Secretariat had cause to cite another lost
month. The cost could be devastating. The current
hopes for peace among the peoples could be replaced
by the creeping paralysis of a hopeless outlook, by a
greater hardening of positions and by a deepening of
the spiral of violence.

In this situation, time is not the ally of peace.
Waiting merely prolongs the suffering. I hope that the
parties will recognize the urgent need of bold action
and begin immediately to implement effectively the
Quartet's road map. I would be delighted if, in its first
briefing of the new year to the Security Council, the
Secretariat would be able to report that the parties were
firmly on the path to a just, lasting and comprehensive
settlement of this long and painful conflict, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003).

