Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me join others in
thanking the presidency of the United Kingdom for
organizing the debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Bouchamaoui and Ambassador Skoog
for their briefings.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union.
In addition, I would like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

First, let me join previous speakers in strongly
condemning the despicable acts of terrorism that took
place in Paris a few days ago, other atrocious acts of
cowardice and terror we witnessed recently in Lebanon,
and the downing of the Russian aircraft. Terrorism has
no borders and no nationality, and none of us is immune
to the threat. Hence, it is only through our unity - the
unity of international community - that humankind
will be able to vanquish darkness.

Many examples in modern history demonstrate
how security and development are intertwined in
pre-conflict, conflict and post-conflict situations. The
root causes of conflict are often the political, economic
and social imbalances in society. We must therefore
focus on good governance. Upholding the rule of law,
strengthening independent judicial mechanisms, ending
impunity, and ensuring accountability and responsive
Government are some of the crucial measures to take
on the path to ensuring sustainable development for
all. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) offers real hope for
stability, prosperity and conflict prevention worldwide.
Goal 16 on promoting peaceful and inclusive societies
for sustainable development, access to justice and
effective, accountable and inclusive institutions is one
of the central Goals, since the progress in all other areas
largely depends on efficient governance.

The international community can and must provide
assistance in building capacities in countries struggling
with development challenges, including for the
purposes of preventing and combating terrorism and
crime. But national ownership and determination to
solve the problems, coupled with democratic reforms,
good governance practices, the rule of law and the
eradication of corruption are essential prerequisites. As
a country that has undergone a dramatic change over
the past decade through reform and modernization,
and as a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Georgia stands ready to share its successful experience
with fellow Member States in the streamlining of all
segments of the public sector, the establishment of a
Viable police force, the eradication of corruption and
the provision of swift and efficacious Government
services to all citizens.

As we speak on the need for inclusive societies,
let me stress how important it is that these goals be
applied equally to people living in conflict-affected
areas. The two Georgian regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali/South Ossetia are under illegal foreign
military occupation. Georgian citizens residing in
the Russian occupied territories are deprived of the
minimal safeguards for their fundamental rights and
freedoms. The most vulnerable groups of population
cannot receive education in their mother tongue and
freedom of movement and other fundamental rights are
constantly denied. Let me reiterate that the men, women
and children living in conflict situations should enjoy
the benefits of development and progress like the rest
of us, and the international community should spare no
effort to that end.

Although Georgia continues to be prevented from
directly and fully addressing the needs of its citizens in
the occupied regions, in cooperation with United Nations
agencies, such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, we are implementing
crucial confidence-building measures and promoting
people-to-people contacts through meetings among
professional communities, the training of experts and
teachers, study visits and other activities. One of our
key priorities is the provision of health-care services to
those living beyond the occupation line, provided that
the people in need are not prevented by the occupying
Power from accessing these services. Addressing
the needs of the local population on both sides of the
artificial divide and improving the living conditions of
the sundered communities is important not only from
a purely humanitarian point of View, but also from the
human security and peacebuilding perspectives.

