Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of my delegation, allow me, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the precedency of the
Security Council for the month of July and to thank
France for having guided our work during the month of
June. We also thank you for having convened this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing, to which we listened carefully
and which we fully endorse.

Once again, Uruguay expresses its emphatic
condemnation of the actions of terrorist groups
operating within the region. We are convinced that
the attacks against the lives and dignity of innocent
civilians carried out through terrorism and violent
extremism must not be tolerated in any part of the world.
Uruguay is concerned about the growing destabilizing
impact of such groups, whose actions negatively affect
the possibility of achieving sustainable solutions to the
ongoing conflicts in the region and believes that it is
essential to strengthen international cooperation at all
levels to allow the development of national capacities
necessary to address that threat.

Uruguay maintains a deep friendship with both the
State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We have not
lost hope that both peoples will be able to overcome
their differences and reach an understanding on the
key issues that separate them. Uruguay reaffirms its
support for the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders in an
atmosphere of cooperation and free from any threat
or acts that breach the peace. Uruguay believes that
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) remain in effect.
And I reiterate Uruguay's position regarding the
unacceptability of the acquisition of territory by force.
In that regard, Uruguay believes that it is essential
that the international community step up its efforts to
support the process and encourages the parties to return
to the negotiating table.

Uruguay considers the recent report of the Quartet
as an important contribution to move forward in
the search for solutions to the Middle East peace
process. However, we are concerned about the trends
that threaten the viability of the two-State solution
identified in the Quartet's report, such as the ongoing
Violence, the terrorist attacks and incitement to
Violence; the ongoing policy of settlement construction
and expansion, the designation of land for exclusive
Israeli use and the denial of Palestinian development;
and the increase in illegal weapons and militant
activity and continued lack of Palestinian unity and
the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Uruguay regrets
that those trends continue. We are surprised by the
continued policy of settlement expansion and that, only
four days before the publication of the report, Israel
made public its decision to build 560 new homes in the
West Bank and 240 in East Jerusalem. The continued
policy of settlement construction undermines the
physical viability of the two-State solution. At the same
time, Uruguay condemns the recent terrorist attack
carried out in Tel Aviv, which left four people dead and
several others wounded. We also condemn the loss of
Palestinian lives in equally regrettable situations.

It is necessary to encourage the parties to create
the conditions necessary for the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the Quartet report
aimed at restarting negotiations between the parties
and adopting actions and policies that demonstrate
their commitment to the two-State solution. In order
to move towards a definitive solution, it is important
for the international community to step up its efforts
to support the process and encourage the parties to
resume dialogue

Uruguay welcomes the final communique of
the peace conference for Israel and Palestine held in
Paris on 3 June, which acknowledged the importance
of implementing economic incentives in terms of
cooperation in order to unlock the current impasse
and promote the economic and social development of
the Palestinian people. Strengthening and establishing
national institutions and basic infrastructure are
essential to ensuring the Viability of the Palestinian
State, which has embarked upon the path of declaring
itself a fully fledged State.

Unfortunately, there are other conflicts affecting
the Middle East, especially those involving the Syrian
Arab Republic, Yemen, Iraq and Libya, which, albeit
is not part of the region, is related to it. The situation
in Syria is an affront to human dignity, with thousands
of refugees and dead civilians, unremitting terrorist
actions and a complete lack of agreement between the
different parties involved to reach a negotiated political
settlement. Uruguay commends the role that is played
by the Special Envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura,
and encourages all parties to continue making efforts
to reach an early political solution and respect the
ceasefire that has been agreed to.

Uruguay underscores the efforts of the international
community and particularly those of humanitarian
workers, who despite many difficulties on the ground
continue to work so that humanitarian aid reaches the
neediest people. Uruguay reiterates its condemnation of
the use of hunger as a tactic ofwar and strongly calls on
all parties to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Uruguay also condemns the deliberate targeting of
medical personnel and medical facilities and urges
compliance with resolution 2286 (2016), which was
adopted by the Council in May.

Increased international efforts are needed to keep
Syrian children from becoming a lost generation as a
result of, among other problems, the lack of educational
opportunities, their recruitment as child soldiers
and forced marriage at an early age. For Uruguay,
access to education is a right that must be guaranteed
without distinction.

The only possible solution to the conflict in Syria is
a political solution. To that end, progress must be made
in the peace talks under way, and a transition process
must be facilitated as a way to achieve lasting solutions
to the current conflict. The transition should be led by
the Syrian people, whose interests should be considered,
with the provisions of resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2268
(2016) being respected and taken into account.

Uruguay recognizes the progress made since the
start of negotiations in Kuwait on Yemen, which was
made possible by the cessation of hostilities reached
in that country and by progress in terms of security.
This has also enabled humanitarian aid to reach areas
that were previously inaccessible. In this task, the
outstanding work done by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, Ismail Ould Cheikh
Ahmed, should be acknowledged.

Nevertheless, Uruguay is dismayed at the escalation
of terrorist attacks, particularly those perpetrated by
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic State,
both of which have benefited from the power vacuum
that has existed in Yemen. For Uruguay, the killing
of children - no matter by whom - is unacceptable.
In this regard, we have followed with concern the
statements made by the Secretary-General with respect
to his motivations for removing the name of a country
from the list of parties responsible for committing the
gravest violations against children published in the
section on Yemen in annex I of his annual report on
children in armed conflict (S/20l6/360).

In Syria and Yemen, civilian populations are not
merely incidental victims of the conflicts unleashed
there. They are not what is euphemistically called
"collateral damage". In Syria and Yemen, civilians are
deliberately targeted by warring factions. This is clearly
demonstrated by the type of weapons used in such
conflicts, which are fired directly on civilians: barrel
bombs, thermobaric explosives, cluster munitions,
white phosphorous bombs, rockets and missiles - some
of which are sophisticated, others are home-made.
Some of these weapons can be produced by the forces
in combat since they are relatively unsophisticated,
and those who make them are not concerned about
their accuracy; all they care about is that they explode
somewhere near their supposed targets and cause the
greatest damage possible.

But cluster munitions, phosphorous bombs and
thermobaric explosives are not produced in the back of
a garage or secretly hidden at night in a shed. These
weapons are produced in a relatively limited number
of fairly sophisticated factories, set up in the territory
of an even smaller number of countries, probably all
members of this Organization. By their very nature,
and beyond their evil purpose or their manifest
consistency with international humanitarian law, this
type of weapon is generally reserved for conventional
armed forces, which are subject to a chain of command
and control by State institutions. Their production,
stockpiling, supply, trade and export cannot take place
without the knowledge and control of State entities.

Let us be clear- those States Members ofthe United
Nations in whose territories such weapons are produced
and from whose territories such weapons are supplied
to conflict zones are equally responsible for their use
against civilian populations, which are helpless Victims
trapped in a nightmarish hell. Sooner or later, all those
responsible will be held to account - some perhaps
in court, others will be judged by history, but all will
have to answer to their consciences and ultimately to
their Maker.

