Ms. Kaba (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like to congratulate the People's Republic of China on its presidency of the Security Council and to express our appreciation for the choice of the theme of this meeting on combating terrorism and extremism in Africa, which is a topical issue. I also wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Special Adviser to the United Nations Development Programme Administrator. Terrorism today is emerging as a_ global phenomenon that challenges the sovereign efforts of States to defend the territory and the property of their citizens. Terrorism is not a new phenomenon in Africa. It has gradually taken hold on the continent, which is plagued by destructive conflicts, climate change and endemic poverty. Terrorist activities thrive and spread in that environment, undermining the efforts of States to promote peace and security. Africa has been ineffectively facing the challenges of terrorism and violent extremism for many years due to their multiple and complex causes and the constantly evolving strategies of terrorist groups in transnational spaces. The activities carried out by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb organization, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin and the various terrorist groups operating in northern Mali and Central Africa compel us to find adequate strategies to combat the phenomenon at the international level. The number of civilian and military victims of terrorist activities in Africa is estimated in the thousands. In addition, millions have been displaced and State services do not extend to affected areas. This situation significantly undermines development efforts and forces States to allocate a substantial part of their budgets to security, to the detriment of their economic and social development. It is regrettable to note that, in the face of the tragic events in Africa and worldwide, with their attendant loss of human life, destruction of infrastructure, proliferation of organized crime and drug trafficking and massive displacement of populations, the international community is struggling to find a consensual definition of terrorism and an appropriate response to it. That is one of the obstacles to the implementation of a comprehensive and effective strategy to combat the scourge. Security challenges related to the activities of terrorist groups, organized crime, piracy and communal violence threaten security and stability in Africa. Given the scale and complexity of the terrorist groups operating in Africa, it is high time for the Security Council to pay due attention to combating terrorism in Africa. The African continent is facing major socioeconomic and security challenges. In that context, it is necessary to assess the counter-terrorism efforts undertaken within the framework of the African Union and to propose solutions to bolster its fight against terrorism. In that regard, my delegation believes that counter-terrorism efforts in Africa should focus on a number of measures, in particular: the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts, the urgent settlement of ongoing conflicts within the framework of the African Peace and Security Architecture, and the effective implementation of the relevant instruments on democracy and governance - because the effective entrenchment of the values and principles of democracy and respect for human rights is a safe response to the conflicts that are shaking Africa. In addition, Africa needs enhanced cooperation between regional organizations and the United Nations because the cross-border nature, complexity and scale of the threat require new approaches to combat terrorism and violent extremism. Moreover, Africa must enhance the capabilities of African armed forces through training and equipment, freezing the assets and sources of financing for terrorist activities on the continent and sharing relevant information. In that connection, Guinea welcomes the establishment of the African Police Cooperation Organization. Africa must also enhance its border control and procedures for identifying foreign terrorist fighters. We must leverage new information technologies in the fight against the scourge. We must fight against endemic poverty in Africa by mobilizing the necessary resources for the implementation of the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development worldwide. Africa must also focus on strengthening subregional, regional and international cooperation, combating the illicit trade of and trafficking in small arms and light weapons as one of the priorities of the African Union's strategy, and implementing its Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative. Aware of the risk of the spread of terrorism in our subregion, Guinea has taken the following national measures - the establishment, in 2007, of a national committee to review financial information in order to combat money laundering and terrorist financing, the adoption of Law L-2019-033, on the prevention and repression of terrorism, enacted on 4 July 2019 by the President of the Republic, and of policies toraise awareness about terrorism and hate speech, in partnership with civil society, religious leaders, women and young people. My country also stresses the need to support international counter-terrorism forces - particularly the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force - and to strengthen the strategic partnership between the African Union and the United Nations in the fight against terrorism. All those measures must be taken in the framework of the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions. The actions taken by Secretary-General Guterres, specialized bodies and partners for an effective coordinated implementation of those resolutions and the Global Counter-terrorism Strategy are a source of hope in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism in Africa. The establishment of the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel to help 10 countries, including Guinea, is an innovative approach by the Secretary- General. It aims to establish a close link between the issues of peace, security and climate change and those of socioeconomic development. This new approach to the issues of peace, security and development will contribute to the fight against extreme poverty, inequality and the perverse effects of climate change, all of which are foster breeding grounds for terrorism. That is why the President of the Republic of Guinea, Mr. Alpha Conde, has stated that it is through economic development, respect for human rights, social justice and the improvement of the living conditions for young people and women that terrorism will be definitively defeated.
