Mr. Heller (spoke in Spanish): We were extremely
pleased by the initiative taken by the Turkish
delegation to hold this debate, as well as to develop the
concept paper on peacekeeping operations. This gives
us an opportunity to continue collective discussion
within our Organization in order to improve working
relationships and communication between the Security
Council and the financial and troop contributors to
peacekeeping operations.

We are also grateful for the presentation made by
Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, as well as by Ms. Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support.

We are pleased to see the document that will
serve as the basis for defining a New Horizon, based
on a strengthened convergence of partnerships around
the purpose, action and future of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Special attention should be
given to the proposal to establish a new partnership
agenda, which would incorporate three elements: first,
improving the unity and cohesion of the actors involved
in the management, planning and administration of
peacekeeping operations; secondly, endowing the
operations themselves with greater credibility; and,
thirdly, strengthening this capacity so that they may
continue to be an instrument for safeguarding world
peace and security. We hope that the proposals
generated by this meeting will make it possible to
establish better mechanisms for dialogue between the
Security Council and the contributing countries.

During the Security Council's last debate on this
topic, in January, my delegation underscored the need
to identify areas where we need more action, as well as
good practices that may be applied in the future, given
the growing complexity of the international scenarios
that United Nations peace operations are facing. In this
respect, there seen to us to be five key areas: First,
centralization of the decision-making process for the
establishment of a peacekeeping operation; the need
for precise political leadership in order to help define
the conditions that will determine the success of a
mission; taking into account the multidimensional
character of operations, as well as the nature of
conflicts, in order to arrive at collective approaches
based on different types of cooperation, with greater
coordination at the strategy and programme level; the
importance of protecting the civilian population as an
essential element in strengthening peace operations;
and the need to establish an effective planning and
coordination mechanism.

Mexico is interested in seeking joint proposals in
order to improve the design, planning, preparation and
administration of peacekeeping operations. In this
respect, it is important to include the participation of
contributing countries, as it would broaden and enrich
our vision of operations and enhance their viability by
incorporating those countries' knowledge, experience
and practices. We should stress that we need to assess
how to improve the protection of civilians, especially
children, in armed conflicts, as well as the effectiveness
of strategic partnerships between the Security Council
and regional and other field organizations. As by far
the largest financial contributor in Latin America to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, Mexico is
committed to these aims.

Though there have been numerous proposals over
the years for improving communication between the
Security Council and the financial- or troop-
contributing countries, we have not managed to
structure them in a formal way. Resolution 1327 (2000)
recommended strengthening the system through private
consultations, but we have not yet succeeded in
institutionalizing this proposal. We have to decide
whether the current structure and existing mechanisms
for dialogue between the Council and the contributing
countries are suitable, or if, on the contrary, we should
establish new ways and methods of promoting fuller
discussion. In this respect, we should see if it is
preferable to have a structured dialogue or to establish
interactive formats that could be even more effective.

One aspect that we could consider in order to
formalize the abundant proposals stemming from this
debate is to ask the Secretary-General to establish a
mechanism with the contributing countries within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations that could
provide timely support and advice to the Security
Council before it establishes particular mandates. It
would be a type of advisory council.

It would also be useful to increase the
participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, as well as the main countries contributing
to each operation, in the analysis carried out by the
Council of every mandate before the latter is renewed
or changed. This would make it possible to have a
specific and timely review of the achievements,
challenges and opportunities that every mission faces,
as well as the priorities and viability of the components
of every mandate. It would also be desirable to update
the request contained in resolution 1353 (2001) for the
Secretary-General to always include in the reports on
peacekeeping operations a section on his discussions
with contributing countries.

The complexity of peacekeeping operations
reflects the need to seek ever-larger and more flexible
mechanisms for complementarity and coordination
among its various bodies, as well as with other entities
in the area of peacekeeping. Today we have helped to
improve the dialogue with countries that contribute
troops, police and resources to the peace missions. In
the future, we believe that we will also have to include
in this dialogue those who contribute through other
activities, such as constructing hospitals, assisting
refugees, supporting electoral processes, building
institutions, as well as providing training for education,
health and judicial system programmes, among others.
It is important to take advantage of the experience that
these countries provide by taking it into account when
we design peacekeeping operations.

It is also crucial to promote an ongoing dialogue
with the major financial contributors to peace
operations. In this respect, we must reflect on the
distribution of financial responsibilities between the
Security Council and the General Assembly in the area
of peacekeeping operations, especially given their
proliferation.

Let us not forget that we find ourselves in an
especially serious global financial crisis that makes the
burden of financial commitments for the States and
international organizations even greater. This is a
valuable lesson for the future which we cannot overlook.

To conclude, Mexico believes that, in order to
ensure the credibility and legitimacy of the United
Nations, we have to establish peace operations that
have the proper financial, political and military
resources to fully comply with their mandates in the
terms that we have described.

