Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
21 March to 21 May 2019. At the outset, I would like
to highlight three developments relating to the work of
the Committee.

First, the Committee received the interim report
of the Panel of Experts, pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 2441 (2018), on 2 May.

Secondly, the Committee received an ad hoc report
from the Panel on 3 May. A Committee meeting with
the Coordinator of the Panel is scheduled for 31 May.

Thirdly, a member of the Panel of Experts,
Mr. Moncef Kartas, was arrested and detained in
Tunisia on 26 March. Since that time, the members of
the Committee have received five written notes and
one oral briefing from the Secretariat with respect to
this matter. On 18 April, in my capacity as Chair, and
accompanied by the Secretariat, I met with the Charge'
d'affaires ad interim ofthe Permanent Mission ofTunisia
to the United Nations, as agreed during the informal
consultations of the Committee on 15 April. In its most
recent written note of 13 May, the Secretariat informed
the Committee that following a careful review of the
information submitted by the Tunisian authorities to the
Secretariat relating to the legal proceedings in relation
to Mr. Kartas, it reaffirmed the immunities enjoyed
by Mr. Kartas and requested his immediate release
and that the charges against him to be dropped. The
Committee is closely following the situation and calls
upon the Secretariat to keep the Committee informed.

During the reporting period, the Committee
concluded its consideration of two of the four
communications previously submitted by Libya with
reference to paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014). In
those two cases, the Committee determined that the items
and services in question fell under the exception to the
arms embargo contained in paragraph 10 of resolution
2095 (2013), provided that all of the conditions of the
exception were met. The Committee also responded to
a guidance request from the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya related to the arms embargo.

Furthermore, the Committee received three
inspection reports, conveyed by the European Union,
on vessel inspections conducted by the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean under the authorization provided by
resolution 2292 (2016) and extended in resolution
2420 (2018). The Committee recalls the arms embargo
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1970 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2095 (2013) and 2174 (2014)
which obliges all Member States to take immediate
steps to ensure full and effective implementation of the
arms embargo.

With regard to the assets freeze, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee on a basic-expenses
notification submitted by the United Kingdom in
connection with medical and related travel expenses for
Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. A travel-ban exemption request
had previously been approved for Ms. Al-Qadhafi. Also
with respect to the travel ban, the Committee approved
a second exemption request pursuant to paragraph 16
(a) of resolution 1970 (2011) for Ms. Al-Qadhafi.

Furthermore, after receiving additional information
from the Panel of Experts, as well as from Libya, the
Committee determined that the travel of Mr. Abu Zayd
Umar Dorda, from Libya to Egypt through Tunisia, on
17 February 2019, constituted non-compliance with the
travel-ban measure. While appreciating Mr. Dorda's
reported medical condition at the time of travel, the
Committee would like to highlight that its travel-ban
exemption procedures allow for the consideration of
cases of emergency medical evacuation. For individuals
who are also subject to an assets freeze, the Committee
would like to highlight that the Council has provided for
exemptions in paragraph 19 of resolution 1970 (2011),
and that the Committee has elaborated corresponding
exemption procedures in its Guidelines. The Committee
has written to the three countries in connection with
Mr. Dorda's travel and has received a response from
one of them.

