Mr. Angelo (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me the opportunity to introduce the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) of 12 September 2008.

The report covers the principal developments in
politics, the security situation and humanitarian
concerns since the last report of the Secretary-General
of 8 July 2008 (S/2008/444). It also shares the findings
of the joint United Nations-European Union midterm
review of the implementation of resolution 1778
(2007) and recommendations for arrangements
following the end of the mandate of the European
Union-led military force in Chad and the Central
African Republic (EUFOR).

Before providing an overview of the key
elements of the concept of operations of a possible
United Nations presence following the end of the
EUFOR mandate, I should like to refer to the situation
in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African
Republic, and to the activities of MINURCAT during
the most recent reporting period.

The situation in Chad remains fragile. There has
been some progress on the political front, including the
signing by eight additional political parties of the
13 August 2007 agreement on electoral and
institutional reforms. The implementation of the
agreement has been somewhat limited, however, and
we shall have to encourage the various parties to
accelerate it.

There has been no significant progress with
respect to the implementation of the Sirte agreement of
25 October 2007 between the Government of Chad and
the main armed opposition groups. Furthermore,
instability and insecurity could increase after the
imminent end of the rainy season, when the roads will
become passable and rebel activities will resume.

Relations between Chad and the Sudan remain
tense, despite the regular meetings of the contact group
established under the Dakar Accord of 13 March 2008.
The group met on 12 September and achieved positive
results. Indeed, Chad and the Sudan agreed on that
08-51167
occasion to exchange ambassadors and to reopen their
embassies before the next meeting of the contact
group. The decision to hold that meeting in N'djamena
was an additional confidence-building measure. An
intensive political dialogue must now be held at the
highest level - either national or regional - to
maintain the momentum created in Asmara. The
international community must be prepared to support
the process with renewed vigour, as it remains fragile.

Eastern Chad currently hosts over 290,000
refugees and more than 180,000 internally displaced
persons (IDPs), who continue to rely on humanitarian
aid for their survival. The spontaneous and voluntary
return of IDPs has been halted by a lack of the basic
social services and national capacities necessary to
socio-economic recovery, strengthened local
administration and the restoration of the rule of law.
Above all, however, the main obstacle to return is the
problem of security.

MINURCAT has begun providing security,
logistical support and security information to the
humanitarian community, but the protection of
civilians remains of major concern. Villages are
attacked regularly, impunity remains a critical issue
and criminal acts are rarely investigated or are often
dismissed, given the weakness of the judicial
institutions. Vulnerable groups, in particular women
and children, are often the most severely affected.
Refugee camps in eastern Chad are allegedly being
used by rebels as places of rest and recruitment.
Refugee camps, sites for displaced persons and villages
are targeted for forced recruitment, especially of
children.

Alongside the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Children's Fund, MINURCAT is currently conducting
an inventory of cases of child recruitment in eastern
Chad, in close cooperation with the Chadian ministries
concerned. The first part of that exercise has begun,
and the exercise itself should be concluded in early
October.

In the Central African Republic, it must be said
that the security situation in the Vakaga region in the
north-eastern part of the country remains volatile. The
presence of MINURCAT and EUFOR have encouraged
the Government of the Central African Republic to
strengthen its administrative presence in the area, but
the situation remains fragile and must be supported.
08-51167

However, the access of humanitarian workers to the
Sam Ouandja refugee camp remains very problematic
and the convoys of non-governmental organizations are
often attacked and threatened.

I should like to say a few words concerning the
deployment of MINURCAT. As of 18 September,
MINURCAT had 768 of the 1,500 authorized staff
members, including 210 United Nations police officers
and 45 military liaison officers. Fifty United Nations
police officers are currently deployed on the ground
outside N'djamena. We have 37 in Abeche', five in
Bangui, seven in Farchana and in Goz Beida, and two
in Iriba. The civilian portion of the Mission is currently
deployed in all sectors: N'Djamena, Abeche, Farchana,
Goz Beida, Iriba, Birao and Bangui. We continue to
deploy United Nations police and other personnel as
premises are built and as logistical infrastructure is put
in place.

Current mission support agreements include a
construction contract signed with Pacific Architects
and Engineers (PAE), a technical agreement with the
European Union-led military force in Chad and the
Central African Republic (EUFOR) for support for
United Nations personnel deployed in EUFOR camps,
and contracts for fuel and food supplies signed locally.

Police stations, offices, accommodation and other
vertical structures are being built despite difficult
rainy-season conditions. Although security could
deteriorate with the arrival of the dry season, the dry
season would speed the building of police stations in
remote sites such as Iriba and Bahai and could make it
possible to complete the work at Abeche, Farchana and
Goz Beida, Once that is done, nearly full deployment
will be possible on the ground. Even though
MINURCAT's deployment will not be complete until
December, the impact of our presence is already visible
in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African
Republic. I want to highlight our excellent cooperation
and relations with the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic and with United Nations
agencies and our other partners in our area of
operations.

Concerning the deployment of the Integrated
Security Detachment - the Detachement integre de
securite (DIS) - the Mission continues to work
closely with the Chadian authorities to accelerate the
training and deployment of DIS personnel. Three
hundred eighteen DIS officers have been trained by
3
MINURCAT, and the next group of DIS officers has
been selected, and their training will begin on
22 September.

United Nations police and newly trained DIS
officers have recently carried out a series of
reconnaissance missions on the sites of their future
deployment. On 15 September, 28 DIS officers were on
the ground at Abeche. On 16 September 44 additional
DIS officers were added; they are carrying out pre-
deployment missions elsewhere in eastern Chad. Thus,
there are now 72 DIS officers on the ground in eastern
Chad, under the supervision of United Nations police
and officers from MINURCAT. Although the
memorandum of understanding with the Government
concerning the DIS was signed on 14 August, the
presidential decree officially establishing the
Detachment has yet to be signed. In the absence of
such a document, which would recognize the legal
status of the DIS under domestic law, the Detachment
cannot be fully deployed, which has delayed its
presence on the ground. But, when the presidential
decree is signed, which could be in the coming days, it
is planned that DIS officers already trained will be
deployed in eastern Chad as anticipated.

Turning to the rule of law, the rule of law
programme of MINURCAT is cooperating with the
local authorities to strengthen judicial institutions,
harmonize traditional justice with the modern judiciary
system and facilitate access to justice by all, by
supporting the development of mobile courts and
effective legal clinics.

Turning to civil affairs, civil affairs officers are
on the ground and are working closely with United
Nations agencies, in particular the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
and with local authorities. Their present objective is
basically to facilitate inter-community dialogue. Also
through civil affairs officers we are carrying out a
number of quick-impact projects aimed at
strengthening local governance institutions. These
projects fall within the realm of governance, justice
and prisons, and they do not compete with the projects
of humanitarian actors: rather, they complement them.

In the realm of human rights, MINURCAT human
rights officers have followed and investigated cases of
human rights violations, including persistent cases of
sexual violence and gender-based violence against
refugees and displaced persons, and the continued
recruitment of child soldiers by parties to the conflict
in eastern Chad and in the Sudan. Our humanitarian
liaison officers, we believe, are carrying out work that
is crucial in terms of paying heed to the needs of
humanitarian actors and responding to their security
and security information requirements.

In the framework of resolution 1325 (2000),
MINURCAT has strengthened its coordination
mechanisms with relevant ministries in Chad to
increase the number of women involved in security
matters, especially with regard to the protection of
women and children in refugee camps and internally
displaced person sites. For example, new training will
begin on Monday for 50 women police officers and
gendarmes; they will also serve as DIS officers.

Our relations and our cooperation with EUFOR
has been excellent. Should the Council approve the
recommendations set out in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/601), MINURCAT and EUFOR will
take the necessary measures to prevent a security
vacuum during the transition from EUFOR to a
possible United Nations force. For such a transition to
be as smooth as possible, it is crucial that at least
minimal air transport, medical, engineering and
logistics capacities be available on the ground before
any transfer of responsibility. Placing under United
Nations command some contingents already deployed
in the theatre of operations and transfer to the United
Nations of all sites and infrastructure set up by EUFOR
would significantly expedite the process. It will also be
necessary to ensure the availability of additional troops
from other contributing countries, with a minimum of
operational capacity, so that the deployment can take
place by March 2009. It will also be crucial for the
success of the mission that the mission maintain its
impartiality with respect to internal and external
conflicts and that it enjoy total freedom of movement,
including on the principal supply routes in Chad. I
should add that this has been the case to date. The
Government of Chad has fully met its commitments
with respect to our freedom of movement on its
national territory.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
the expansion of MINURCAT to include a military
component would be effective only if in addition to its
present mandate the Mission were mandated to support
Chadian stakeholders in addressing underlying causes
of insecurity relevant to the safe and voluntary return
of refugees and internally displaced persons. In that
connection, the United Nations remains prepared to
help the Government to strengthen its mechanisms to
ensure a stable and peaceful environment.

If the Security Council should decide to authorize
the deployment of a United Nations force to replace
EUFOR in the Central African Republic, as requested
by the Governments of the Central African Republic
and Chad and as requested by humanitarian actors in
the Central African Republic, the needs and the role of
the force would need to be carefully assessed.

The Security Council resolution continues to be
crucially important for the stability of Chad and the
Central African Republic. The security threat - in
particular, from heavily armed criminal groups -
remains a major problem in the area of operations.
With its deterrent role, EUFOR has had a positive
impact, and with the deployment of the DIS and the
United Nations police, we can hope that security will
be further enhanced. A concerted effort from DIS, the
local Chadian authorities, United Nations police, and
from security, civilian affairs, human rights and other
components, as well as from EUFOR will be decisive
in conditions conducive to return, in creating a safer
life for refugees, displaced persons and the local
population, and in resolving local tensions.

However, a significant return of refugees and
displaced persons is not very likely in the short term.
Only an improvement in the security conditions and
more effective and participatory local administration
can ensure a safe return for those who have long been
affected by conflict.

I would also like very quickly to display a few
photographs. The first is my way of thanking the
Security Council for having come to visit us in the
month of June. That visit was very useful.

The next photograph shows the presidency of the
meeting of the Dakar contact group in Asmara, which
includes the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Eritrea and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Libya. This
photograph highlights the importance of supporting the
Dakar process.

The next photograph is the same as the previous
one, except that we can see the delegation of Chad face
to face with the delegation of the Sudan on the other
side. I have to say that the two Ministers spent a lot of
time talking to each other in the corridors.

In the next photograph, we see one of our
frequent meetings with all the local authorities.

Specifically, this photograph shows the meeting
between the Special Representative and all the
sub-prefects of the Ouaddai region to discuss security
matters and how to strengthen the capacities of the
sub-prefects and the local administrative authorities.

Next we see, unfortunately, that the displaced
persons camps are not set up as well as the refugee
camps. I believe that that is one of the questions that
we will have to attend to in the future. The Mission and
the mandate will have to pay more attention to the
question of displaced persons and ensure a balance
between the attention given to refugees and that given
to displaced persons.

We are going to see one or two more photographs
of the displaced persons camps. In this photograph, we
can see the conditions in which the displaced persons
live in the huts visible in the foreground of the image.
The next photograph is also of huts inhabited by
displaced persons. I have no photographs of the
refugees, but we can easily see that conditions in the
refugee camps are certainly better.

The next photograph shows one of the DIS
training officers. I have to say that the selection of the
DIS trainees, whether they come from the gendarmerie
or from the police, was very rigorous. The Government
greatly invested in the selection of candidates, and we
have been truly impressed by the quality of the people
that we are training.

We also trained national trainers. It is not only
United Nations trainers who are now doing the
training, but also officers from the police and from the
national gendarmerie who are doing the training and
who were trained by us.

