Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom, too, is grateful for this opportunity to review
the arrangements for the exchange of views between
members of the Security Council and troop-contributing
countries, and we pay tribute to the efforts of the
Permanent Representative of Argentina and also to the
Permanent Representative of New Zealand in once again
focusing attention on this important question.

The arrangements established by the presidential
statement of 4 November 1994 represented a considerable
step forward and one which the United Kingdom warmly
welcomed. But the arrangements are not working as well
as they could. The meetings with troop contributors must
be more than an opportunity for the Secretariat to brief on
developments in operations. They should be the occasion
for a serious discussion between troop contributors and
members of the Council on the mandates of those peace-
keeping operations in which the men and women of those
countries serve.

The meetings need to be held in good time and to be
provided with adequate documentation. Troop contributors
must make their voices heard at such meetings, and -
this is particularly important - their views need to
inform the work of the Council. That is why the Council
President should report back to the Council, during the
informal consultations of its members, on the views
expressed by troop contributors at those consultations. It

 

is perhaps unfortunate that this provision has not been as
fully respected over recent months as the system permits.

As one of the largest contributors of troops to the
United Nations over the last few years, the United Kingdom
can well understand the concerns of fellow contributors
whose young men and women risk their lives in the service
of the Organisation. Indeed, there is probably little
argument about the need to make the existing system of
consultations more dependable and more effective. Where
we may differ is on the means by which this should be
done. The ideas that have just been aired by my Argentine
colleague, who proposed a subsidiary organ under Article
29 of the Charter, may be a case in point - that is to say,
a case where United Kingdom views on the means by
which to get greater effectiveness into these consultations
would differ.

Among our concerns are that the operational
responsibilities of the Secretary-General must be protected
and preserved, as must the decision-making ability of the
Security Council itself. But I want to assure my colleagues
that we will be listening carefully today to others' views on
how the arrangements for consultation can be improved and
that we look forward to working with others to give effect
to any necessary changes, beginning in January next
year - our own month of responsibility for the presidency.

