Mr. Baali (Algeria): I would like first of all to
thank the ministers of Djibouti and Kenya, the
facilitator from the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the representative of the
current Chair of the African Union for the statements
they have made this afternoon. However, I would also
like to express our special thanks to President
Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed for finding the time to come to
the Security Council and sharing with us his views and
his vision on the future of Somalia.

Algeria has always been firmly attached to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia based on respect for sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and national unity. We
are therefore very pleased that, thanks to the tireless
and highly commendable efforts of IGAD, in the last
few weeks the Somali national reconciliation process
has made significant progress towards achieving peace
and security in Somalia, and in particular the
establishment of the transitional parliament, the
election of the President and the appointment of a
Prime Minister. We are hopeful that a broad-based, all-
inclusive and effective Government will soon be
established and that all Somalis will seize this historic
opportunity to make progress towards peace, stability
and reconstruction of the country. Now that legitimate
institutions are being put in place, it is imperative that
the international community provide political, financial
and economic support to Somalia. We are pleased, in
this regard, that the African Union has expressed its
readiness to assist in the transition process in Somalia,
including in the field of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, and we believe that the Security
Council also has a role to play and responsibilities to
assume in Somalia.

Together, we have to consider ways and means
for the Security Council to assist the new institutions
and the new Government to establish and exercise their
authority in the country. We believe that we should
agree on an expanded peace-building role and presence
of the United Nations, as has been recommended by
the Secretary-General in his last report.

I will conclude my remarks by thanking the
Ambassador of China for his leading role in keeping
the issue of Somalia on the agenda of the Council and
for introducing the presidential statement, which my
delegation strongly supports.

