Mr. Skraeie (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
extensive briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
as well as to welcome to the Chamber Palestinian
National Authority Foreign Minister, Mr. Al-Malki, and
Israeli Permanent Representative, Ambassador Shalev.

Croatia shares the sense of urgency to secure an
early resumption - and conclusion - of Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations aimed at the two-State solution
as a key part of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. What happens now is critical, and
failure to move forward risks deepening
disillusionment and impasse.

We are pleased to see the imperative reflected in
the statements made at the high-level meetings held in
New York this September, including the Quartet
statement and that of United States President Obama in
his statement to the General Assembly. The continuing
efforts of the United States Administration and those of
Special Envoy Mitchell to promote negotiations have
our full support. Croatia believes that, in order to
advance the peace process, all sides need to meet their
responsibilities and make a meaningful contribution
towards creating conditions conducive to negotiations.

Israel and the Palestinians need to implement
their obligations under the Road Map without
preconditions. The Palestinians need to pursue their
reform agenda, particularly in the area of security. The
Arab States need to take early and tangible confidence-
building steps in the spirit of the Arab Peace Initiative.
The international community should be ready to assist
the parties in creating an atmosphere conducive to
peace and in ensuring that all efforts remain focused on
our shared objective of achieving peace. It is time that
the roadblocks to peace are removed.

In light of ongoing efforts, provocative actions
that risk undermining attempts to create an atmosphere
conducive to credible negotiations are a cause of
concern. We are concerned with the recent clashes in
Jerusalem. We appeal for restraint, and we appreciate
United Nations efforts to diffuse tensions. We also call
for the cessation of other provocative actions,
including demolitions and evictions.

As recognized in repeated calls by the
international community, Israel settlement activities
present an obstacle to peace and should be immediately
brought to an end. And this includes "natural growth"
settlements and outposts erected since 2001, which
should be dismantled.

We condemn the marked increase in attacks
directed at Israel from the Gaza Strip over the past
month. At this critical stage, another outbreak of
violence must not be allowed. Croatia finds
encouragement in Palestinian State-building efforts, as
well as in recent trends in the West Bank area, where
improvements in security are opening space for
economic revival as part of the groundwork for a
sustainable Palestinian State.

We welcome the recent removal by Israel of a
number of roadblocks and would welcome further steps
in that direction. We understand that, should the
restrictions on movement and access continue to be
eased, for the first time since 2005, there is a realistic
chance that the downward trend in Palestinian living
standards in the West Bank can be reversed in the near
future.

It remains crucial that the Palestinian Authority
continue with its agenda of self-empowerment,
including building and consolidating an effective and
reformed security sector, functioning institutions and
the rule of law as building blocks of a viable and
independent Palestinian State. At the same time, Israel
must be assured that this objective does not go
undermine its legitimate security interests, including
that of addressing the threat of renewed rocket attacks
from the Gaza Strip.

The situation in Gaza is our continuing
preoccupation. We believe that finding a durable
solution for Gaza should be part and parcel of the
peace effort. In order to put an end to the protracted
humanitarian and human dignity crisis in Gaza, full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) remains a
priority. Croatia believes that the controlled and
sustained opening of crossings, matched with the
appropriate monitoring arrangements, is key for the
humanitarian recovery and reconstruction of Gaza and
for eradicating the tunnel economy.

We continue to call for the release of Gilad
Shalit, whose recent video message was an
encouraging sign, and we reiterate our support for the
efforts of Egypt to assist in restoring Palestinian unity.

Croatia has taken note of the Report of the United
Nations Fact Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
which has been submitted to the Human Rights
Council. Croatia takes seriously the issues that are at
the heart of the report and we respect the scope of the
confidence in the Human Rights Council within the
United Nations system.

At this stage, let me state that Croatia believes
that it is the obligation of all States to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. When and where
there are violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, individual accountability needs to be
established. This is what constitutes the basis for a
lasting peace. This is a duty that falls principally on the
national authorities of States themselves, which need to
carry out a credible domestic process and investigate
situations where there are indications that such
violations have been committed.

Concerning Lebanon, let me express our serious
concerns with the several recent incidents in southern
Lebanon, which are in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). Last week, there was yet another weapons
cache explosion involving munitions that apparently
belonged to Hizbullah. A few weeks earlier, rockets
were fired against Israel. We condemn these acts,
which, together with the grave incidents in July, only
underscore the need to insist on the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
disarmament of all paramilitary groups in Lebanon. We
also share concerns about the delay in forming a new
Lebanese Government and hope that an agreement can
be reached soon.

Before concluding, allow me to say a few words
of appreciation to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which marked its sixtieth anniversary in
September this year. I would like to pay tribute to
UNRWA'S dedication and commitment to providing
assistance to Palestinian refugees over the past
decades, often under challenging and dangerous
circumstances. Croatia will continue to support its
vitally important work.

Equally, we believe that the interests of both
parties, the region and the international community as a
whole are best served by pursuing a shared, clear and
fundamental objective, namely, the establishment of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with Israel in
the context of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the region on the basis of Security Council
resolutions and the Madrid Principles.
