The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Colombia, Cuba, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Morocco, New
Zealand, Norway, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, in which he
requests to be invited, in his capacity as acting head of
the delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. IfI hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
His Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
2

resolution 1540 (2004); His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities; and His Excellency
Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

At the outset, His Excellency Mr. Claude Heller
will make a joint statement on behalf of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004), respectively.
Thereafter, the Council will hear briefings by the three
Chairs of those Committees.

I now give the floor to Mr. Heller.


