Mr. Brown: Please allow me, Mr. President, to
greet you in my mother tongue of the Cook Islands and
say "kia orana". I thank you, Sir, and the members of
the Security Council for this opportunity to share the
Cook Islands perspective of security and how it relates
to our islands and to the broader Pacific islands and the
small island developing States family.

If I may, I should like to provide a very brief
explanation of the meaning of "kia orana" which I
believe encapsulates the spirit of why we are here
before the esteemed Council. "kia orana" is how we
greet each other and visitors to our islands. Literally
it means "may you and your lineage live on". That is
a blessing that a Cook Islander will bestow upon those
that we come into contact with. That is in essence what
we are asking for: to be given the chance by the rest of
our global family to live on in our own islands and to
guarantee that we can still say "kia orana" long into the
future.

We the Pacific islanders are the custodians of
165 million square kilometres of ocean and the last
remaining healthy fishery stocks in the world. The
Cook Islands is steward to 2.2 million of those square
kilometres. That in itself is significant coverage for a
small island nation. Despite our best efforts at vigilance
in guarding that space, not only for our own good but
also for our neighbours and the wider global community,
we cannot deny the fact that we are disadvantaged in
terms of the readily available resources to police our
area as effectively as we desire against transnational
crime and illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing.
Nonetheless we are trying.

Fisheries for the Cook Islands - as with the rest of
our Pacific family - are a mainstay of our economy.
The riches of our ocean are primary resources that we
are taking major steps to utilize in a sustainable manner.
That is why the Cook Islands has declared its entire
exclusive economic zone as the Cook Islands Marine
Park. We are certain that the Marine Park will provide
the necessary framework to promote sustainable
development by balancing economic growth interests
such as tourism, fishing and deep-sea mining with
conserving core biodiversity and natural assets in the
ocean, on our reefs and islands.

The establishment of areas of sustainable
management is a trend that is spreading across the
Pacific. We are leading the world in marine-resource
management, with innovative initiatives such as
the regional vessel-monitoring system, ship rider
agreements with the United States Coast Guard, the
Pacific-wide boat- and aircraft-surveillance Kurukuru
programme and our own quadrilateral observation
relationship with New Zealand, Australia, the United
States and France.

However, those national and regional efforts can be
futile without the cooperation of distant-water fishing
nations in ensuring compliance with signed agreements.
Equally important is the attitude of the international
community with regard to our collective Pacific call for
stronger control over the high seas and the international
waters bordering our respectivejurisdictions. The Cook
Islands has made significant progress in delineating its
maritime boundaries, and is has signed treaties with
its neighbours where our borders are shared. It is our
belief that, given our experience ofillegal, unregulated
and unreported fisheries, we will be better served
with a buffer no-fishing zone between our individual
and collective maritime boundaries and international
waters.

We have raised that issue at the Western Central
Pacific Fisheries Commission and will continue
to advocate for it in various settings. We implore
the international community to extend its support
in advancing stronger measures to ensure the
sustainability of our fisheries. Furthermore, I welcome
your comments, Mr. President, on encouraging greater
returns to Pacific Island countries from their fisheries
resources. I look forward to initiatives to improve the
fisheries management framework to that end.

We cannot address peace and security without
considering the obvious threat of sea-level rise and
other adverse impacts caused by climate change. Those
impacts range from the serious to the catastrophic.
The increasing acidification of the oceans threatens
our food and pir economic security. the intensification
of cyclones can wipe out decades of infrastructure
development progress. Receding shorelines will
eventually mean the complete disappearance of islands.
We are already experiencing those impacts on our
islands.

We cannot stress enough the urgent need for the
global community to confront the climate change
crisis. We share this world, and the world does not
end at our respective borders. Give us a fighting
chance against the changing climate. A legally binding
agreement must be reached at Paris, one that also takes
into account our special case and vulnerabilities as
small island developing States. We are engaging with
you, Mr. President, and with the Security Council with
sincerity. We seek its understanding, and we hope that
it will reciprocate with sincerity.

