Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
join other speakers in welcoming Minister Al-Malki
and Ambassador Shalev to the Council today, and also
thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
comprehensive update.

As we have noted in prior monthly Middle East
consultations, advancing the cause of peace in the
Middle East is among the most important objectives
that President Obama has identified for our renewed
international engagement. As President Obama
affirmed to the General Assembly on 23 September:

"The time has come to relaunch
negotiations - without preconditions - that
address the permanent-status issues: security for
Israelis and Palestinians, borders, refugees and
Jerusalem. The goal is clear: two States living
side by side in peace and security: a Jewish State
of Israel, with true security for all Israelis, and a
viable, independent Palestinian State with
contiguous territory that ends the occupation that
began in 1967 and realizes the potential of the
Palestinian people." (A/64/PV.3)

Special Envoy George Mitchell has just returned
from another trip to the region, working to create the
context for a prompt resumption and early successful
conclusion of negotiations between the parties. I wish
to place in clear contrast two dramatically different
visions for the road ahead: the road of statehood and
the road of conflict.

The Palestinian Authority and President Abbas
are constructing the basis for a viable and responsible
Palestinian State. They have been making steady and
significant progress towards that goal. We have
welcomed Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's
development of a detailed two-year plan to develop
institutional capacity. We supported the deployment of
over 2,000 Palestinian security personnel to the West
Bank, after they completed their training in Jordan,
with another 500 on the way.

We have also welcomed the recent increases in
economic activity and in the quality of life in the West
Bank. Israel has taken constructive steps to facilitate
that progress. It has removed key checkpoints and
eased conditions at others and has withdrawn troops to
the outskirts of four cities. Those initial steps show that
Israelis and Palestinians can make practical progress by
working together towards the same goals.
Much more, however, needs to be done. Israel
should stop settlement activity and dismantle outposts.
The United States does not accept the legitimacy of
continued Israeli settlements. Israel should further ease
access and movement and facilitate economic growth
in the West Bank. Palestinians, for their part, should
continue efforts on security, reform of governance
institutions and ending incitement. And all parties,
including Arab States, need to move forward to
relaunch negotiations as soon as possible.

Then, there is the road of conflict. Hamas's
behaviour continues to fall short of the principles long
outlined by the Quartet: renunciation of violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements between the parties. In the month of
September alone, 13 rockets and mortars were fired
indiscriminately at civilian communities in Israel from
Hamas-controlled Gaza, and there were dozens of other
attacks along the boundary. Terrorist attacks of that
nature are not a form of resistance. They represent a
threat to international peace and security, and they were
the cause of the conflict between Israel and Hamas last
winter. That path will never lead to the fulfilment of
Palestinian aspirations for an independent State.

A further danger to international peace and
security that we note with very great concern is the
continuing presence of armed groups, including
Hizbullah, in Lebanon. Armed elements and their
assets and weapons in south Lebanon pose a similar
threat to those who work diligently for peace and
security in that country. The explosion in Tayr Filsay,
taken alongside the earlier explosion in Khirbat Salim,
signals yet another weapons-related violation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006). It should be a
source of deep concern to all of us. We look forward to
the report of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations for detailed information on this latest
serious incident.

We continue to strongly support the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1701
(2006) and 1559 (2004), including their calls for all
arms in Lebanon to be brought under State control and
the delineation of Lebanon's borders. The people of
Lebanon deserve to reap the benefits of a Government
whose services and authority extend throughout the
land.

Lest we sow the seeds of another conflict, all
United Nations Members must also fulfil their
responsibility to prevent the smuggling of arms into
Gaza. We also continue to call for the immediate
release of Gilad Shalit. At the same time, just as we
defend Israel's right to self-defence, we cannot accept
the continuing humanitarian crisis in Gaza. The people
of Gaza must have hope for a better future and know
that the international community hears their concerns.
We call for a reopening of the crossings, with an
appropriate monitoring regime to allow for the entry of
legitimate goods into Gaza.

On the matter of the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict that was
requested by the Human Rights Council in Geneva
(A/HRC/12/48), the allegations of human rights and
humanitarian law violations contained therein are not a
matter for Security Council action. We continue to
have serious concerns about the report: its unbalanced
focus on Israel, the overly broad scope of its
recommendations and its sweeping conclusions of law.
Nevertheless, we take the allegations in the report
seriously. Israel has the institutions and the ability to
carry out serious investigations of those allegations and
we encourage it to do so. Hamas is a terrorist
organization and has neither the ability nor the
willingness to examine its violations of human rights.

Finally, we urge all Arab States to take steps' in
the spirit in the Arab Peace Initiative towards building
relations with Israel, including ceasing harsh rhetoric
in the international organizations and other forums.
Arab Governments can also promote progress by
supporting the Palestinian Authority under President
Abbas, both politically and financially, thus helping to
improve conditions for all Palestinians throughout the
West Bank and Gaza. With patience and determination,
we can assist all people in the region to construct a
new and better future and to realize the peace and
stability that they deserve.

