Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, I thank you, Sir,
for scheduling this discussion on the United Nations
Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and for enabling our
delegation to express its views on this matter.

The extent and depth of the India-Nepal bilateral
relationship cannot be overemphasized. It is based on
ties of history, culture, language, ethnicity, kinship and
geography. We enjoy the closest political ties, with
close relationships between our political parties and
equally close economic and commercial relations.
India is also partnering Nepal's development in sectors
ranging from energy to agriculture.

Since our two countries share an open border,
with open access to each other's markets and
privileged access for the citizens of the other country,
no country has more to gain from peace, stability and
development in Nepal than India. It is for that reason
that we have remained closely involved, not only in
Nepal, but also in India and at all multilateral forums,
through a decade of difficulties as an armed conflict
raged, and subsequently as Nepal's leaders and people
brought the conflict to a halt and began a peace process
to bring closure to that conflict.

Just as the conflict was indigenous, so too is the
peace process. All credit should go to the people of
Nepal and to the wise and statesmanlike efforts of
Nepalese political parties and leaders for bringing
about a peace process.

India has strongly supported the peace process in
Nepal, the ownership of which is entirely indigenous.
We have warmly welcomed every positive step taken
by Nepalese stakeholders in a complex and sensitive
process, without outside assistance or advice. Against
all odds and despite cynicism, the Nepalese people not
only maintained the cohesion of the Seven-Party
Alliance, but also proceeded to implement their
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Despite delays, Nepalese authorities conducted an
extremely successful Constituent Assembly election in
April, which was truly a historic moment. Despite
facing complex challenges in its peace process, Nepal
and its leaders have indigenously addressed each of
those. As a close and friendly neighbour, India stands
ready to assist in any manner that the leaders and
people of Nepal may ask of us.

India has fully supported the United Nations
efforts to assist Nepal, at the request of the host
Government. We have been in close contact with
UNMIN at all levels, including in New Delhi. Our
support was never limited to words; we also provided
material support at the crucial phase when UNMIN was
being established.

Taking into account the current situation on the
ground, we fully support Nepal's request, made
formally on 8 July, to extend the mandate of UNMIN
for a further six months. The letter makes it abundantly
clear that some of the mandates relating to the Mission,
as laid down in resolution 1740 (2007), have already
been accomplished. The request for an extension of six
months therefore pertains to the remainder of the
original mandate - a clear statement with nothing
implied and nothing to be interpreted or clarified. We
also note that the request is made on the basis of a
consensus between key Nepalese political parties,
including the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist),
which has a plurality in the Constituent Assembly. That
consensus is also reflected in the 25 June Seven-Party
Agreement and is therefore fundamental to the
continuation of political processes in Nepal.

From that standpoint, it is difficult to accept parts
of the Secretary-General's latest report. Bearing in
mind that it is at Nepal's request for assistance on
specific aspects of its peace process that UNMIN
exists, it seems inappropriate for the Secretary-General
to advise the Council to extend the mandate for one
month unless Nepal's request is clarified. In other
words, unless Nepal's request is in line with what
UNMIN wants it to say, the request is not good
enough. That could imply that UNMIN would be
asking the new Government - whose constituents
expressed their views in the 8 July letter - to
reinterpret the 25 June Agreement. In doing so,
UNMIN could find itself in the unfortunate position of
having its role become a matter of contention rather
than being seen as a positive contributor to the peace
process. It may also be seen to imply that the report is
suggesting that political formations that are to form the
Government are liable to change their minds. Not only
does that run counter to the trend of Nepali political
parties abiding by previous commitments, but it is also
an extraordinary claim to make, even by implication.

I carefully listened to the excellent statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Nepal and,
as he made clear, several aspects of the original
mandate have been completed. The request is for
something on a smaller scale. The clarification of the
letter of 8 July essentially reiterates, in a sense, the
earlier document, and it is significant that the peace
process as a whole does not find mention in that
clarification.

Furthermore, the report also suggests in
paragraph 64 that UNMIN has "been made aware" of a
broad consensus within Nepal that continuation of a
United Nations political presence is important to the
completion of the peace process. While we would
welcome being made similarly aware, what should
have weight is not a subjective impression - including
through an oral exchange - that the United Nations
may have gained, but what the people's elected
representatives convey in writing.

To our knowledge, UNMIN's support has not
been sought in taking decisions on issues related to the
peace process. Indeed, the greatest strength of the
peace process is that it has consistently been
nationally-owned, directed and implemented. The
Nepalese request for United Nations support was with
regard to the implementation of aspects of Nepal's
peace process - as speakers before me have noted -
which required an internationally-accepted monitor.
Those included advising the national Election
Commission in the conduct of elections and monitoring
the management of arms and the forces of the two
contending armies. And yet, in paragraph 68, it is
asserted that the "key requirement now is not the
continuation of monitoring arrangements so much as
the transition to a durable and permanent solution".
While that may or may not be so, it certainly cannot be
automatically assumed that the durability and
permanence of arrangements to address the problem of
two armed forces depends on the active involvement of
the United Nations.

I am constrained to point out that we have noted a
consistent effort to expand the definition of what Nepal
seeks in terms of support to include a role in the Nepali
peace process, irrespective of the desire of Nepalese
interlocutors. To insist on playing a role that the host
nation is reluctant to provide is to risk jeopardizing the
work of UNMIN thus far. That should be avoided at all
costs, as it could undermine the United Nations
investment in Nepal - not the other way around.

In that context, the Council must also seriously
consider whether to permit a liberal interpretation of

the principle of the sanctity of a State's requests for
specific assistance. We often hear the counter-argument
that it is for the Council to decide on what action is
appropriate in each case, but not when parallels are
drawn between Nepal and other issues on the agenda of
the Council. Let us not forget that Nepal approached
the United Nations for assistance of its own free will,
not because the situation in that country was a threat to
international peace and security.

We therefore urge the Council to accept the
Nepalese request, as contained in its letter of 8 July
2008, in letter and spirit. To put it directly, the
continuation of UNMIN on a smaller scale to engage in
the remainder of the mandate for a period of six
months is what Nepal has sought. It is precisely what
Nepal should get - no more, no less.

