Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden.

I would like to begin by thanking the Nigerian
presidency for organizing this debate. The last time the
Council held a debate on security sector reform was in
2008 (see S/PV.5889). Now it is due time to take stock
of the progress made.

In order to save everybody's valuable time, I will
deliver an abbreviated version of our statement
circulated in the room.

We need a balanced and holistic approach to
security sector reform (SSR) for it to serve the broader
aim of achieving sustainable peace and development
and full respect for human rights and the rule of law.
There is a clear link between SSR, conflict prevention
and socio-economic development. This needs to be
fully understood and taken into account in international
support measures and actions.

The linkages between security, justice and
development were highlighted in the recent United
Nations and World Bank reports. Instability and
political and criminal violence reoccur in
circumstances where governance is weak and the rule
of law and mechanisms to control corruption are
neglected. Violence leads to an increased risk of
conflict, not to mention its negative effects on
development.

All security sector reform efforts should be
carried out within the overarching framework of the
rule of law and good governance. We would like to
commend the efforts of the Security Sector Reform
Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task
Force. We encourage the Task Force to continue its
efforts to enhance coherence.

It is clear that more must be done. The United
Nations recently conducted a review of international
civilian capacities in which the Senior Advisory Group
for the Review of International Civilian Capacities
identified several capacity gaps. Security sector reform
and justice sector reform ranked as the most critical
ones.

Security sector support encompasses complex
technical challenges, in which specialized external
expertise may be required to complement national
capacities. Moreover, SSR goes beyond critical yet
narrow exercises such as right-sizing the security
services or training and equipping uniformed
personnel. SSR can also mean the development of
national security sector strategies and legislation or
enhancing the oversight and governance of security
institutions. These are inherently political processes,
where the main responsibility and ownership can only
lie with national Governments.

National Governments have the sovereign right
and primary responsibility to manage and coordinate
national reform efforts and international support. A
truly demand-driven approach on both sides would
solve many of the coordination problems. The Senior
Advisory Group for the Review of International
Civilian Capacities gave concrete recommendations
here too. National ownership can be fostered also
through areas such as procurement, policy framework
and mechanisms to manage partnerships. National
ownership should not be reduced to Government
ownership. Security and justice institutions are there to
serve people, including those who are marginalized.

Special attention should be paid to the
participation of women in planning, leading and
implementing security sector reforms. Women are
actors and stakeholders in upholding and promoting
security and the rule of law. In this regard, we would
like to recall the action plan of the Secretary-General
on women's participation in peacebuilding. It offers
practical suggestions, which should now be taken
forward into concrete implementation in the United
Nations system and be supported by Member States,
regional organizations and international financial
institutions. We also encourage all actors to make full
use of the gender and security sector toolkit, which
offers practical guidance.

African countries are increasingly important
providers of security sector reform assistance. It would
therefore be pertinent to consider a regional approach
not only to capacity-building, but also to assessments
and the design and implementation of reforms. African
perspectives on SSR can help in better adapting SSR
tools to a particular country context, and thus
contribute to the legitimacy, viability and sustainability
of SSR support.

The Nordic countries fully support the African
Peace and Security Architecture initiative, which is
aimed at enhancing the prevention, management and
resolution of conflicts in Africa. We also warmly
welcome the ongoing efforts of the African Union to
develop a policy framework on SSR in consultation
with diverse stakeholders, including regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms, African and
international SSR experts and African civil society
organizations.

In conclusion, we believe that the report
requested by the Council today on the United Nations
approach to SSR will contribute to a more effective
and coherent United Nations response to SSR. For the
United Nations to continue to provide comprehensive
support in this vital area, we must all ensure it receives
adequate support.

