Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to begin
by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and for convening this debate.

United Nations peacekeeping missions embody the
most noble of our collective security responsibilities.
Whether Caucasian, African, Asian or Arab, all
peacekeepers are united in our common cause to ensure
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, while nine peacekeeping operations are
currently deployed with mandates on the protection
of civilians, the latest report by the Secretary General
(S/2013/689) indicates that the current state of the
protection of civilians leaves little room for optimism.

My delegation is concerned that the practice of
protecting civilians in the field may not be able to catch
up with how the international community envisions
taking that process forward. Our expectations are
unreachable, while our efforts remain rudimentary.
We feel that there is a need to take stock of the lessons
learned, given the lack of success in establishing an
effective regime for the protection of civilians.

Malaysia is all too aware of the complexities
involved in protecting civilians in conflict areas. Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders of United Nations missions are facing
intricate and unique challenges. Nevertheless, Malaysia
sees the protection of civilians as a fundamental
component of peacekeeping operations.

In that regard, my delegation wishes to underscore
the proposal of the Secretary-General, contained in
his report, on the recommendation of a mechanism to
record and track civilian casualties. Such a mechanism
not only warrants our attention, given the need to protect
civilians from harm, but can also be an instrument to
guide United Nations missions in taking proactive and
preventive measures to reduce the number of civilian
casualties in conflict areas.

As the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security,
it should also be kept abreast of the latest developments
in the field. We believe more efforts should be made by
the leadership of United Nations peacekeeping missions
to brief the Council in a more timely and frequent
manner. That would enable continued engagement
between the Council and the field on developments,
progress and prioritization in the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates.

My delegation also sees the merit of proper policy
planning and preparedness in peacekeeping missions.
When undertaking a protection-of-civilians mandate,
peacekeeping missions must consider implementing
that mandate through an integrated approach. Military
and police units, along with United Nations agencies,
cannot work in silos.

An integrated apporach to peacekeeping would
need to be balanced between instilling peace and
security and seeding economic growth and development
in the host country. The Council, in collaboration with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission, should capitalize on the
synergies between those two important mechanisms,
each with important roles in instituting good governance
and economic growth.

We also believe that there must be effective
coordination so as to provide a platform for interaction
and the sharing of information, based on expertise
and priorities set by the Council. In that regard,
Malaysia welcomes the formulation of a comprehensive
protection strategy for the implementation of the
civilian protection mandates of four United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

We are equally pleased to note that the Office of
the Military Adviser is also finalizing the drafting
of baseline guidance on the protection of civilians.
We believe that those developments will improve
inter-agency coordination and communications and
eliminate gaps in carrying out protection mandates.

Training is the cornerstone for ensuring the
standardization of the work of peacekeeping missions
in protecting civilians. Peacekeepers and civilian
personnel must be trained through a common
protection-of-civilians module prior to deployment. We
believe efforts should also be made to include substantial
elements on the religious and cultural sensitivities of the
local people in the common training module for United
Nations peacekeepers. The significance of respecting
cultural sensitivities and their impact on relations
between peacekeepers and the local community must
not be underestimated.

Giving due importance to training and exposure,
the Government of Malaysia, with the support of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, hosted a
training course on the protection of civilians at the
Malaysian Peacekeeping Training Centre in Port
Dickson from 9 to 13 September 2013. Malaysia
expresses its appreciation to the United Nations mobile
training team that was tasked to conduct the module for
26 international and Malaysian military officers. The
training module included mission-specific scenarios
based on incidents faced during United Nations
missions. We believe that such training can benefit host
countries and peacekeepers alike.

The experiences accumulated by the various
United Nations missions are unique and often result
from custom-tailoring efforts in the implementation
of mandates. Those experiences should be shared with
Member States and other United Nations missions. My
delegation believes that such exchanges of experience
can be carried out through the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We furthermore believe that such
measures would improve awareness and generate a
common understanding of the protection of civilians.

To conclude, peacekeeping remains the only feasible
instrument to protect civilians caught up in armed
conflict. In order to improve the status of the protection
of civilians in conflict areas, we must ensure that
peacekeeping remains an effective tool and diplomatic
instrument. That requires commitment, resources and
coordination by leaders of peacekeeping missions, host
Governments and civilians in the field. My delegation
would like to underscore the importance of unanimous
action by the Security Council to develop a framework
to ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We need to ensure that the United Nations is always
endowed with the resources necessary to implement
protection-of-civilians mandates effectively.

