Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): Namibia wishes to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
Guinea-Bissau. We also thank Mr. Prendergast for the
update he has given us.

The situation of Guinea-Bissau was high on the
agenda of the United Nations during the past year and it
will continue to enjoy the attention of the international
community, so as to enable the people of that country to
consolidate their democracy. I therefore wish to take this

 

opportunity to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau.
We commend them for the efforts they have made in
bringing about peace and the rule of law in their country.
The successful conclusion of the legislative and presidential
elections and the formation of a broad-based Government
are clear indications of their commitment to transform their
country into a democracy.

We encourage the new Government of President
Kumba Yala to embark upon a vigorous programme to
promote genuine national reconciliation and to inculcate
democratic values, the rule of law and good governance in
Guinea-Bissau. These are important tenets for bringing
prosperity and improving the quality of life for the people
of Guinea-Bissau, whose ingenuity and enterprise can be
realized with the full support of the international
community.

In this connection, we pay special tribute to the
Representative of the Secretary-General and to the men and
women of the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for the tireless efforts
they have made in assisting the people of Guinea-Bissau.
Our special thanks also go to the Member States, United
Nations agencies, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for their support and the
critical role they have played in the peace process in
Guinea-Bissau. We call on the international community to
continue to support the reconstruction process in that
country.

Guinea-Bissau needs a dependable and democratically
accountable defense force. The process for induction into
the force must, as a matter of priority, take members with
no track record of gross human rights violations or active
involvement in politics. Members unfit for service in the
force must be given skills that are transferrable into civilian
life.

We express our concern about the flow of small arms
in the country, and we wish to associate ourselves with the
point made by Ambassador Hasmy in this regard.

Finally, we wish President Kumba Yala and the people
of Guinea-Bissau every success.

