Mr. Shearer: Just six days ago, we marked the first
anniversary ofthe signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. At the official ceremony last year, I witnessed
much jubilation and hope that the agreement signalled
an end to war and the beginning of a new era of peace.
The citizens of South Sudan had high expectations.
Over the past year, their political leaders have met
some, but certainly not all of those expectations.

The recent visit of Mr. Riek Machar to Juba,
at the invitation of President Salva Kiir, was
an important development. The face-to-face
meetings - which many of us believe are fundamental
to moving forward - provided an opportunity to
discuss critical unresolved parts ofthe peace agreement.
Publicly, the demeanour of the two men appeared
conciliatory and they reportedly spent several hours in
formal and informal discussions. Those meetings need
to continue. Importantly, they recommitted to forming
the transitional Government - a positive step because
it maintains the momentum of peace and bolsters
confidence among the people of South Sudan. The
challenge remains, of course, to show tangible results.
Three areas, in particular, require progress.

The first is the unification of security forces. Of
the 35 cantonment sites planned, 23 are now occupied
by opposition forces and 10 by the Government. Troop
registration has begun. Food, water and other resources
are beginning to be delivered. However, many sites
lack amenities and protection risks may arise in nearby
villages if those shortfalls continue. More fundamental
differences also persist. The opposition foresees a newly
constituted security sector, whereas the Government
presumes that opposition troops will be subsumed into
existing forces. A strategy for a unified security sector
is therefore required. The United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) has contracted an experienced
retired general from the region to help parties determine
the future security policy, including the size and shape
of forces.

Secondly, the Independent Boundaries Commission
was unable to reach consensus on the number of states
and boundaries. Resolution via a referendum, we
believe, is implausible given the expense and time
required. Instead, political consensus is needed. The
Kiir-Machar dialogue last week called for a committee
to address that sensitive issue, and we hope that is able
to be resolved.

Thirdly, the agreement provides for five
vice-presidents, each leading a cluster of cabinet
portfolios. Two months out from a transitional
Government, these still need to be determined. Finally, I
should mention that the non-signatories to the agreement
need to move from violent opposition, in which they
have been involved, to constructive participation.

One year on, peace is beginning to pay dividends
for the citizens of South Sudan. First, and critically, the
ceasefire largely continues to hold. Political violence
and subsequent displacement have decreased markedly.
Opposition members are continuing to move and work
in Juba, alongside their Government counterparts, to
implement key parts of the peace agreement. There
have been more than 130 different rapprochements
across the country at the grass-roots level, which
demonstrates confidence and commitment.
The latest Integrated Food Security Phase
Classification (IPC) report - a UNICEF, World Food
Programme and Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) report that measures
food security - documents a slight improvement in
food security. There are now 5 per cent fewer people
facing crisis or acute food insecurity compared with
last year. This, the report notes importantly, is directly
attributable to peace.

The fact that displaced families and refugees
are returning home means that more crops are being
planted, and improved security has enhanced access
to markets and to humanitarian access. According to
the FAO, cereal production has increased by 150,000
metric tons in one year, an indication of what peace
can provide.

Still, 6.3 million people - or 54 per cent of the
population - remain food-insecure and have limited
access to health care. We have also noted that child
malnutrition has in the short term, we think, increased.

But we are seeing a change. The IPC severity map
is, at least, becoming more orange and yellow rather
than red. Humanitarian access has improved. Incidents
are down 30 per cent from last year, and humanitarians
are becoming more emboldened to reach out to
remote areas.

However, administrative impediments are still
too frequent. UNMISS has been blocked by the
Government from accessing areas where civilians and
convoys require protection, with 124 violations of the
status-of-forces agreement lodged just this year.

The relative calm has enabled more displaced
people to return home. The International Organization
for Migration has registered 594,000 returnees since the
peace agreement was signed. During the same period,
17,000 people left UNMISS protection-of-civilians
sites, while 180,000 remain.

At the Council's request, as mentioned by the
President, we have reported back on future planning for
the protection-of-civilians sites, detailing the challenges
ofprolonged displacement and the impediments to safe,
voluntary and dignified return. These impediments
include the lack of health-care and educational services
in return areas; obviously, perceptions of security; and
concern about the fragility of the peace process.

The report's findings drew from wide consultations
right across the community in Juba. It has enabled a
shared understanding of challenges and is forming
the basis of actions going forward, which are already
being developed.

To reflect the changing security environment,
UNMISS peacekeepers are rebalancing their
deployment, moving away from static type of
deployment protection at protection-of-civilians sites to
increase confidence-building patrols in areas to which
people will be returning.

However, the Government must take the lead in
creating a safe environment and support communities
so displaced refugees and others can come back with
confidence and be safe when they come back. I should
recall here that a South Sudan that is truly at peace will
no longer need United Nations protection sites.

The formation of the transitional Government
provides an opportunity to lift our gaze from immediate
challenges and look over the horizon towards the
elections that are expected at the end of the three-year
transition. Elections give the opportunity to resolve
differences through democratic rather than violent
means and to make a fundamental shift from deals
done between elites to a duty to deliver policies by a
Government that is elected by its people.

Holding free and fair elections is not just about
preparing logistically but will require the creation
of a political space where parties can form, discuss
policies and campaign freely. I say this because there is
mounting resentment among South Sudanese towards
elites amassing wealth while the people themselves
remain some of the poorest in the world.

The Government's budget this year is 46 per cent
higher than last year, but with no indication of how a
$496 million financing gap will be funded. There is little
transparency about where oil revenue is being spent.
The Ministry of Finance reduced health-care spending
by 16 per cent this year, handing almost the entire
burden of health care to external donors, and reports of
Government expenditure have not been received since
the first quarter of 2017-2018. Meanwhile, the salaries
of civil servants, including teachers, health workers and
police officers, are often months late.

Criminality remains a serious problem, with
random attacks on civilians, most commonly by unpaid
soldiers and former combatants. The United Nations is
also providing technical assistance to reform and rebuild
the justice system, notjust to tackle criminal acts but to
address the more pervasive issue of impunity. Mobile
courts staffed by South Sudanese judiciary personnel,
which have done an excellent job, have expanded
beyond Bentiu and Malakal. In the next few weeks
they will try hundreds of serious cases, including many
cases of sexual and gender-based violence.

The bottom line is simply this. While the situation
for many South Sudanese citizens remains bleak, the
last year of peace has kickstarted a transformative
process that is improving people's lives. This could not
have happened without the ceasefire or the confidence
generated by the peace process. The country's leaders
and international peace partners deserve credit for this.

Across the country I have personally witnessed
former enemies once committed to killing each
other sitting amicably across the table planning a
future together. If South Sudan's leaders ever needed
inspiration to reconcile and work in the country's best
interests, they can find it under trees and in the tukuls
where communities are coming together to build peace.

I promise the Council that UNMISS is working
alongside them to lay strong foundations so that
peace can be sustained. As always, our efforts
are in partnership with the laudable efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union.

The peace process remains precarious, but progress
is being made. Maintaining momentum is the absolute
key, and that depends very much on the continuing
goodwill of the parties as well as the collective and
unrelenting focus of international friends to support the
formation of a transitional Government.

