Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We too would like to thank Mr. J can-Marie Guehenno
for the very thorough and enlightening briefing he has
given us on the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) (S/2008/26). We also thank our friend the
Permanent Representative of Timor-Leste for his
enlightening and very informative statement.

The history of the people of Timor-Leste, their
struggle for independence and their current admirable

efforts to fully regain their sovereignty are an example
to us all. They deserve the unwavering support of the
international community in helping the country to build
its institutions and advance its development. Any
obstacle or attempt intended to jeopardize that desire to
assume responsibility cannot be tolerated. It is for that
reason that the recent attacks against President Jose
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao
prompted unanimous international indignation and
condemnation. In that connection, we cannot fail to
commend the action taken by the Government of
Australia, which promptly came to the assistance of the
legitimate Government of Timor-Leste.

We welcome the notable progress made by
Timor-Leste and its firm commitment to building a
democratic future, as illustrated by the very successful
holding of the recent presidential and legislative
elections. That clearly demonstrates a spirit of
tolerance, understanding and reconciliation. We hope
that that spirit will prevail throughout the entire
country in order to promote genuine national
reconciliation, including as regards the issue of the
petitioners.

We also welcome the Government's drafting and
the Parliament's adoption of a development programme
as part of the 2008 budget. That will make it possible
to address the crucial challenges of security and the
situation of internally displaced persons. There are
other equally important issues on the agenda, such as
the building of a strong national economy, national
reconciliation and strengthening security and the rule
of law. Nevertheless, one of the main challenges that
the Government must urgently address is, in our view
and as noted in the report of the Secretary-General, that
of combating unemployment, which undermines the
future of young people and which can also lead to
migration from the countryside. Without jobs and real
prospects for the future, there is a significant risk that
young people will face dangers and difficulties in life.
Those dangers must be avoided, as they could lead to
demands and troubles of all sorts. Whatever the
difficulties, priority should be accorded to that issue.

Burkina Faso welcomes the Government's
signing of an agreement aimed at coordinating national
resources and international assistance to promote the
country's development. Timor-Leste's donors and
partners, especially the countries of the region, should
therefore firmly support the Government's programme
in order that it can be fully implemented. It is also
important to ensure that the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework has the same
support.

Governance is a crucial issue for an emerging
democracy such as Timor-Leste. We have every
confidence that UNMIT and the United Nations system
can support and strengthen the republic's institutions,
leading to the establishment of genuine democracy
based on the rule of law. The risk of instability and the
fragility of the political process, which are still real,
justify the continued presence of UNMIT to maintain
public order and provide support for the justice sector.
However, my delegation recognizes that restructuring
and appropriate training of the Timorese national
police - which must also be depoliticized so that it
can assume full - is more necessary than ever. We
therefore welcome the proposal of the Secretary-
General to assess the needs of the national police, with
a View to a gradual transfer of competencies. It goes
without saying that Burkina Faso supports the renewal
of UNMIT's mandate.

Lastly, we would like to thank Ambassador
Dumisani Kumalo for the role his country has played
in the core group on Timor-Leste.

