Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We very much appreciate your giving us the
floor for the second time at this meeting, Madam
President. We are taking the floor to respond to the
allegations in the statement by the representative of
the Qatari regime, which has now become isolated and
ostracized even by its closest allies in the Arab Gulf.

If the representative of Qatar were truly concerned
for the children of Syria and their lives, she would have
asked her ruling family to stop the sectarian narrative
of instigation launched from their territory through
their local and and satellite television channels. Such
a narrative - for her information, of course - is
what sends jihadists from the world over to Syria to
perpetrate the most abhorrent forms of killing, slaughter
and rape against Syrian children. I believe that the
decision by Qatar's neighbouring States to withdraw
their Ambassadors in protest of Qatar's narrative
is the strongest proof of the ignominous and brutal
methodology adopted by the Qatari sheikhdom in
altering facts, inciting sectarian conflict and instigating
the murder of Syrian children from a distance.

Those who claim that they are concerned for human
rights in States worldwide should set an example in this
area. Today, I do not want to remind the representative
of Qatar of the remarks by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
Gabriela Knaul, about the persistence of a judicial
system that flouts the human rights of non-Qatari
nationals in Qatar and which is not independent
because of interference by the Qatari executive branch,
in particular by major companies and the members of
the ruling family.

Today, everybody is aware of the role played
by the Qatari regime, which sponsors international
terrorism. Facts are unfolding about the involvement
of the Qatari regime in bombings in Syria, Egypt,
Libya, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. In addition, we
have seen the closing down of the mouthpiece of the
Qatari regime, the Al-Jazeera channel, in a number of
capitals around the world, following evidence about
its involvement in stirring up public opinion and
conveying a distorted picture about what is happening
in the world. It is no secret that this channel has been
covering, for several decades, the activities ofAl-Qaida
and Taliban movements. We reserve the right to hold
these people accountable for their crimes, which have
been documented by the United Nations in the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

Finally, I should like to recall the well-known
Arabic saying, which applies to the Qatari regime and
its representatives: "If you have no shame, then do
whatever you wish".

