Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by thanking the Government of Germany for inviting
us to participate in this open debate. Speaking to you
personally, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate
you on your leadership and achievements as the Chair
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

I would also like to congratulate Ms. Zerrougui
on her appointment as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. The Department of Peacekeeping Operations
is firmly committed to supporting her work as the
independent and moral advocate for children affected
by armed conflict. Throughout the years, the Office
of the Special Representative has provided excellent
leadership and established strategic partnerships with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF
and the broader United Nations system. This unique
partnership has enabled us to lean on the comparative
strength of each actor in order to provide comprehensive
and real protection for children on the ground, as this
is, after all, about them.

(spoke in English)

As a key part of this unique partnership, our
multidimensional peacekeeping operations are of course
uniquely placed to contribute to the actual protection of
children affected by conflict. They provide a common
platform that combines political, justice, human rights,
gender, child protection and other civilian expertise
with military, police and corrections experts and
myriad logistical and operational capabilities.

The deployment of child protection advisers to
our peacekeeping operations, with the support of the
Security Council, has enabled us to harness all of our
capacities and to leverage our political, security and
civilian assets to better protect children.

First, at the political level, child protection
advisers support heads of missions in integrating the
United Nations child protection concerns at all stages
of the peace process, including negotiations with
Governments, armed groups or parties to conflict.
Take the example of the Sudan, where, following broad
political consultations held between the Mission and the
Justice and Equality Movement (J EM) earlier this year,
JEM. issued a command order last week prohibiting the
recruitment and use of child soldiers. J EM. has thus
become the seventh armed movement in Darfur to have
taken such a significant step since 2010.

Secondly, our military peacekeepers actually
play an important role in protecting children from
violations. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where I myself was last week, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) military units and
observers deployed in remote areas have contributed to
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
children by providing information, security and critical
logistical support for their release. Since the beginning
of this year, for instance, MONUSCO has documented
the release of no less than 1,038 children through the
assistance of peacekeepers. In the past four months
alone, at least 38 children have escaped from the March
23 Movement in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as Ms. Zerrougui mentioned, and sought refuge
and protection with peacekeepers. These children were
handed over to UNICEF and partners for reintegration
support.

Thirdly, our child protection advisers are
working closely with all civilian components, such
as those dealing with human rights, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, rule of law, justice,
protection of civilians coordinators, women protection
advisers, gender and security sector reform to promote
synergies and a child-sensitive approach to their work.

An important area where the mission harnesses
its broad capacities, including the military, police and
civilian components, is in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. These diverse
components refer cases and provide critical information
on grave violations to United Nations country task
forces, which enables the mission leadership and child
protection actors to respond appropriately and support
the important work of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, which you chair, Mr. President.

All of those efforts can have a real and sustainable
impact when we work closely with national authorities.
An excellent example of this partnership was the recent
renewal of the action plan to end the recruitment and
use of child soldiers signed by the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) with UNICEF, the United
Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in March 2012.
As a result, the SPLA has screened out 429 children
at recruitment sites and ordered its military units to
vacate all occupied schools immediately. Today, 11 out
of 16 schools have indeed been vacated, and efforts
are under way to vacate the remaining five. These
achievements are a testament to how concerted action
at all levels can result in better protection for children
in conflict zones.

Although we have made significant progress
in providing protection for children, the report of
the Secretary-General (S/20l2/26l) illustrates that
more needs to be done. One of our priorities moving
forward is to ensure that we maximize our resources to
improve our interventions. We believe that training is
an important tool to achieve this. Indeed, in different
missions, training on child protection for all military,
police and civilians is a top priority. This year alone,
over 9,000 peacekeepers received awareness training
on child protection in our peacekeeping missions. With
the generous support of several Member States, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is leading the
updating of training materials for peacekeepers. Those
training tools will be ready in 2013.

A second priority is the update of the DPKO policy
on child protection. We are working jointly with the
Office of the Special Representative and with the
Department of Political Affairs to reflect the most
recent developments in the child protection agenda,
and the broader protection agenda since 2009, and to
strengthen our collective efforts in this regard.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our firm
commitment to the protection of children in conflict.
Under the leadership of the Special Representative, in
partnership with UNICEF, we are deeply committed
to ensuring the full implementation of Security
Council resolutions. Jointly, we believe that indeed we
can deliver tangible and lasting peace for vulnerable
children whose lives are so often disrupted by conflict.
As always, we look to the Council's mandate and
support to achieve that.

