Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): I am particularly
honoured and pleased to be here in the Council today,
exactly five months after I assumed my functions
at the head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
on 15 January 2016, and three months after the Council's
memorable mission to Mali on 4 and 5 March, when it
visited Bamako, Mopti and Timbuktu.

This is therefore the first time that I am appearing
before the Council in order to present the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (8/2016/498).
I welcome this opportunity afforded me and I commend
the Council, on behalf of the men and women of
MINUSMA, who are working with determination day
and night to execute the mission that the Council has
entrusted to them in resolution 2227 (2015), adopted on
29 June 2015.

I welcome the presence here today of an important
delegation from Mali, led by His Excellency Prime
Minister Modibo Keita and including my dear friend
Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and African Integration.

Since the Council's visit to Mali last March,
the evolution of the situation unfortunately remains
worrying. Several factors justify that concern.

First, and as outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General, one year after the signing of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, it is clear that neither
the signatories, much less the international mediation
team, are satisfied with the pace of its implementation.
This slowness, which is difficult to understand, is about
to compromise the entire process, including the setting
up of joint patrols and other security arrangements.
While the Agreement is a package, for some time the
debate has seemed to reduce it to the putting in place of
interim administrations, which unfortunately are also
slow in becoming operational. As such, we welcome
the compromise reached among the Malian parties
two days ago on the sidelines of the ninth meeting of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee. MINUSMA
remains fully committed on that matter, continuously
using its good offices and other tools at its disposal,
and is ready to support the immediate putting in place
of interim authorities.

Secondly, as the Secretary-General states in
his report, the security situation has deteriorated
significantly in recent weeks. Although since its
deployment, in 2013, MINUSMA has held the sad
distinction of being the deadliest of the currently
deployed United Nations missions, what has happened
this year is even more serious and should challenge us
to act. From February to May 2016 f a period of four
months - 19 peacekeepers were killed due to terrorist
actions, including 12 in the month ofMay alone. Adding
to that the seven others who died from other causes,
such as accidents and diseases, the toll rises to 26. And
the total rises to 27 when we include the United Nations
contractor who was killed on 31 May. The figures are
even more distressing if added to the losses suffered in
the course of Operation Barkhane and those of Mali's

defence and security forces and among Malian civilians.
As I have often said, many such losses could be
avoided if our troops were better trained and equipped,
especially when it comes to armoured personnel
carriers. Moreover, the attack on a MINUSMA convoy
in the area of Mopti on 29 May - the International Day
of United Nations Peacekeepers - serves to tragically
illustrate that the terrorist threat is increasingly
spreading to the centre and the south. That trend
carries with it the threat of contagion, which must not
be forgotten.

Since the recent attacks, MINUSMA has taken a
number of steps to be more proactive and to improve
efficiency and responsiveness. I understand the general
skepticism and disillusionment in that regard, but, in
view of the situation in 2012, there are many signs of
hope. As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General, there has been progress with regard to the
peace process, even though, as I said moments ago,
the pace of the Agreement's implementation suffers
from slowness, which should be avoided. Allow me to
mention three examples of that progress.

The first is the strict adherence to the ceasefire
observed by all the Malian parties that signed on to the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In
addition, dialogue continues to be the preferred means
among the parties.

The second example pertains to the continuing
efforts by the Malian Government in the establishment
of a solid legal and institutional framework for the
Agreement's implementation. In that regard, the draft
decree of 18 May on establishing the National Council
for Security Sector Reform under the authority of
the Prime Minister represents a significant advance
from the perspective of reconstituting the security
and armed forces. Decrees were also approved to set
up other commissions, including on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

Finally, in terms of cantonment, about eight sites
are nearing completion, which should allow for the start
of the DDR process - a process that includes two other
crucial dimensions, namely, the integration of former
combatants and managing violent extremism.

Among many others, those positive elements
provide a solid basis for moving forward. It is
absolutely crucial to enhance mutual trust among the
signatory parties, as that is a dimension that sometimes
hinders implementation.

The weakness of the State in the north of the
country and the lack of effective control over land by
other signatory parties where they are present have
given way to an increase in terrorism, organized crime,
banditry and intercommunal tensions. The more we fall
behind in implementing the Agreement and actually
managing those challenges, the more we risk further
weakening the peace process.

It would be desirable that the next MINUSMA
mandate take into account the challenges I have just
mentioned. There is a need for an enhanced posture for
MINUSMA. Given the determination of the enemies of
peace and the magnitude of the recent deadly attacks,
the recommendations of the strategic review set out
in the report of the Secretary-General are in line with
that objective. As such, it is necessary to increase the
capacity of both the force and the police in terms of
personnel, equipment and air cover. Without those
capabilities, which have bee repeatedly requested, we
risk hindering and undermining the Mission; providing
them will save lives. There is also a need to make
more explicit the fact that the mandate of the Mission
authorizes it to conduct proactive and preventive
operations to fulfil its responsibilities in terms of
protecting both civilians and its personnel. Beyond
that, MINUSMA alone cannot resolve the whole host of
Mali's security challenges. Only increasing the strength
of Mali's defence and security forces will serve to
meet that sovereign function, and hence the assistance
requested in terms of support for the Malian forces. The
restoration of State authority depends upon it.

However, that issue must be part of a regional
strategy in which various initiatives, such as the Sahel
Group of Five, the Nouakchott process, the Economic
Community of West African States and others, are
called on to play a more prominent role. The presence
of Operation Barkhane on the ground strengthens such
initiatives. The situation in Mali is affecting the region
as a whole. Recent attacks in Cote d'Ivoire and Burkina
Faso illustrate the fluidity of terrorist groups and the
interdependence among countries in the fight against
terrorism. In the face of this regional threat, we must
strive to promote more effective coordination and to
increasingly operate within a logic of synergies and
resource sharing.

I cannot conclude without telling the Council that
I remain optimistic, even if my optimism is measured.
It should also be stressed that there is no alternative
to peace. The status quo of neither peace nor war only
benefits the enemies of peace. The presence here of a
large delegation headed by the Prime Minister of Mali
reassures us that the hardest part is behind us, although
we must not forget that time is our greatest enemy.

Today it is clear that all Malians, beginning with
the most sceptical, are increasingly taking ownership
of the Agreement. A year ago the people of Kidal were
protesting its signing. Today the same populations take
to the streets of Kidal, Gao and Timbuktu to demand its
prompt implementation. Similarly, the Malian people
eagerly and hopefully await the new mandate that the
Council will confer on MINUSMA.

