Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain had no doubts about co-sponsoring resolution
2270 (2016), for three reasons.

First, in recent years the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has, on various occasions - probably
too many - shown an unequivocal determination to
develop its nuclear programme as well as its missile
technology, thereby breaching the international
non-proliferation regime and repeatedly violating
Security Council sanctions.

The Council, as a consequence, is obliged to react
for two very important reasons: first, because this
implies the practical development by North Korea of a
military capacity, which is very seriously threatening
peace and stability on the peninsula and in the region;
and, secondly, because resolution 2094 (2013) states
clearly the Council's determination to adopt further
significant measures if the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea carries out a new missile launch or
a nuclear test. We therefore had no other choice than
to comply with what is established and to adopt these
further significant measures.

Secondly, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006), Spain has a special responsibility to ensure that
Security Council decisions are complied with with due
effectiveness, transparency and rigour. That is why we
will be providing an open briefing to the membership
over the next few days.

Member States have concentrated their efforts in
this area, but we must be honest and acknowledge that
the previous sanctions regime was not as effective as
it could have been in that it was not able to prevent
the North Korean regime from continuing with its
arms-development programme. We believe that this
new resolution will be a useful tool for achieving
this efficiency and, of course, as Chair we will work
closely with other members to ensure the practical
implementation of measures that will ensure the
achievement of the ultimate goal of these measures:
that North Korea once again becomes part of the
non-proliferation regime, thereby guaranteeing peace
and stability on the peninsula.

Finally, I should like to touch on what may be a very
important idea with regard to the future, and I should
like to stress that this idea was already mentioned by
certain speakers: namely, that the sanctions are not
a goal but a means of achieving lasting peace and
stability. Nor are they in any way a punishment of
the population. The sanctions are designed to have an
effect on the elites ofthe regime, not its citizens. We are
convinced that only a radical change of attitude on the
part of the Government of Pyongyang can offer people
the opportunity that they deserve: nothing more than
the ability to live a normal life.

