The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of South
Africa.

I, too, wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on his report before us (S/2011/634*). It is a
truism that the promotion of justice and the rule of law
is an indispensable pillar of peaceful coexistence and
the prevention of conflict. An inextricable link between
the promotion of justice and the attainment of a
peaceful world is reflected in Articles 1, 2 and 33 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Our efforts in the
search for long-lasting peace must therefore of
necessity include the establishment of the rule of law
and the promotion of justice.

Peacebuilding and peacemaking require an
integrated and comprehensive approach that takes into
account development, economic prosperity, the
establishment of the rule of law and the promotion of
justice. All of these must be accounted for in all
conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacemaking activities. The role of the international
community in assisting with the building and
strengthening of justice institutions in conflict-affected
countries is crucial. Equally important, however, is the
promotion of national ownership in all activities
associated with the rule of law if these are to be
successful.

We cannot speak of the rule of law in the context
of peacebuilding without speaking of accountability,
particularly for the most serious crimes of concern to
the international community. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the ad hoc Tribunals for
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are important cogs
in the international architecture to fight impunity. The
ICC and the ad hoc tribunals, through the promotion of
accountability and the fight against impunity, are
making an essential contribution to the preservation of
the peace, security and well-being of the world.

Ultimately, however, success will be achieved
only when there are no cases before international
courts and tribunals because national systems are
willing and able to carry out investigations and
prosecutions. It is for that reason that South Africa
continues to champion positive complementarity,
which is a key principle of the Rome Statute system
designed to strengthen domestic jurisdictions to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes.

In efforts to promote the rule of law at the
national level, including the promotion of
accountability mechanisms, equal attention must be
paid to the rule of law at the international level. If it is
not, the United Nations runs the risk of being accused
of double standards and of losing its credibility. To

borrow from a statement made by the Secretary-
General in 2004, we need to ask the question of
whether the international community can be said to be
governed by a system in which all players are
accountable to laws that are equally enforced and
independently adjudicated.

Over the past year, we have seen inspiring
improvements and spectacular disappointments alike in
the promotion of the rule of law through the Council's
work. The adoption of resolution 1989 (2011), bringing
the Al-Qaida regime closer to human rights and due
process standards, was a noteworthy illustration of the
Council's willingness to improve its adherence to the
rule of law. However, as noted by President Zuma on
12 January from this very seat (see S/PV.6702), the
abuse and disregard of basic rule of law requirements
in the implementation of resolution 1973 (2011) remain
a serious cause of concern. South Africa therefore fully
supports the call on the Council to undertake deliberate
measures to satisfy itself about whether those who
implemented resolution 1973 (2011) correctly
interpreted its provisions. They should also be held
accountable for the actions they took in implementing
the Council's decisions.

We continue to encourage the Council to make
better use of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations. By
making requests for advisory opinions when
confronted with complex legal questions, it would
show that the old debate about whether the Security
Council functions above international law is passe and
that, notwithstanding the primary role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council operates within the framework of
international law in all its actions.

In conclusion, we thank the Rule of Law Unit and
the Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group for
their efforts to ensure greater coordination and
coherence in the United Nations rule of law activities.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among Council
members, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law and emphasizes the vital
importance it attaches to promoting justice and
the rule of law as an indispensable element for
peaceful coexistence and the prevention of armed
conflict.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, and to an international
order based on the rule of law and international
law, which are essential for cooperation among
States in addressing common challenges, thus
contributing to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

"The Security Council is committed to and
actively supports the peaceful settlement of
disputes and reiterates its call upon Member
States to settle their disputes by peaceful means
as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council emphasizes the key
role of the International Court of Justice, the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, in
adjudicating disputes among States and the value
of its work. To this end the Council calls upon
States that have not yet done so to consider
accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in
accordance with its Statute.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
over the devastation and suffering caused by
armed conflict and emphasizes the need to
prevent conflict and, where conflict has already
broken out, to restore peace and security. The
Council acknowledges that political will and the
concerted efforts of both national Governments
and the international community are critical to
preventing conflict and achieving success in the
restoration of and respect for the rule of law.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern
about the situation of the most vulnerable in
societies affected by armed conflict, including
women and children as well as other vulnerable
groups and displaced persons. The Council
expresses particular concern about sexual and
gender-based violence in conflict situations and
recalls in this regard resolution 1325 (2000) and
other relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence between political, security,
development, human rights, including gender

12-2096]
equality, and rule of law and justice activities. In
this regard, the Council emphasizes the
importance of the rule of law as one of the key
elements of conflict prevention, peacekeeping,
conflict resolution and peacebuilding.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of national ownership in rule of law
assistance activities, strengthening justice and
security institutions that are accessible and
responsive to citizens' needs and which promote
social cohesion and economic prosperity. In this
regard, the Council takes note of the initiatives
being taken by some conflict-affected countries to
help ensure national ownership in rule of law
assistance activities and improve the quality of
support to those countries.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for enhanced efforts aimed at capacity building in
justice and security institutions, especially in the
police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors. In this regard, the Council notes the need
for increased efforts to ensure that conflict-
affected countries are able to access a broad
range of relevant expertise, in particular from
developing countries, in order to effectively build
the capacity of justice and security institutions.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts by
the Rule of Law Unit and the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group within existing
mandates and encourages further efforts to ensure
greater coordination and coherence in rule of law
activities in conflict-affected societies. To this
end, the Council requests that the Secretary-
General continue his efforts to further clarify
roles and responsibilities within the United
Nations system for specific rule of law activities,
based on assessments of agencies' respective
strengths and capacities, to ensure more effective
delivery of support to conflict-affected countries.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking can pose serious threats to
international security in different regions of the
world, notes also that these transnational crimes
may threaten the security of countries on its
agenda, including post-conflict States, encourages
the coordination of United Nations actions as
well as Member States' actions in fighting these
threats through implementation of national and
international applicable norms, relevant

international long-term capacity-building efforts
and regional initiatives.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
all parties to armed conflict to comply with the
obligations applicable to them under international
humanitarian law and to take all required steps to
protect civilians and recalls in this regard
resolution 1894 (2009).

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
opposition to impunity for serious violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights
law. The Council further emphasizes the
responsibility of States to comply with their
relevant obligations to end impunity and to
thoroughly investigate and prosecute persons
responsible for war crimes, genocide, crimes
against humanity or other serious Violations of
international humanitarian law in order to prevent
violations, avoid their recurrence and seek
sustainable peace, justice, truth and
reconciliation.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
by its President on 29 June 2010
(S/PRST/ZO 1 0/1 1), which included the
contribution of the International Criminal Court,
ad hoc and mixed tribunals, as well as chambers
in national tribunals to the fight against impunity
for the most serious crimes of concern to the
international community. In this regard, the
Council reiterates its previous call on the
importance of State cooperation with these Courts
and Tribunals in accordance with the States'
respective obligations.

"The Security Council reaffirms that the
failure to prosecute persons responsible for acts
of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia, including hostage-taking, negatively
affects the rule of law, and recalls its decision
contained in resolution 2015 (2011) to continue
consideration, as a matter of urgency, without
prejudice to any further steps to ensure that
pirates are held accountable, of the establishment
of specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia and
other States in the region with substantial
international participation and/or support.

"The Security Council considers sanctions
an important tool in the maintenance and
restoration of international peace and security.
The Council reiterates the need to ensure that
sanctions are carefully targeted in support of
clear objectives and designed carefully so as to
minimize possible adverse consequences and
implemented by Member States. The Council
remains committed to ensure that fair and clear
procedures exist for placing individuals and
entities on sanctions lists and for removing them,
as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
high-level meeting on the rule of law at the
national and international levels to be held on
24 September 2012 and notes with appreciation
the intention to extend an invitation to the
President of the Council to participate in the
event.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to provide a follow-up report
within 12 months to consider the effectiveness of
the United Nations system's support to the
promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l2/ 1.

I should like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.

