Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to pay tribute to Special Representative
Edmond Mulet, to whose briefing I listened with great
interest. I commend his commitment at the head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). MINUSTAH, whose personnel work
tirelessly under conditions that continue to be very
difficult, plays a crucial role in Haiti. Mr. Mulet enjoys
the respect and trust of Haitians, and he should have
the full support of the Security Council.

I also listened with interest to the statement made
by Ambassador Merores, Permanent Representative of
Haiti. I assure him of France's commitment to continue
its support for Haiti.

An electoral process has begun in Haiti since our
last meeting on this subject. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report (S/2010/446), it is essential that
the presidential and legislative elections be carried out
in the best conditions possible, so as to provide strong
governance for the country and enable Haitian leaders
to carry out the reconstruction effort. MINUSTAH is
already contributing to the ongoing effort by providing
technical, security and logistical support. We call on
the Haitian authorities to support the smooth conduct
of this process.

In that regard, MINUSTAH continues to play a
crucial role in various areas, including good offices,
maintaining public order, promoting human rights and
strengthening the rule of law, which, more than ever
before, should be at the centre of the Mission's
mandate. This United Nations Mission demonstrates
the complexity of the mandates entrusted to
peacekeeping operations. However, in order to
continue to effectively perform its tasks, MINUSTAH
will need sufficient resources. In particular, we should
ensure that there are always enough police personnel.
That is Vital to ensure the safety and security of
vulnerable groups; I am thinking in particular of
women, whose security must be a priority.

In Haiti, perhaps more than elsewhere given the
circumstances, the success of the United Nations
depends on good coordination of the various actors on
the ground. It is vital that the agencies, funds and
programmes work in a coordinated way in their various
areas, whether they concern democratization,
development or security.

The New York conference in March opened up
prospects. The international community strongly
mobilized and commitments were made. We welcome
the establishment and the work of the Interim Haiti
Recovery Commission, thanks to which clear priorities
can be defined. As the Secretary-General underscores
in his report, it is extremely important that all
commitments be met. The donors, for their part, should
be kept informed of the needs and priorities that have
been identified. We must also continue to give our full
attention to assisting the hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons, who will have to live in camps for
an as yet undetermined time. The more time passes, the
more urgent it becomes to meet their needs, especially
for security reasons.

France is providing Haiti considerable assistance,
with $326 million for the period 2010-2011 and further
technical cooperation efforts in various areas, in
particular education, governance and the police. We are
also committed to strengthening the rule of law,
including by helping to train judges. Moreover, we are
making a large contribution to the aid given by the
European Union, whose representative will shortly
give the details; France associates itself, in advance,
with the statement that he will make.

France is also deeply committed within
MINUSTAH, including through the deployment of
nearly 140 gendarme and police officers, which makes
our country one of the largest contributors of police to
the Mission. We have also provided direct support to
the Haitian National Police and the firefighters, in
particular by sending 110 vehicles. Lastly, we have
deployed, in coordination with MINUSTAH, military
engineering capacity to help with clearing Port-au-
Prince and other urgent activities in that area.

France will continue its commitment to the
Haitian people and Government, in close coordination
with the United Nations. It will do so as part of a
comprehensive effort involving the State, and also
local communities including the French Caribbean
departments, non-governmental organizations and the
Haitian diaspora living in France.
