Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative for his briefing, and
his team for their continuing dedication to this issue.
I also extend a welcome to His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Serbia and Her Excellency the Ambassador
of Kosovo.

I have spent a lot of my career dealing with the
Balkans. I have spent some time in Kosovo and in
Mitrovica, which is in northern Kosovo and a Kosovo
Serb-majority community. It is fair to say that there are
still tensions in the communities, and it is also fair to
say that the communities have not always treated each
other with kindness, respect and friendliness. But I was
sorry to not hear any recognition today, from one of the
speakers, of the events that led us to 1999, to the NATO
intervention and to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
presence of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) , which we are dealing
with today. I heard no contrition or acceptance of the
enormity of the war crimes that were committed on the
ground. Those war crimes have been established by the
international tribunal that the Council set up for that
purpose. I heard no recognition of the events that led
up to the Ahtisaari process on the status of Kosovo and
the events that then followed, or of the attempts by the
Council, as a whole, and by individual members of the
Council, notably the United States and Russia, acting
with the European Union (EU), to try to resolve the
status issue. All of those efforts came to nothing and
remain in abeyance. That is not at all to take away from
the fact that each of the communities in Kosovo could
do more to build a tolerant, inclusive society where
rights are respected across the board. But there is a very
big difference between that point and the description of
how we got where we are.

The situation in Kosovo in 2019 has changed
dramatically since UNMIK entered in 1999. UNMIK
has played an important role, with the help of the
European Union and NATO, in promoting security,
stability and human rights in Kosovo and the
region. Kosovo is no longer a country in conflict,
and it is becoming increasingly integrated into the
international community.

The Council deals with very many important
issues related to international peace and security.
With the agreement we have been able to reach today
on reducing the frequency of UNMIK meetings going
forward, followed by the endorsement of the President
of the Council - and I thank you, Mr. President, for
your role in that - we have taken a step commensurate
with the nature of the issue regarding Kosovo, thereby
enabling the Council to focus its efforts on much more
fierce, intractable and live conflicts. At the same time,
we support a strategic review of the Mission to ensure
that UNMIK's efforts are fully tailored to the situation
on the ground.

As the UNMIK report (S/2019/102) makes clear,
and notwithstanding overall developments in Kosovo,
tensions between Belgrade and Pristina, sadly, rose
over the reporting period. I think it is incumbent
upon all of us to look forward to potential solutions,
and for political leaders in the region, but particularly
in Kosovo and Serbia, to refrain from exacerbating
tensions and divisions.
I mentioned a few minutes ago that Kosovo is not

an acute crisis situation of the sort that the Council,
sadly, has to deal with all too often. Rather, it and
Serbia are fortunate in that the European Union has
offered a dialogue within which they can normalize
their relations and make progress towards integration
into the European Union as equals and as sovereign
nations that respect one another. There are other
conflicts where we have no such prospect of reaching
any sort of agreement along those lines. I would really
like to use this meeting to appeal to the political leaders
in Belgrade and Pristina to recognize the opportunity
that the EU-facilitated dialogue offers them to be able
to resolve their differences and move forward for the
sake of their peoples, their history and their relations
as equal and sovereign neighbours working together for
the prosperity and democracy of Europe. In addition
to that, I look to both parties to cease all provocations,
which increase tensions, and call on them to show the
good faith that the dialogue expects. Progress on the
dialogue is not only Vital for the prosperity, stability
and security of both Kosovo and Serbia and the wider
region, it would also be an important example ofhow, at
a very unpredictable time in world affairs, two former
adversaries could come together and show that a way
forward can be found to mutual benefit.

I want to say that we also welcome the law
mandating the Kosovo State delegation, which passed
its first reading on 2 February. The State delegation,
in the context of the dialogue, will help ensure that a
plurality of voices from across the political spectrum
is able to deliver a deal that the Kosovo Parliament and
the country can accept. And of course, any deal should
be comprehensive, inclusive and contribute to regional
stability and security.

IfI may, I would also like to highlight one aspect of
the Special Representative's report to which the Kosovo
Ambassador alluded, that is, the transition of the
Kosovo Security Force, which the Council discussed
in December (see S/PV.8427). I would like to reiterate
what I said at that time, that the United Kingdom
believes that it is Kosovo's right as an independent,
self-governing State to develop its own armed forces.
Our legal interpretation of resolution 1244 (1999)
is that it does not contain anything that precludes
the future transition of the mandate of the Kosovo
Security Force. I also repeat something else I said in
December, that we look to Kosovo to act responsibly,
transparently and in consultation with NATO allies to
uphold existing commitments to arrangements with the
NATO Kosovo Force.

In closing, I would like to again pay tribute to
Council colleagues who have helped us reach a sensible
and proportionate way forward on the frequency with
which the Council discusses Kosovo, and I would like
to reiterate our thanks to the Special Representative
and his team for their efforts on behalf of the Council.

