Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Let me begin, Sir, by
extending my delegation's appreciation to you for
presiding over this debate and to Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his briefing.

The conflict in the Middle East remains one of
the most pressing issues that the Security Council must
resolutely tackle today. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-
moon has said on various occasions, the Middle East
region is more complex, more fragile and more
dangerous than it has been for a very long time. Such
complexity warrants a decisive and unflagging
response from the United Nations, particularly from
the Security Council and other bodies of the
Organization, and from its leadership. Indonesia has
always been of the View that the United Nations must
remain constantly engaged in the Middle East if peace
is to be won in the region.

In that regard, my delegation appreciates the
commitment of the Secretary-General and his recent
visit to the Middle East, including Syria. We concur
with his observation that solving the Middle East
conflict is both a moral and a strategic necessity. We -
the United Nations, and not just the Council - bear a
moral obligation to bring peace to the region.

Again, because of the magnitude of the challenge,
the United Nations cannot meet it alone. Thus, the
partnership between the United Nations, the European
Union, the United States and Russia within the Quartet
forum remains crucial.

We have high hopes in the Quartet, believing that
the Quartet should continue its efforts, meet regularly
and monitor, through its envoys, developments and
actions taken by the parties concerned. We look
forward to its forthcoming meetings in the region and
encourage the forum to achieve a new, higher level of
commitment towards the realization of sustainable
peace in the region.

My delegation is also hopeful that, with firsthand
information obtained from meetings with various
leaders in the region, the Secretary-General will be
able to inject new vigour into the work of the Quartet.
The Quartet is instrumental in maintaining the
momentum at the international level, but, at the
regional level, efforts towards peace will also require
actors in the region that have an affinity to the issue.
Thus, we commend Saudi Arabia for its important
initiatives, including the Mecca meeting, as well as
other countries in the region for their contribution.

We also have high regard for the role of the Arab
League and commend the Riyadh declaration adopted
at its recent Summit. We believe that the international
community should support the reaffirmation by League
member States, as stipulated in the Declaration, of their
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative.

The Initiative, endorsed in the Road Map, is an
important element that forms the bedrock of the peace
process. It is a home-grown formula aimed at
achieving a genuine and abiding peace in the region -
an initiative which affirms that the countries in the
region take care of the matters affecting them.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, my
delegation reiterates its call for restraint and for
avoidance of any action that could jeopardize
opportunities for peace. We deplore the continued
incursions of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in
Palestinian cities, including Nablus and Jenin, and in
refugee camps. We also deplore the IDF's use of
Palestinian civilians as human shields in door-to-door
searches during those raids. My delegation demands
that Israel cease such actions and respect the human
rights of the Palestinian people and international law.

The continuing practice of the unlawful
construction of the wall in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, in defiance of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice,
is also deplorable. The harmful consequences of that
measure on the Palestinians are obvious. When it
reaches its full length of 703 kilometres, the barrier
will have fully encircled more than 31,000 people.
With 80 per cent of the barrier winding through
Palestinian land, Palestinian communities are
increasingly cantonized and isolated from each other.

On the bright side of current Israeli-Palestinian
relations, we welcome the development of a biweekly
mechanism by which President Abbas and Prime
Minister Olmert consult with one another and discuss
political issues on a regular basis. Their commitment to
doing their utmost to promote peace is commendable.
The agreement reached between Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ismail
Haniyeh on 14 March 2007 on the composition of the

unity Government, and its inauguration on 17 March
2007, is a welcome development. We recognize the
subtleties that both sides had to deal with in achieving
that agreement.

The international community should give the
National Unity Government of Palestine a chance to
work. International assistance provided by donor States
for capacity-building and to promote the efficacy and
effectiveness of the unity Government will be
essential.

A comprehensive solution to the Middle East
conflict should also include the achievement of a
permanent solution to those issues that emerged from
conflicts between Israel and Lebanon as well as
between Israel and Syria.

With reference to Lebanon, my delegation
strongly deplores the continuing violations by Israel of
Lebanese airspace, which are contrary to the letter and
spirit of resolution 1701 (2006). We cannot stress
enough the point that if Israel is really committed to
the cause of peace, it must abide by its obligations
under the rule of law. We remain concerned at the
ongoing political turmoil in Lebanon. In our View,
while the international community is working hard to
ensure peace in the region, the Lebanese people and
their leaders should work diligently towards national
unity and reconciliation. That is a necessary input that
international efforts in the country and in the region
cannot do without. We underline the importance of the
genuine observance of the Taif Accords by all parties
in the region.

On matters related to Syria, it is heartwarming
that Syria's role in peace calculations in the Middle
East is being widely appreciated.

My delegation welcomes President Assad's
willingness to restart negotiations with Israel. We
believe that a solution to the Golan Heights issue on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981) will contribute to the comprehensive settlement
of the Middle East conflict. We also welcome President
Assad's assurances of Syria's cooperation with the
United Nations in all matters relating to peace and
security in the Middle East.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
our commitment to making a constructive contribution
to efforts aimed at promoting peace in the Middle East.
We wish also to reiterate our conviction that the
termination of the Israeli occupation that began in 1967
and the creation of an independent and viable
Palestinian State, alongside a secure and fully
recognized State of Israel, will be fundamental to the
attainment of a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the region.

