Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me at the outset to welcome General
Higino Carneiro and to express our satisfaction at his
presence here today.

Once again, the Security Council is having to meet
to take decisions on the situation in Angola. Once again,
the Security Council is having to face an attitude of

 

defiance on the part of UNITA, which has again failed to
meet its obligations and is impeding the full implementation
of the "Acordos de Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol. Thus, the
Security Council is meeting to send a clear message to the
leaders of UNITA that there should be no doubt of our
resolve to secure absolute compliance with the
commitments undertaken by the Angolan parties in the
context of the process of peace and national reconciliation.

UNITA has indicated that the present situation in
Angola is not conducive to the extension of State
administration to the areas of Andulo, Bailundo, Mungo and
Nharea and that this will not be possible until 30 June. This
is simply unacceptable for Costa Rica and reflects nothing
less than UNITA's flouting of its given word and failure to
comply with its own proposals and, worst of all, it
increases tensions and delays the process of rehabilitation
and reconstruction in Angola.

The draft resolution before us contains a clear and
unequivocal message: the international community is not
prepared to tolerate further vacillation of this kind on the
part of UNITA, and this is the last chance UNITA will be
given.

The sanctions established by the draft resolution are
precisely targeted. For the first time they focus on UNITA's
real interests and seek only to ensure that that group fulfils
its commitments. Moreover, the Security Council has gone
further by giving UNITA the benefit of a further grace
period, until 23 June, to do what it must do. Thus, it has a
temporary warning before the sanctions are enacted. Costa
Rica hopes that, today once and for all, UNITA and Mr.
Savimbi will understand that this is their last opportunity to
comply with the commitments of the "Acordos de Paz" and
the Lusaka Protocol.

My delegation takes this opportunity to pay a tribute
of recognition to the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation of Angola and to President Dos Santos, who
have tangibly demonstrated, time and again, their readiness
to respect their commitment to national reconciliation and
to implement all their obligations under the "Acordos de
Paz" and the Lusaka Protocol. I also take this opportunity
to request General Carneiro to convey this message from
our Government to the leaders of Angola.

I wish to conclude by stating that, in view of all this,
Costa Rica will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
us, in the hope that UNITA will show that it has a sense of
history and the political will required to put an end, at last,
to this protracted conflict which, for almost 20 years, has
shed the blood of the noble and brotherly people of
Angola.

