Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): On behalf of the Pakistan
delegation, I would like to congratulate Kazakhstan on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
for organizing this very important debate in a very
timely way.

Itis almostatruismto saythere canbe no development
without peace and no peace without development. The
situation in Afghanistan starkly illustrates how the
absence of security prevents economic development
and, in turn, how a lack of economic development fuels
and breeds conflict and insecurity. Despite the large
presence of foreign military forces and the huge outlays
of extended assistance, security has deteriorated and
economic growth has been anaemic in Afghanistan. Yet
there is great promise in Afghanistan. It is a strategically
located country, which can act as a bridge between its
multiple neighbours, between South and Central Asia
and between West and East Asia.

Muhammad Iqbal, the poet who first conceived
of Pakistan as an independent State, also described
Afghanistan as the heart of Asia. Presciently, the poet
of the East declared, over a century ago, that if there
is instability in Afghanistan, Asia will be unstable;
while peace in Afghanistan will bring peace and
prosperity to all of Asia. The people of Afghanistan
have paid a heavy price for over four decades of foreign
invasions and bloody civil wars. And so have the
people of Pakistan 4 Afghanistan's closest neighbour.
Indeed, the entire region has been buffeted by the war,
turmoil, terrorism, drugs and instability radiating
from Afghanistan.

We in Pakistan recognize the imposing challenges
that face Afghanistan in realizing economic and social
development. We commend the security and economic
reforms envisaged by the Afghan Government.
Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority for my
Government. We have taken a number of initiatives
to support Afghanistan's economic development. We
have done all we can to improve the transit of Afghan
trade through our ports. We look forward to the day
when transit trade from Central Asia can flow through
Afghanistan and Pakistan, which is the shortest route to
the Arabian Sea. Fifty thousand Afghan students have
studied in my country's universities, and we also offer
3,000 scholarships to our Afghan brothers and sisters.
Pakistan is also committed to several projects - the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline
project and the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade Project 4 which will
contribute to the economic integration of the entire
region. Pakistan has committed $1 billion over the past
decade to various infrastructure, road network and
development projects in Afghanistan.

However, none of ourefforts to supportAfghanistan's
economic development can be successful without the
restoration of peace. Sadly, civil war continues in
Afghanistan. Over 40 per cent of the country is under
insurgent control, contested or ungoverned. Illicit drug
trafficking provides insurgent groups with a steady
financial income estimated at almost $400 million a
year. Indeed, with its safe havens inside the country
and income from the narcotics trade, the insurgency
does not really need any outside assistance or support
centres to sustain itself.

Afghanistan and its partners, especially the United
States, therefore need to address those challenges inside
Afghanistan, rather than shift the onus of ending the
conflict onto others. Those who imagine sanctuaries
outside really need a reality check. And those who
speak of changing mindsets need to look within at their
own record of subversion against my country, as our
capture of an Indian spy has amply demonstrated and
proved beyond any shadow of doubt.

The international community has found time
and again that sustainable peace is achievable only
through a negotiated end to war. The presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/2) the Council adopted this
morning again reiterates that firm consensus of the
global community. After 17 years of war, it is more
than evident that neither the Afghan Government and
its military partners nor the Afghan Taliban are in a
position to impose a military solution on each other.

The continuing resort to military force and
escalation of the conflict without an accompanying
political and diplomatic strategy will not yield a result
different from what we have seen in the past decade and
a half. It will produce more violence and suffering for
the Afghan people. It will not yield a political solution.
And it is not enough to pay lip service to a negotiated
settlement and then do little other than exercise and
execute a strategy of force and coercion under the
delusion that it might work.

We also call on the Taliban to abandon the path of
violence and to join the talks. Both sides need to show
the determination and the commitment to follow a path
of a negotiated settlement.

There is in fact an urgent need to pursue a credible
and sustained peace and reconciliation process in
Afghanistan aimed at finding a negotiated peace.
Pakistan's participation in all regional and international
forums on peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan
is a reflection of my country's commitment and
unflinching support to an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned peace process.

Apart from Afghanistan, it is Pakistan that has the
most to gain from peace in Afghanistan. We continue
to host the largest protracted presence of refugees
anywhere in the world. Approximately 3 million
refugees still reside in my country. My country has
also been a major victim of terrorism and violence
emanating from Afghanistan's strife and wars. We have
fought and are defeating terrorism within Pakistan.
Pakistan's counter-terrorism campaign 4 the largest
in the world, with a 200,000-strong deployed military
force 4 has turned the tide of terrorism in Pakistan.

But our ability to totally eliminate terrorist acts
in Pakistan depends upon the effective control over
our long border with Afghanistan. We have enforced
stringent border management measures on our side of
the border. We look forward to Afghanistan matching
what we have done on their side of the border. We are
also committed to not allow Pakistan's soil to be used
for attacks against any country.

In conclusion, the path to peace and development
in Afghanistan is arduous, but achievable. While the
international community, including Pakistan and
Afghanistan's other neighbours and the Central Asian
States, can help in promoting a peace process and assist
the country with its development agenda, ultimately
the principal responsibility for achieving peace rests
on the Afghans themselves. As far as my country is
concerned, we stand ready and committed to extend
our full cooperation bilaterally and within the various
regional frameworks to promote peace and security
in Afghanistan.

