Mr. Thoresson (Sweden): Allow me, too, to
express our deepest condolences to our Russian friends
and colleagues for the heinous crime committed in
Ankara today.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union.

In my national capacity, I would like to begin
by thanking the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2016/1049), which as usual provides a sound and
comprehensive basis for our discussions today. Let me
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov,
Ambassador Van Bohemen and Ambassador Saikal for
their insightful briefings.

Democratic and peaceful development in
Afghanistan remains a priority for Sweden. We
believe that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), through its work in support of
the Afghan people, continues to play a critical role in
the process of stabilization and in preventing a return to
conflict in Afghanistan. We are particularly pleased to
see the significant attention given to women, peace and
security in the most recent report.

Peaceful and inclusive societies, as well as effective,
accountable and inclusive institutions, are prerequisites
for sustained economic and social development.
We enourage UNAMA's efforts to promote the rule
of law, respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law. Afghanistan has made progress.
However, much remains to be done to consolidate the
gains and to create the basis for a lasting transformation.
Unity and cooperation within the National Unity
Government remain key to the continued development
of Afghanistan.

While the Government's agreement with Hizb-i
Islami (Gulbuddin) is welcome, increased political
dialogue with other insurgent groups is also needed.
Sweden underlines the importance of the full
implementation of the economic and political reforms
pledged by the Government at the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan in October.

The sustained engagement of the countries of the
region also remains essential to Afghanistan's future.
The constructive engagement of regional partners can
create a regional environment that is conducive and
contributes to security and stability in Afghanistan and
in the region more broadly. A peaceful and sustainable
Afghanistan should be in everyone's interest. Sweden
calls on all actors to take responsibility and to work
together towards a sustainable peace.

In 2016, more than a million Afghans returned
from Pakistan and Iran. These people are joining those
internally displaced in facing the challenging Afghan
winter. All actors should support the humanitarian
community's efforts to provide life-saving emergency
assistance to vulnerable Afghan families over the
winter. However, an adequate response plan for
returnees is also required, and we urge the Government
of Afghanistan to work with UNAMA and others to
increase efforts in this regard.

Women's participation in society and in
peacebuilding is crucial if Afghanistan is to lift itself
out of poverty, war and violence. Sweden welcome's
UNAMA's continued efforts to advance Afghan
women's equal and full participation in building peace
and security within their communities and their country.
Excluding half of the population from the peace process
is not only wrong, but has been proven to lead to less
successful and less sustainable peace agreements.

Ensuring that women can fully play their role in
peace and security is a high priority for Sweden. Last
week in Kabul, we conducted dialogue and mediation
training for women from 32 ofthe 34 Afghan provinces.
This training will continue over the course of the
year, with at least two more gatherings. As a member
of the Security Council for 2017 and 2018, Sweden
will work to advance the women, peace and security
agenda on the ground in all country-specific situations
on the Council's agenda, including Afghanistan.
From 1 January, Sweden will co-chair the Council's
informal working group on women, peace and security,
together with Uruguay. We look forward to continued
interactions with UNAMA also within that forum.

In conclusion, Sweden's support for Afghanistan
remains firm. We will continue to work hard for
democratic and peaceful development that benefits all
of Afghanistan's people.
