Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Chinese presidency in the Council for organizing this
open debate.

Terrorism and violent extremism are direct affronts
to what the United Nations stands for. As the main
custodian of the mandate of the Charter of the United
Nations to maintain international peace and security,
the Security Council must continue to counter these
threats in a visible manner.

The tentacles of terrorism continue to grow and
engulf more and more territories and communities. As a
series of barbaric incidents from Paris to Ougadougou,
from Istanbul to Lahore make it evident, no one
nation among us is immune to terrorists' reach. We
may have a different set of readings of the underlying
drivers of terrorism, yet we must all subscribe to
certain fundamental concerns. While going into a
firefighting mode about some immediate challenges,
we must address the larger, accumulated grievances that
terrorists tend to use as staples to increase their ranks.

We also lose focus when we try to find scapegoats
instead of being somewhat self-reflective. This leads to
scare- and hatemongering about others, whose identity
may vary depending on the context. The action of some
aberrant individuals cannot be apportioned to an entire
community or a nation in an indiscriminate fashion.
That kind of generalization leads to further polarization,
disrupting the unity of purpose that is a must to defeat
and degrade terrorists. For us, a terrorist is a terrorist
and does not have any religion, belief or creed. No faith
in the world justifies or condones unwarranted violence
and attacks against innocent civilians in the pretext of
righting any wrong.

Based on this, in Bangladesh, Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina has avowed a zero-tolerance approach
to terrorism and violent extremism in all their forms
and manifestations. Our Government has done much to
dismantle fringe terrorist groups and their offshoots.
We remain vigilant so as to obviate the possibility
of our nationals being recruited as foreign terrorist
fighters in the Middle East and elsewhere. We have
made sure that our territory is not used by any terrorist
entity working against the interest of our neighbour
countries. Bangladesh hasjoined the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund as a pilot country to
strengthen community-based responses against the
spread of violent extremism leading to terrorism.

We remain concerned over the targeted terror
tactics being used by certain banned terrorist outfits,
especially a group of online activists. This outfit
primarily operates through splinter cells, with
indoctrinated individuals working within a disparate
network system. This poses a challenge to investigation
and prosecution, considering our resource constraints.
Matters get further compounded by generally unfounded
claims of involvement of certain international terrorist
groups. Our Government remains firmly committed
to overcoming these threats and challenges and to
preserving the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all citizens within our democratic and pluralist
social fabric.

There are added challenges posed by the growing and
sophisticated use of the Internet by terrorists. Alleged
financial support flows largely through informal
means, including from abroad. Against the backdrop of
our efforts to reduce the digital divide, there remain
loopholes within the system that cyberterrorists can
take advantage of at any time. Perhaps these challenges
are not unique to Bangladesh, but they need to be
addressed with the participation of all relevant domestic
actors and the support of our international partners. In
this context, we appreciate the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Financial
Action Task Force, among others, in strengthening the
capacity of ourjudiciary, law enforcement agencies and
financial institutions, broadly in line with our national
counter-terrorism strategy.

To conclude, we wish to share some thoughts for
the Council's consideration.

First, the Council must remain seized with its
efforts to address the fundamental root causes of
international terrorism, including through facilitating
the resumption of the Middle East peace process
towards its logical conclusion.

Secondly, the Council should - as it has done
today - periodically take stock of its contribution
to a holistic and balanced implementation of the four
pillars of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
further calibrate its response in light of the strengths
and gaps identified.

Thirdly, we expect the Council to provide
continued guidance to the concerned counter-terrorism
committees and expert panels under its remit to conduct
their work in regular consultation with the wider
membership and to effectively contribute to needs-
based capacity-building at national and regional levels.

Fourthly, it is crucial for the Council to make an
objective assessment of terrorist threats and linkages
based on evidence and to discourage reporting or
analyses that are not necessarily backed by a sufficient
understanding of the realities on the ground.

Fifthly and lastly, the Council must take an informed
and cautious approach in mandating peacekeeping
missions with counter-terrorism operations for which
the troops deployed on the ground are generally not
equipped.

We look forward to continuing this dialogue with
all Members, including during the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy review upcoming in June.

