Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): The Polish delegation
cannot but express its concern at the additional incidents
that have occurred since the adoption of resolution 1115
(1997), in which the Iraqi authorities effectively denied the
Special Commission (UNSCOM) access to sites designated
for inspection or otherwise interfered in its operations
undertaken in accordance with its mandate. These incidents
have not allowed the Special Commission to advise the
Council that Iraq is in substantial compliance with the
obligations set out in resolution 1115 (1997).

The Iraqi actions reported by UNSCOM. violate the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Under the
provisions of those resolutions, Iraq is obliged, among other
things, to allow the UNSCOM. inspection teams immediate
and unrestricted access to all sites they choose for
inspection.

Let me repeat what my delegation has been declaring
over and over again. We would welcome the speediest
possible lifting of sanctions imposed on Iraq. This is why
we attach importance to the arduous progress made by
UNSCOM. towards the elimination of Iraq's programmes of
weapons of mass destruction. This is also why we believe
that Iraq should be reminded that its cooperation with
UNSCOM. is one of the basic conditions which must be
fulfilled for the process of lifting of sanctions to begin.

The draft resolution before us, based on the logic of
resolution 1115 (1997), which was unanimously adopted by
this Council in June, clearly conveys this message. It also
sends an appropriately strong signal - necessarily stronger
than the one contained in the June resolution - that the
Security Council is committed to ensuring that the Special
Commission completes its mandate.

The Polish delegation expresses its earnest hope that
the draft resolution submitted to the Council, if adopted,
will have its intended effect and that the Iraqi authorities
will desist from actions which prevent the Commission
from carrying out its responsibilities. We remain
concerned that such actions can only contribute to a
regrettable delay in the fulfilment of the UNSCOM
mandate, with all its detrimental consequences to the Iraqi
people.

For the reasons I have just stated, the Polish
delegation has co-sponsored the draft resolution before the
Council.

