Mr. Ali Adoum (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings to
the Council, and Ijoin previous speakers in commending
the work of the ad hoc Tribunals, whose creation is a
significant milestone in international relations that has
paved the way for a new era in international criminal
justice for serious violations of international human
rights and crimes against humanity and in which they
have made a contribution to international jurisprudence.

The Victims of ethnic cleansing, genocide and other
serious crimes have found their greatest support in
them, however limited the number of cases may have
been. Today the international community's expectations
of justice are equal to the crimes perpetrated around
the world, particularly on civilian populations. The
impunity currently enjoyed by the perpetrators of
crimes in South Sudan, Syria, the Central African
Republic, Somalia and Libya should not undermine
those expectations or be interpreted as an admission
of powerlessness on the part of the international
community, but rather should be seen as a sign that,
more than ever, we must unite in order to find more
effective ways of combating it.

Africa, where the worst of these atrocities are
committed today, has an enormous task before it if it is
to enjoy the benefits of peace and security without which
overcoming its underdevelopment would be impossible.
To achieve that, Africa has to be able to show that no
crime committed on its soil shall go unpunished by
making the ideal of justice its own, particularly for the
generations dedicated to the demon of war. But there is
a price to pay for justice, which should not be a reason
to renounce it. The Special Court for Sierra Leone,
created in 2002 and intended to last three years, did not
truly accomplish its mission until 2013, long after the
duration originally envisaged and having exceeded its
initial budget four times over.

While the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) approaches the end of its mandate,
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), on the other hand, will be unable to close
its doors according to schedule owing to various
judgements and arrests still under way, some of which
will not be resolved until 2015 or 2017. That is clearly a
setback to the established completion strategy. The fact
that some principal perpetrators were not arrested until
2011 and the complexity of some cases explains most of
these delays.

Apart from these difficulties, there have been some
achievements since the last report, in December 2013
(S/2013/363), both in the framework of proceedings
and in the execution of the completion strategy. New
judgements and arrests have been made. The archives
are being transferred. External relations have improved
thanks to efforts to promote openness. Efficient use of
staff, the activities of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals and follow-up on cases both at
trial and on appeal have resulted in gains both in time
and means.

Furthermore, the transfer of cases and functions
to national jurisdictions has gone smoothly, and the
jurisdictions of the countries of the former Yugoslavia
have cooperated well with the ICTY in trying mid-level
and lower-level accused persons, except in some cases
such as in Bosnia and Herzegovina. These jurisdictions
continue to benefit from the support of the ICTY,
particularly in strengthening their capability for trying
international crimes. However, many questions are still
hanging, chief among them the delays in meeting the
completion strategy deadline.

Furthermore, the issues of witness protection
and delivering support to the victims remain a major
concern. Persons who have been acquitted or who
have served out their punishment for the genocide in
Rwanda have been unable to find countries willing to
host them, and it is Vital that we find a suitable solution
to such enduring problems. It is deeply regrettable that
the nine persons wanted by the ICTR have remained
at large despite the search efforts of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and the
Tribunal itself. This situation emphasizes how weak the
cooperation of States has been, a fact highlighted by
most of today's speakers, particularly those in the areas
of the Great Lakes region and southern Africa, where
the search has been focused. The search for the three
principal fugitives should receive special attention
from the United Nations and the entire international
community so that nobody, anywhere, suspected of
genocide has the chance to find asylum.

The activities promoting awareness and information
for the public on the role of the International Criminal
Tribunals and international criminal law are very
important, as much for ensuring that memories are kept
alive as that justice is delivered to the Victims, but the
lack of financing threatens to put obstacles in the way
of preserving these gains.

There are many difficulties on the road to completion
of the ICTY's mission, but they should never undermine
the hopes that have been born of international justice
and the role it can play in maintaining international
peace and security. On the other hand, the only case
currently active in the ICTR will not be finished until
2015. The Tribunal should therefore take all necessary
steps to complete its work on schedule, while taking
into consideration the comments of the Rwandan
Government.

