Mr. Wax (Israel): We welcome the convening ofthis
important meeting and would like to thank Secretary-
General Guterres and African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security Chergui for their briefings
this morning.

The maintenance of international peace and security
is the foremost reason for which the United Nations
was created, and traditionally, the most instrumental
tool that the United Nations has to fulfil that goal is
peacekeeping operations, most of which are located
on the African continent. Peacekeeping operations in
Africa have faced unprecedented challenges in recent
years, as they are increasingly targeted by armed
groups whose attacks are also steadily increasing in
complexity and intent. Strengthening those operations
in the most immediate future requires enhancing the
safety and security of peacekeepers, as highlighted in
the report authored by former United Nations Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. In the long run, that must go
hand in hand with development efforts, support for the
political process and humanitarian assistance, all of
which are far more effective when done in cooperation
with regional organizations, such as the African Union,
which can work as a multiplier for the efforts of the
United Nations.
If we wish to ensure that peacekeeping remains
sustainable, we must adjust our mindsets to match
the realities on the ground. We must recognize that
wearing a blue helmet no longer guarantees protection.
Last year proved to be the deadliest year in decades
for United Nations peacekeepers, with 61 fatalities due
to malicious acts, all of which were in Africa. While
we are encouraged to see a much lower number of
casualties so far this year, the tragic incident this week
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which sadly
took the lives of eight United Nations peacekeepers,
reminds us that there is still much work to be done, and
we wish to express our condolences to the families of
those peacekeepers.

Israel is committed to strengthening peacekeeping
operations in Africa and enhancing their protection.
We have expanded our partnership with the United
Nations to improve camp security, and we are
providing the training and capabilities necessary to
fulfil peacekeeping mandates. Israel is determined to
invest in African peace and security and has increased
its support in recent years for the development of the
continent, which goes hand in hand with supporting
peacekeeping in the region. We are encouraged by
the recent developments in the Horn of Africa, which
exemplify how peace and stability can be achieved.
However, as many delegations have stated here today,
we also agree that we must be respectful of Africa's
leading role in resolving its own security issues. In
that regard, utilizing United Nations partnerships
with regional organizations and supporting their
peacekeeping activities, as stated in the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, should be an important part of our collective
efforts in the region.

Africa is blessed with a great resource, which is its
people - men and woman who, together and supported
by the international community, must lead the continent
out of conflict. Many of those men and woman serve
bravely in peacekeeping missions in the region and
dedicate their lives to the pursuit of peace. Israel is
actively engaged in lending knowledge, expertise and
training to those peacekeepers and is working closely
with the Medical Services Division and the Department
of Field Support to improve the standard of medical
care in peacekeeping by facilitating life-saving first-aid
training, medical field training, medical evacuation and

standards of health care in hospitals. We look forward
to continuing our partnerships with the relevant United
Nations departments, as well as offering our expertise
in medical training to troop-contributing countries,
especially those serving on the African continent

Last but not least, allow me to convey Israel's strong
support for the Secretary-General's zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and sexual harassment.
We are encouraged by the efforts made so far to combat
those phenomena, both at Headquarters and in the
field, but much more still needs to be done. The efforts
to strengthen peacekeeping operations in Africa and
empower the continent to strive for peace are inherently
weakened by such incidents. The United Nations must
be trusted not to harm the local populations it is meant
to protect; otherwise, its ability to be truly effective is
severely compromised.

Israel has a profound understanding of the need for
peacekeeping operations that work effectively and fulfil
their mandates. We hope that we can all work together
to strive for those goals, and we thank the peacekeepers
for their important work and dedication to the cause
of peace.

