Ms. Miiller (Germany): We welcome the
initiative of the Council to hold a meeting on the Sudan
here in the region, and we welcome also the fact that
the Council, on this very special occasion, has adopted
this resolution.

The main aim of our meeting in Nairobi, as well
as that of this resolution, is to support the Sudanese
peace talks taking place right here in the city. We want
to encourage the parties to come to a conclusion and
sign a comprehensive peace agreement as soon as
possible, at least before the end of this year. I am glad
to say that all Council members agree on this point.

The successful conclusion of the Naivasha peace
talks between the Government of the Sudan and the
SPLM. would not only end one of Africa's oldest and
bloodiest conflicts; it could also contribute to solving
the other conflicts that continue to plague the Sudan
and its people.

We are convinced, however, that these other
conflicts, most prominently the one in Darfur, have to
be addressed even as a great deal of attention is -
rightly - focused on helping along the Naivasha talks.
But if those other conflicts are not solved, there is no
chance for a durable peace in the Sudan.

In our view, it is important, therefore, to remind
both sides in the Darfur conflict of their
responsibilities to respect the ceasefire and human
rights. We need to remind them now - not in a few
weeks, when another few thousand people might have
been killed or died as a consequence of displacement in
Darfur.

Developments in October have, unfortunately,
demonstrated that, instead of improving, security and
humanitarian problems in Darfur have deteriorated and
put even more lives in danger. Civilians in Darfur
continue to be attacked, killed or raped. Refugees have
been forcefully relocated by the Sudanese parties.

We welcome the signing of the Abuja
agreements. The international community will closely
monitor the implementation of those agreements by the
parties to the conflict.

In accordance with the resolution we have just
adopted, Germany considers it imperative to stop
human rights violations also in Darfur. All parties to
the conflict have to implement their obligations. The
rebel parties must respect the ceasefire agreement and
immediately cease attacks against civilians and human
rights organizations. The Sudanese Government has to
fulfil the obligations it once again signed in Abuja,
including those concerning the Janjaweed militia.

The Sudanese Government must also take
decisive steps to end the state of impunity which is still
prevailing in Darfur. Failure to do so would necessitate
a firm response by the international community. Again,
ending impunity is vital for peaceful development in
Darfur. That is why the Commission of Inquiry is
mandated to identify perpetrators of human rights
violations, with a view to ensuring that those
responsible are held accountable.

Germany considers the ongoing work of the
Commission of Inquiry to be of the utmost importance
and urges the Sudanese Government and all the parties
to support the work of the Commission.

We know that all the conflicts in the Sudan are
very complex. We know also that they have a lot in
common, and therefore it is hard to imagine that there
could be peace in one part of the country while in other
parts of the Sudan human rights violations continue to
occur. Consequently, we very much appreciate the fact
that all Council members agreed to address both
conflicts in the present resolution. That sends a clear
message that the international community is prepared
to assist all parties to the conflict in the Sudan to build
a sustainable peace and a comprehensive political
solution. It reminds them that progress achieved in one
part of the Sudan would be lost if suffering in other
parts were allowed to continue. In particular, this is a
signal that the international community will not stand
idle if human rights violations and atrocities in Darfur
continue.

