Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
French presidency for organizing today's extremely
important meeting on the serious situation in and
around Gaza. Since this is my first formal statement to
the Council during the new term, I pledge on this
occasion Japan's commitment to promoting global
peace and security through the efficient and effective
work of the Council.

Japan is deeply grateful to the Secretary-General
for his statement today, which is extremely useful in
addressing the serious security and humanitarian
situation on the ground and for guiding our course of
action. The participation of President Abbas, Secretary-
General Amre Moussa of the League of Arab States
and so many ministerial representatives in today's
meeting clearly demonstrates the gravity and urgency
of the issue at hand.

Japan is deeply concerned about the deteriorating
situation in and around the Gaza Strip. We are
particularly concerned that Israeli ground troops
operations are continuing in the Gaza Strip, despite
urgent calls from the international community for a
ceasefire. It is regrettable that there are so many
Palestinian civilian casualties every day. At the same
time, Japan deplores the rocket attacks against Israel
from the Gaza Strip that preceded current events and
are still continuing, causing serious harm to civilian
life in southern Israel.

We must make every effort urgently to achieve an
effective ceasefire to give assurance of calm in the
area. A ceasefire can be effective only when it is
immediate, permanent and fully respected. The cycle of
violence must come to an end and further increases in
civilian casualties must be prevented. To that end,
Japan calls on Israel to exercise the utmost self-
restraint. Foreign Minister Nakasone has spoken with
Foreign Minister Livni, and Prime Minister Aso spoke
with Prime Minister Olmert, calling for an immediate
ceasefire. At the same time, Japan strongly calls on
Palestinian militants and Hamas to stop attacks from
the Gaza Strip against Israel.

Japan appreciates and strongly supports the
regional and international intermediary efforts by
concerned countries to achieve the immediate cessation
of violence - most notably, the efforts on the part of
President Mubarak of Egypt, the Prime Minister of
Turkey, President Sarkozy of France and other political
leaders, including those of the European Union, the
United States and Russia. We also appreciate the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy
and representatives. We very much hope that these
efforts will bear fruit very soon.

We also need to address urgently the dire
humanitarian situation. Japan sympathizes deeply with
the innocent civilians who are suffering in Gaza. Prime
Minister Aso requested Prime Minister Olmert to take
necessary measures to allow humanitarian supplies into
Gaza. On 3 January, Prime Minister Aso called
President Abbas to express his full support for the
President and to convey Japan's condolences to the
Palestinian victims. We support Palestinian unity under
the leadership of President Abbas.

The people in Gaza require immediate
humanitarian assistance, and Japan will provide $10
million in aid, of which $3 million will be provided
immediately through the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
All necessary humanitarian and economic aid should

be allowed to go unhindered through the crossings. The
crossings into Gaza need to be reopened, under
legitimate control, in order to allow necessary supplies
to reach the population in need and to provide medical
treatment for the injured. In opening the crossings, we
are concerned about the smuggling of arms into Gaza,
which undermines the safety of crossings as well as the
security of both Palestinian and Israeli civilians.
Effective measures need to be taken to prevent such
illegal smuggling of weapons.

Japan believes that it is important for the Security
Council to address these serious issues and forge a
unified voice urgently. Japan is committed to playing a
constructive role in resolving the situation speedily.

Peace and stability will be attained not through
violence, but through political and diplomatic means.
We fully support the principles laid out in Security
Council resolution 1850 (2008). A lasting peace will
only be achieved through an enduring commitment to
mutual recognition, freedom from violence, incitement
and terror, and the two-State solution, building upon
previous agreements and obligations. We must
continue to encourage the moderate forces that seek
peace.

Japan, along with others in the international
community, stands ready to support the parties in their
efforts to achieve peace. We sincerely hope that the
political process will soon again be on track to realize
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

