Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We welcome The
Honourable Justice Dennis Byron, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
and The Honourable Justice Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We also welcome Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Prosecutor of the ICTY, and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the ICTR. We thank
them for their briefings, and we thank them and the
staffs of the Tribunals for their good work.

Uganda attaches great importance to the delivery
of justice and the fight against impunity. Our interest in
the delivery of international criminal justice continues
to be manifested in various ways. Uganda has
collaborated closely with the two Tribunals, and also
with the International Criminal Court. The arrest of
Nizeyimana in Kampala last year testifies to that. The
recent hosting in Kampala of the Review Conference
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is further evidence of our keen interest in ending
impunity.

Resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) call on
the Tribunals to take all possible measures to complete
all trials, and they stress the importance of
implementing the completion strategies. We commend
the Tribunals for their work towards completion in a
proper way that would not undermine efforts against
impunity. We welcome the strategy for the completion
of remaining cases. In that regard, we welcome the
holding of 10 simultaneous trials at the ICTY, which
has meant that there are no cases at the pre-trial stage.

However, we now recognize that the completion
strategies themselves raise challenges of retaining staff
to do the job. We have heard that, as the completion
dates have drawn near, the depletion of some of the
best staff has continued. We are concerned by the high
turnover of highly qualified and essential staff as the
Tribunals near the end of their mandates. There is a
need to implement measures to assist in the retention of
staff at this critical stage.

Uganda supports a clear and unequivocal
statement by this Council in support of the retention of
staff by the Tribunals. Uganda also supports the request
to grant an extension of the judges' terms after
December 2014 in order to enable them to complete the
pending trials and appeals.

We welcome the initiatives undertaken to ensure
that the professional staff of the Tribunals is considered
alongside internal candidates at the 30-day mark for
vacancies within the Secretariat. The Secretariat should
endeavour to ensure that the right of long-serving staff
to conversion is protected.

It is necessary to address the issue of the
selection of candidates for the positions of President,
Vice-President and Presiding Judge of a Trial Chamber
once the terms of the current incumbents are completed
and the judges have been redeployed to their previous
Chamber. My delegation supports the proposal by the
Tribunals for the appointment of currently serving ad
litem judges as permanent judges or amending the
statute so as to make ad litem judges eligible to serve
as President or Presiding Judge of a Trial Chamber.
Uganda also supports the request for the creation of a
new roster of ad litem judges in order to alleviate the
additional workload that cannot be covered by the
serving judges.

We also note with concern the inequality in
emoluments between the permanent and ad litem
judges. The principle of equal payment for an equal
amount of work must be upheld. We therefore welcome
General Assembly resolution 64/261 adopted on
29 March, which decided that the matter should be
addressed with priority at the sixty-fifth session.

We welcome the outreach programme being
undertaken by the tribunals to raise awareness and
build capacity. Activities such as the awareness
programme of the ICTR targeting the young people of
the region on the role of the Tribunal in promoting
international justice are important. We also welcome
the efforts of the ICTY in assisting national judiciaries
of the region in securing capacity to provide education
on, investigate and prosecute war crimes and cases.

Finally, I wish to reiterate Uganda's support for
the ICTY and ICTR because we attach great
importance to their work in the delivery of justice and
the fight against impunity. We call on Member States
and the international community to support them in
ensuring a smooth and proper completion of their
mandates.

