Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Before
I begin my statement, I should like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Mr. Jan
Petersen, and to express once again to him my
country's support for the Norwegian presidency of the
Security Council. Mexico is confident that Norway's
enlightened and committed foreign policy will
successfully guide the work of this body. I also thank
you, Mr. Minister, for your words of tribute to
Mexico's presidency of the Security Council during the
month of February.

Mexico would like also to join those delegations
that have praised the work done by Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch as High Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also welcome Lord Ashdown, who
shortly will assume the office of High Representative.
In our view, the work of the High Representative is
vital in coordinating the efforts of the institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina with those of the international
community. Mexico therefore thanks Mr. Petritsch for
his efforts and dedication.

For a number of years now, Mexico has been
following with particular attention the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and has reviewed with interest
the conclusions of the Peace Implementation Council
with regard to a follow-up to the International Police
Task Force and to the coordination of international
efforts.

We look forward with interest to the holding of
general elections on 5 October this year. We encourage
the political leaders of the country to reach agreement
by the middle of this month on the enactment of the
Constituent Peoples' Decision. We take note of the
acceptance by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council of the European Union's offer
to provide a police mission, starting 1 January 2003,
which would replace the International Police Task
Force.

In supporting the draft resolution before us,
Mexico appeals to the principal political actors in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to come up with solutions that
would be inclusive of minorities, democratic and
respectful of human rights, in order to lay the
groundwork for a future of harmonious coexistence.

