The President: It is good to see Council
colleagues back in New York, looking happy and fully
recharged.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Italy, Malaysia, Pakistan, the
Republic of Korea, Spain and Turkey, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Farhddi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reservedfor them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Arnault to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/525, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I
now give him the floor.


