The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation supported the resolution
before the Security Council for its consideration. We
would like to reiterate our unswerving commitment to the
full implementation of the mandate given the United
Nations Special Commission by the Security Council.
Russia staunchly advocates Iraq's fulfilling of its
obligations deriving from the relevant resolutions of the
Council.

At the same time, the Security Council must be
guided in its activities by the need quickly to achieve the
objectives set forth in these resolutions. In this context,
we also consider the situation relating to the recent
incidents involving inspections by the Special
Commission, which was denied access to sites of concern
to it. In this connection, it was extremely important that
the Security Council should state its position clearly and
with one voice. Agreements were arrived at between the
Special Commission and Iraq on the practical modalities
for carrying out inspections, and these agreements must
be fully implemented. All members of the Council
unambiguously reiterated their commitment to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence
of Iraq.

We note that, during work on the draft resolution,
account was taken of virtually all the concerns of all
delegations and the specific proposals made by them. As
a result, the resolution does not set out a one-sided
approach, but rather a balanced reaction that reflects both
the very core of the problem and the broad range of
 

views of the members of the Security Council. Today, the
Security Council has reached consensus. This consensus is
indeed an appropriate response to the situation that
developed with respect to the inspections. It sends a clear
signal of the Council's support for the work of the Special
Commission as it implements its mandate. This consensus
was not based on the logic of punishment but forms part of
the Council's main thrust: to conclude this disarmament
issue as quickly as possible and to achieve a lasting post-
conflict settlement in the Persian Gulf on the basis of
resolution 687 (1991).

I new resume my Functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.40 1).m.
