Mr. Petersen (Denmark): I have the honour
of making this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries: Finland, Iceland, Sweden, Norway and my
own country, Denmark.

First, let me reiterate the full support of the Nordic
countries for the 2007 Paris Commitments and Paris
Principles and express the appreciation of our countries
for the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) and the statement made by
the Special Representative, Ms. Gamba, this morning.

The Nordic countries strongly condemn the
recruitment and use of children by any party to conflict.
Non-State armed groups, including violent extremist
groups, use children to perpetrate acts of violence. All
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
must be considered primarily as victims. At the same
time, we must not forget the children who travel to and
return from conflicts with their families, in addition to
children born in the context of conflict.

Preventing and combating the radicalization of
children is an issue that concerns us all. Although
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is now losing
territory, the threat of that group's ideology and
propaganda remains. As part of the aftermath, we will
continue to face a new generation born in conflict or
radicalized. That is only one example, and it raises
a number of challenges that we need to address. We
know that kinship, forced recruitment, slavery, lack of
education, and online and offline propaganda are all
important explanatory factors for radicalization and
violent extremism.

We note that some military responses against
non-State armed groups perpetrating violent
extremism have raised challenges with regard to the
protection of children. In some cases, State-allied
militia and vigilante groups have been mobilized and
used children in support roles or even as combatants.
When responding to violent extremism, Member States
should ensure that their rules of engagement take into
account that children may be living in areas under the
control of armed groups or may be used on the front
lines following their abduction or recruitment.

We need to deal with this problem urgently. We
need a long-term perspective to prevent more children
from being recruited and used by non-State armed
groups, including violent extremist groups. We need
to address all forms of violent extremism through
a variety of preventive and long-term international,
national and local measures. Let me stress that such
measures must always be in conformity with applicable
international law, including human rights law and rule
of law principles.

Jordan and Norway recently launched the Group of
Friends of Preventing Violent Extremism, which is now
active in the United Nations. The aim of the Group is
to seek balanced implementation of the four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
with appropriate attention to all of its pillars. That
initiative has the full support and participation of the
Nordic countries.

On behalf of the Nordic Countries, please allow
me to emphasize six challenges facing the international
community in addressing this issue.

First, we need to strengthen our efforts to provide
high-quality education to children in times of conflict.
Access to safe schools and education is a human right
and a precondition for development. We need to provide
children with the tools necessary to develop critical

thinking, a vital part of preventing radicalization and
violent extremism.

Secondly, it is imperative that we share best
practices and increase cooperation on all levels. We must
support and learn from non-governmental stakeholders,
such as civil society, women's organizations, youth
organizations, scholars and practitioners, in order to
adapt to new challenges.

Thirdly, we need to work together with private
entities, establish good global solutions to prevent the
proliferation of online propaganda material and the
recruitment of children to engage in violent extremism.
We need to identify and stop online radicalizers who
target our Children and our youth.

Fourthly, we must ensure a comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. More emphasis
on eliminating conditions conducive to terrorism and
on the respect for human rights and the rule of law
is necessary, as are efforts across the United Nations
system to ensure the prevention of violent extremism.

Fifthly, child protection concerns must be included
in all efforts to end conflicts. That includes United
Nations missions, where training in child protection for
civilian and military personnel should be a key priority.
The role of child-protection advisors must be protected.

Sixthly and finally, but perhaps most urgently, we
need to ensure that traumatized children and children
affected by radicalization receive the attention they
need. We need to tailor specific programmes for the
reintegration of such children into society, including
psychosocial support. We must ensure that children
are protected and treated as children and in accordance
with juvenile justice systems.

