Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait) (interpretation from Arabic): First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. I am convinced that you shall
lead the work of this Council to success. I would also like
to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of Kenya, for
leading the work of the Council last month. I would like
to commend him on the exceptional manner in which he
.led the work of the Council.

We are meeting here in the Council today to discuss
one of the most serious measures adopted by the Israeli
Government in the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. Contrary to measures that we had
hoped would bring us closer to peace and stability, we
now find ourselves faced with regressive steps that
destroy peace and shake confidence rather than
consolidate it, dashing our spirits instead of raising them.
Measures such as those being adopted by the Israeli
Government as part of an ongoing policy are designed to
thwart all the efforts now being made for peace. This
Government does not realize that, in the final analysis,
these policies will lead to confrontation, Violence,
instability and a resumption of tension, whereas all
peoples in the region want to see such tensions disappear.
We believe that this cycle of violence will in fact negate
the very concept of security as understood by the Israeli
Government.
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

My Government has followed with great concern the
latest decision of the Israeli Government to build 6,500
housing units in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Jabal
Abu Ghneim. This decision is part and parcel of a series of
steps that compel us to call into question the very intentions
of Israel with regard to Al~Quds Al-Sharif.

The Arab and Muslim world, for its part, has» also
followed Israel's illegal measures, which include the plan
to create a settlement in the Ras al-Amud section within the
original borders of the municipality of East Jerusalem; the
continued opening of the tunnel under Haram al-Sharif, in
spite of the adoption of Security Council resolution 1073
(1996); the Israeli authorities' ongoing deprival of the
Palestinian inhabitants of the city of their right of residence;
and the Israeli authorities' isolation of the city of East
Jerusalem and the West Bank. Kuwait reaffirms here that
this Israeli plan_violates the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, the Hague Rules of 1907 and all Security Council
resolutions on Al-Quds. This Israeli plan is also a serious
violation of the Declaration of Principles signed by the
Israeli Government and the Palestine Liberation
Organization in 1993.

Today, quite obviously, the Israeli Government would
like to impose more faits accomplis. It wishes to make
these facts reality on the ground in order to drive out the
population of the city and to create settlements within and
outside the city before negotiating its final status. This only
confirms that the Israeli policies are the result not of
arbitrary measures or spontaneous decisions, but of a
calculated plan to increase the authority of the new Israeli
Government and the adoption by that Government of a
policy of expansion that violates all conventions and
international norms. This policy also represents the
culmination of the new strategy of the Israeli Government
to abrogate all these agreements, to shirk its commitments

' and to obviate the principle of land for peace. The policy
of expansion at all costs by the Israeli Government
threatens to bring the region to the brink of destruction and
violence.

The Arab and Muslim world, of course, can only
condemn such violations and demands that the Israeli
Government put an end to the violation of Arab rights
under the pretext of security. We demand that the Israeli
Government also try to find ways to support the peace
process. We call on it to respect the principles on which the
process was based in 1991 in Madrid so that it can resume
on all its tracks, especially the Syrian and Lebanese tracks,
and on the basis of the principle of land for peace. In this
way will the Middle East become a region of security and
peace for all time.
In conclusion, Kuwait appeals to this body to take a
speedy decision to prevent Israel from implementing such
a plan. We call upon the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities to preserve the sacred nature of Al-Quds
and urge it to uphold international legality. This Council
cannot disappoint the hopes of peoples for lasting peace
simply because some people do not respect international
rule of law.

