At the outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her comprehensive briefing. Indonesia is deeply concerned about the lack of progress in the country as demonstrated in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/944). Sadly, the people of Haiti continue to pay the price for the instability and insecurity, confronting growing inflation, poverty and hunger. On that note, I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the Council. First, political stability is a key factor, and the political polarization and impasse in Haiti can only make the situation worse. To that end, I reiterate my call to all stakeholders to set their differences aside and work together to find common ground through national dialogue towards a free, fair and successful election. Once again, the responsibility is on the Haitian authorities, who have the obligation to provide a peaceful and stable environment. It is their duty to set the table for progress. Secondly, with regard to the security situation and community violence, Indonesia commends the continued efforts of the National Commission for Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration in consolidating security as the leading national institution on community violence reduction. Nonetheless, we are concerned that, despite several important developments, major challenges persist in the police, justice and corrections sectors. In that regard, we urge the Haitian authorities to make more meaningful efforts to uphold the rule of law and combat corruption and impunity, especially during the pandemic. Gang-related criminal activities are also on the rise. This may be a signal that the situation is getting even more out of control, and bold action needs to be taken. Thirdly, with regard to the economic and social challenges, as I previously mentioned, the people of Haiti are suffering the most. The political havoc is driving prosperity away from them. The dire economic and social challenges need to be addressed accordingly, even as a political solution is being pursued. A robust recovery effort will be required to reverse the negative trends and reinvigorate the economy. On this note, my delegation encourages the Haitian authorities to support the United Nations-supported socioeconomic impact assessment and recovery plan. In conclusion, we support the Secretary-General in urging the Haitian authorities to establish a fully functional provisional electoral council to ensure free, fair and transparent elections that will lend legitimacy to the political system and strengthen State institutions and good governance. Indonesia commends the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, the United Nations country team and United Nations personnel on the ground for their remarkable dedication to assisting the Haitian people in the pursuit of their right to live in peace and stability. The situation is critical. International support is needed more than ever, but the Haitian authorities must take the lead.
