Mr. Majoor (Netherlands): The Netherlands fully
aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Slovenia on behalf of the European
Union. I would like to thank the Security Council
presidency, Panama, for organizing this open debate on
the important subject of children and armed conflict.

With the integrity of our children, the integrity of
this Organization and everything it stands for is at
stake. In children we see our future, and in their
suffering during armed conflict we see the dark side of
mankind. To our shame, children continue to be the
primary victims of grave human rights violations in
dozens of conflicts around the world. The latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2007/757) is a sad
testimony to that reality. The Netherlands strongly
supports the valuable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and that of
the Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict.

We need concerted efforts at all levels. That
requires political will. The Netherlands funds a number
of projects targeting children in armed conflicts. We
are supporting a multi-year UNICEF project in Uganda
that aims to provide vocational training in camps for
children caught up in the conflict. The Netherlands
contributes a total of €1.3 million to that project. We
are also a major bilateral donor of the World Bank
Multi-country Demobilization and Reintegration
Programme in the Great Lakes region, through which
many child soldiers have been demobilized and
reintegrated.

Abuse truly stops only when perpetrators have
been brought to justice. Anything short of that means a
continuation of the violation of the victims' integrity.
That is why ending impunity is a critical element in
ending violations and abuses against children. Member
States concerned should take effective action to bring
to justice individuals responsible for violations of
children's rights. Those who recruit or use child
soldiers; those who rape or commit other grave sexual
violence against children - they all should all be held
to account.

We therefore stress the role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other tribunals in the
investigation and prosecution of such crimes that fall
within their jurisdiction. When national systems of
justice fail, either because of unwillingness or inability
to genuinely prosecute such violations against children
in armed conflict, the situation should be referred to
the ICC. The recent arrest by the ICC of Mathieu
Ngudjolo Chui, former commander of the Fronts des
Nationalistes et Integrationnistes of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a notable example. It shows
how the ICC and the Congolese national authorities
indeed cooperate in the fight against impunity for such
crimes.

Progress has been made. The issue of children
and armed conflict is higher on the agenda than it has
been in the past. We commend the progress achieved
by the Security Council, but there is a need for further
commitment and action. For example, the current scope
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism should be
reviewed. Child soldiers are the focus of much
international concern, and rightly so, but they
constitute a relatively small share of affected children.
The Security Council should give equal consideration
to all categories of grave violations against children in
armed conflict and should include in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's reports a comprehensive listing of
parties to armed conflict responsible for any of these
grave violations. An initial expansion of the trigger
mechanisms could include the crime of rape and other
grave sexual violence against children. There are
several reasons for this. Like the recruitment and use of
child soldiers, rape and other sexual violence are
intentional acts committed by individual perpetrators.
Parties to armed conflict can take action to hold such
perpetrators accountable for their actions. Progress in
ending such violations can be measured, allowing for
de-listing: an incentive for change. But more
important, we cannot remain silent in the face of such
hideous acts. What more reason do we need?

We may be encouraged by our efforts so far, but
we should remain outraged at the continuing violence
against children in armed conflict. There is no room for
complacency or even a business-as-usual approach. We
urge the Security Council to continue to address this
issue and to fill existing protection gaps. If the political
will to do so is to be found anywhere, it should be here
at the core of the United Nations, in the Security
Council.

