Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Inzko for
his report (S/2017/922, annex) and his briefing. He has
the full and continuous support of the United Kingdom.

Iwant to beginbywarmlywelcomingthe unanimous
adoption of resolution 2384 (2017) this morning. I pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to your delegation
for your excellent efforts as penholder. This adoption
is a welcome show of the Security Council's continued
support for the vital work of the European Union (EU)-
led peacekeeping force Althea and a clear sign of our
commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability,
security and territorial integrity. It is a commitment
that we now look to the Bosnian authorities to match.
They must do so in word and deed as they undertake
the vital reforms necessary to bring about the social
and economic renewal that the country needs, and
which is so essential to Bosnia's future within the
European Union.

Bosnia and Herzegovina made good progress
towards that goal in 2016, and the delivery of the EU
questionnaire in December was recognition of that
fact. However the promise and potential of 2016 has
not materialized this year. Instead, this year has seen
the pace of reform slowing markedly, and divisive
rhetoric and premature electioneering only increasing.
It is those negative trends that are now dominating the
political landscape, despite the elections being over
10 months away. When that sort of narrow-minded,
divisive electioneering takes hold, nobody gains. All
Bosnians lose out. We need only look to the tens of
millions of dollars in funding from the International
Monetary Fund that are currently on hold. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has failed to fulfil its responsibilities; if
it had done so, that funding would be released. The
money could be used to make considerable progress
on the reform path. It would transform Bosnia for the
better - building roads and other Vital infrastructure
that would benefit all. Let us all encourage the Bosnian
authorities to refocus on the reform agenda to deliver
socioeconomic reforms that would improve the lives
of their citizens. Divisive, backwards-looking rhetoric
only distracts from that essential work, and will only
slow the country's progress.

As a long-standing friend of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the United Kingdom calls on all the
parties to stop looking to the past and instead look
forward to a shared future. Ifthey do so, they will have
the United Kingdom's support. We stand ready to work
with the authorities to make progress on those critically
important issues.

As the High Representative said just now, a crucial
element of that effort must be to promote and uphold
the rule of law, including through a well-functioning
independent judiciary. We call on all political and
judicial leaders to avoid actions that undermine the
standards of judicial impartiality and integrity.

Ahead of next year's elections, we also urge all
parties to approach the issue of electoral reform through
dialogue and to show willingness to reach a compromise.
The authorities must work towards the implementation
of judgements handed down by the European Court
of Human Rights. No one should be excluded from
political office at any level of Government based on
their ethnicity or residence.

I would like to reiterate today the need for the
Bosnian authorities to find a resolution to the long-
standing impasse concerning local elections in Mostar.
It is absolutely extraordinary that the citizens of Mostar
have now been denied their democratic rights for nearly
a decade. That cannot continue, and Mostar must
remain a single, coherent multi-ethnic unit of local self-
government.

Before I conclude, I would like to express the United
Kingdom's support for reform, not just as a means of
generating prosperity for Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
also as a means of ensuring security for the country
through Euro-Atlantic integration. In order to make
progress towards that goal, it is Vital that Bosnia and
Herzegovina undertake further efforts on registering
defence property, which is needed for the activation of
the NATO membership action plan and for progress on
the 5+2 agenda. But until that agenda is completed, we
remain committed to the continuing role of the High
Representative and his Office. The Office of the High
Representative remains the final authority in-theatre
with regard to the civilian implementation of the Peace
Agreement. That includes supporting the use of Bonn
powers if the situation requires it.

Therefore, both Operation Althea and the High
Representative have a vital role to play in Bosnia and
Herzegovina until stability and security are firmly
entrenched. That day is not yet here, and it is therefore
essential that the Security Council continue its support
for both until that moment arrives.

