Only a few weeks ago, we celebrated the fifth anniversary of the Safe Schools Declaration - a political commitment to protect students, teachers and educational facilities from the worst effects of armed conflict. The current global situation illustrates that the Declaration is as relevant today as it was five years ago. The United Nations verified almost 500 attacks on schools in 2019, many of which were unprovoked. Schools continue to be used for military purposes, thus eroding their sanctity as safe spaces and exposing schools, teachers and students to attack. Such attacks violate the right to education and often constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity. Depriving children of access to education also has a devastating impact on sustainable development, in particular Sustainable Development Goal 4, and inflicts irreparable long-term damage on children, families, communities and societies. It is therefore vital to ensure inclusive, equitable and good quality education for girls and boys at all times. It is also important to put children's voices first, to listen to them as advocates and agents of change and to empower them when they experience violations of their rights. The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communications procedure gives children that voice. It is a reflection of the true spirit of the Convention and is in the best interests of the child. Liechtenstein has been among the few States to ratify the Optional Protocol, and we hope that many others will join us. For many children in situations of armed conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has further deteriorated their already challenging and devastating reality. It has exacerbated the risk of exploitation and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, including human trafficking and modern slavery. Quarantine, curfews and other restrictions on movement are weakening protection mechanisms and heightening risks of domestic and sexual violence for women and girls, as well as men and boys, in crisis-affected communities. Its socioeconomic effects increase the vulnerability of children to recruitment and use by armed forces or armed groups, child labour and sexual exploitation and abuse. The Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire is an opportune moment to put armed conflict on lockdown and to focus together on the fight against COVID-19 and on protecting the most vulnerable. Liechtenstein remains deeply concerned at the high occurrence of rape and other forms of sexual violence against children. Such violence is often underreported owing to the fear of stigmatization and cultural taboos, in particular when perpetrated against boys, as also documented by the All Survivors Project. A culture of silence continues to impede accountability and justice and contributes to further cycles of violence and persistent harmful gender stereotypes. We reiterate our strong support for the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to shed more light on marginalized victims and survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, in line with resolution 2467 (2019). Upholding the security, privacy and confidentiality of survivors and witnesses is key, as are ethical considerations in documenting and verifying information of child survivors of sexual violence. In the light of the pandemic, it is all the more important to prioritize the development and remote roll- out of gender-specific training tools to conduct the safe and ethical documentation of cases of conflict-related sexual violence against girls and boys. With global guidelines for reporting to the monitoring and reporting mechanism unaltered, it is vital that monitoring staff be urgently trained to explore options for remote verification of incidents of violence. While we acknowledge the challenges the Special Representative's mandate is currently facing, we reiterate that the protection of the Office's independence and integrity is crucial to its effectiveness and credibility, which also includes the objective, consistent and transparent practice of listing parties that have committed grave violations against children, as well as those that have or have not put in place measures during the reporting period to improve the protection of children.
