Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me begin by conveying
our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2019/703)and to our good friend, Special
Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his very
insightful briefing.

The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern for the international community, especially
for my country as a neighbour. Persisting conflict,
instability and turmoil and a fragile economy continue
to exacerbate the suffering of the Afghan people. We
share the Secretary-General's concern at the continued
fighting and its heavy toll on the civilian population. We
are also concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan. We agree with his assessment
that the war in Afghanistan has been long and brutal
and that the path to peace will be challenging, but we
share his optimism about the progress achieved in the
peace talks.

That, of course, was before last weekend. After
decades of conflict, the framework for an eventual
peace agreement seemed within grasp. There were
sufficient grounds to be hopeful that the parties
appeared closer to that goal than at any other time in
the past 18 years. Nine rounds of direct talks between
the United States and the Taliban over nearly a year
had brightened prospects for putting in place, at least in
principle, an agreement for a settlement that could lead
to intra-Afghan negotiations and a negotiated end to the
long drawn-out conflict.

As history is our witness, the path to peace,
especially in protracted conflicts, is never linear or
easy. Challenges have to be overcome and hurdles
crossed before a comprehensive agreement is reached.
Therefore, the recent setback should not set back our
hopes or the resolve to persist. We hope the suspension
of the peace talks is only a pause and that they will
resume sooner rather than later, as the alternative is
far worse, namely, a surge in violence that could push
Afghanistan into an even more turbulent and uncertain
phase than has been witnessed in the past.

Pakistan has always condemned violence and called
on all sides to exercise restraint and a commitment to
pursue the process. Let me reiterate that message today.
We have been facilitating the peace and reconciliation
process in good faith, as a shared responsibility, and
have encouraged all sides to remain engaged with
sincerity and patience. Pakistan will continue to
monitor the developments. We reiterate our principled
policy position that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Afghanistan. We urge all sides to re-engage,
and look forward to an early resumption of the talks.

Apart from Afghanistan itself, there is no country
that has suffered more than Pakistan from the four
decades of war and foreign interventions in Afghanistan.
There is no other country that will gain more from
peace in Afghanistan. In his recent visit to Washington,
DC, Prime Minister Imran Khan assured President
Trump of Pakistan's full support in bringing the
conflict in Afghanistan to a negotiated conclusion. But
Pakistan, at best, can be only a facilitator. It is up to the
parties to the conflict to resolve their differences with
patience, trust and continued, sustained engagement.
Tough decisions will eventually have to be taken by
the Afghans themselves. It is equally critical for the
international community to recommit to supporting a
negotiated peace in Afghanistan.

On the bilateral front, during the visit of President
Ashraf Ghani to Pakistan in June, the leadership of the
two countries committed to adopt the framework for
a forward-looking approach and to move away from
the mistrust of the past. The need for enhanced trade
and economic relations and cooperation for regional
connectivity was re-emphasized. Pakistan has provided
significant development aid to Afghanistan in the
education, health, reconstruction and infrastructure
development sectors.

In addition, my country has hosted millions of
Afghan refugees for four decades, opening our homes
and hearts to our brothers and sisters in their time of
travail and tragedy. Even as I speak, we are host to the
largest protracted presence of refugees anywhere in the
world. We remain committed to their safe, dignified
and voluntary repatriation. My Government recently
extended the tripartite agreement and the validity of
their stay in Pakistan to 30 June 2020.

At the regional level, China, Afghanistan and
Pakistan concluded the third round of the trilateral
Foreign Ministers dialogue in Islamabad only this
past weekend. The Ministers reiterated their support
for a politically negotiated settlement of the conflict
and underlined the need for an inclusive, Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace process leading to a
comprehensive agreement for durable peace and
stability. We are working with Afghanistan and our
regional partners on many regional economic and energy
corridors, including the Belt and Road Initiative, the
Turkmenistan-Afghanistan~Pakistan-India Pipeline,
the CASA-lOOO power project and others.

In conclusion, let me say that peace and stability
in Afghanistan and Pakistan are intertwined and
interdependent. Pakistan has a vital interest in a
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan.
My country stands ready to support the Government
of Afghanistan in addressing the multiple challenges it
faces today and will assist in whatever way it is asked
when it transitions from war to a peaceful future.

