Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and for her
briefing today.

The United Kingdom very much regrets that the
situation in Darfur has not improved since the Prosecutor
last addressed the Council in June (S/PV.7l99). As her
report highlights, the ongoing aerial bombardments,
ground attacks, sexual and gender-based crimes
against civilians and the arbitrary arrest and detention
of opposition and civil society figures present a deeply
worrying picture. It has been reported that over 430,000
individuals were newly displaced between January and
November. We welcome the efforts of former President
Mbeki but are very concerned that the latest round
of talks between the Government of the Sudan and
representatives of the armed opposition groups from
Darfur did not lead to a breakthrough. We urge all
parties to resume talks at the earliest opportunity.

The United Kingdom condemns the attacks that
tragically resulted in the deaths of four staff members
of the African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) over the reporting period and
joins with the Prosecutor in calling on the Government
of the Sudan to take the necessary steps to maintain
security for UNAMID personnel. UNAMID remains a
key partner in monitoring the human rights situation in
Darfur. In that context, it is important that UNAMID
investigate and report fully on any incident. We
welcome the establishment of the Cooper review to
examine allegations of past underreporting and believe
it is vital that its findings are shared transparently,
including through wider publication. As we have said
in the Council, it is vital that UNAMID ensures that all
future information is shared with its stakeholders.

We also reiterate the call to allow UNAMID
unfettered access to fully investigate allegations of
mass rape in Thabit. They are serious allegations, and
we note with concern the Office of the Prosecutor's
View that an atmosphere of intimidation has arisen
around the situation. It is vital that the full facts around
the incident are established.

The Prosecutor has also highlighted the immunity
enjoyed by the Rapid Support Forces as part of the
National Intelligence and Security Service. That has
also been highlighted by the previous United Nations
independent expert on the human rights situation in
the Sudan, who recommended the need to repeal or
amend the 2010 National Security Act to ensure that the
powers of Service are in conformity with the Sudan's
international human rights obligations.

We note that 31 March 2015 will mark the tenth
anniversary of the referral of the situation in Darfur
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Resolution 1593 (2005) placed the Government of the
Sudan under an obligation to cooperate fully with and
provide any necessary assistance to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor. Over
the past decade, the Government of the Sudan has
comprehensively and conspicuously failed to meet that
obligation. By protecting those individuals indicted by
the ICC, it continues to obstruct the pursuit of justice
for the victims of crimes carried out in Darfur. The
United Kingdom repeats its call on the Government of
the Sudan to meet its obligations by fully cooperating
with the ICC, particularly with respect to enforcement
of all arrest warrants issued by the Court. The United
Kingdom also urges all States to cooperate fully with
the Court and the Prosecutor, in particular with respect
to the travel of ICC indictees and recalls the obligations
of ICC States parties to implement the Court's arrest
warrants.

Where States fail to comply with their obligations,
it is important that the Security Council respond. The
United Kingdom regrets the fact that the Council has
so far been unable to agree to responses to letters from
the President of the Court relating to the obligation
to cooperate with the Court. We call once again for
all Council members to agree to timely and effective
follow-up to reports of non-cooperation with the Court.
That action should start with responses to the letters
the Council has received. It is the responsibility of the
Council to assist the Court in fulfilling the mandate we
gave it when we referred the situation in Darfur to the
Prosecutor almost 10 years ago.

