Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador is pleased that the Security Council has once
again provided an opportunity for an update on the
situation in the Middle East, including the question of
Palestine, and congratulates you, Sir, on your conduct
of the debate. We also wish to thank Mr. Oscar
F ernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

Ecuador associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

I am pleased to confirm once again Ecuador's
position on the conflict in the Middle East, and that is
total respect for the norms and principles of
international law, especially in matters of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts; condemnation of the use and
threat of use of force; and compliance with the
resolutions of the United Nations and its subsidiary
bodies. In that vein, we support all the resolutions of
the Security Council.

True to that commitment, my delegation
condemns the acts of violence that continue in the
region, because not only do they violate international
law, but they also make it difficult to reach
understanding between the parties.
The crisis in which we find ourselves forces us to
seek actions and decisions to achieve peace. That
requires that Israel respect the law and the resolutions
of the United Nations. The people need the
international community, in accordance with
humanitarian law and United Nations resolutions, to
demand, once and for all call in a clear and firm way,
that Israel cease all harassment activities in the region
and stop the settlement activity that it conducts by
force in the area, including in East Jerusalem.

The settlements are illegal and unjustifiable. They
exacerbate tensions, run counter to the principle of
land for peace, which has been supported by the
international community since 1979, and hamper the
peace process between the parties.

If Israel rejects the efforts, appeals and calls of
the international community in such a way as to
prevent the peace negotiations, then the Security
Council should take concrete action - as should all
the relevant organs of the United Nations - so as to
ensure that Israel suffers the consequences of the
violations and crimes it has perpetrated, especially in
Gaza and East Jerusalem.
28

My delegation renews its condemnation of the
acts being provoked in the region, not only because
they violate international law but also and most
importantly because they block understanding between
the parties.

The region cries out for a solution. We urge the
parties to come to a settlement of the conflict that is
peaceful, just, lasting and comprehensive, and to make
efforts to re-establish the dialogue that will lead - via
the effective fulfilment of the Madrid commitments,
the Israeli initiative and implementation of the Road
Map - to achieving stability and peace in a region in
which two States, Israel and Palestine, must coexist
side by side within secure and recognized borders.

