Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like at
the outset to address to Ambassador Wang my words of
thanks. He has been a very inspiring voice on this
Council. His wisdom, consistently constructive
attitude, tolerance and conviviality will be missed by
all members of the Council. I wish him great success as
he embarks on his new mission from his great country.
I am sure that his inspiring leadership will be a positive
factor in this new phase.

I would also like to extend to Ambassador Mufioz
of Chile a very warm welcome. I look forward to
working very closely with him, as I did with his
predecessor.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate to discuss ways to
reinforce peace and security in Afghanistan and
especially for giving the Council the opportunity to
address the combat against the production and
trafficking of illicit drugs in Afghanistan. I join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Guehenno and
Mr. Costa for their excellent and substantial briefings
before the Council.

Afghanistan has been in the past years the focus
of concern of the international community since it
became a centre for international terrorist networks, as
well as one of the world's largest sources of drugs -
twin scourges that the international community has
identified as constituting serious threats to international
peace and security.

The Bonn Agreement, signed in December 2001
by representatives of several anti-Taliban factions and
political groups, has set the framework for international
peacekeeping, the establishment of peace and security,
the reconstruction of the country, the protection and
promotion of fundamental human rights,
demilitarization and social integration.

As was stressed in Mr. Brahimi's last briefing to
the Council on 6 May, Afghanistan is still far
from meeting the conditions for the complete
implementation of the Bonn Agreement. Security
remains the most serious challenge and must be
improved to allow the establishment of the rule of law
to promote reconstruction efforts and facilitate the
success of the complex political process, including the
development of a new Constitution and the holding of
free and fair elections.

The work accomplished and efforts undertaken by
the United Kingdom, the United States and Germany,
as lead nations, in assisting the Afghan authorities in
implementing the Bonn Agreement are very
commendable. The international community's
assistance, if integrated in a broader context of
reconstruction for development and closer cooperation
between Afghanistan and neighbouring countries,
could enable the Afghan Transitional Administration to
better neutralize the threat posed by the remnants of the
Taliban and by the illicit production and trafficking of
drugs from Afghanistan.

The production of illicit drugs in Afghanistan is
indeed an extremely sensitive issue and remains a
matter of great international concern. The substitution
programme of poppy cultivation administered by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and by the
Afghan National Security Council can constitute a
coherent strategy, but it will produce results only when
security is established and the economic situation is
stabilized.

In our view, such a programme should be
reinforced through the implementation of the measures
contained in President Karzai's recent plan, particularly
through the promotion of alternative means of earning
a living and fresh professional opportunities for the
Afghan rural population; through the assistance of the
Afghan Transitional Administration in enforcing the
ban introduced in January 2002 on opium poppy
cultivation and the illicit production, manufacture and
trafficking of drugs; through identifying and disabling
the entire network of trans-border criminal groups
involved in the supply and sale of drugs from
Afghanistan, including the prevention of drugs-related
money-laundering; and through effective measures to
curtail the demand for and trafficking in those illicit
drugs in the countries of destination.

Assistance in combating illicit opium cultivation
and the trafficking of drugs is essential, not just for
Afghanistan itself, but for the Central Asian region as a
whole. Any increase in opium output in Afghanistan
continues to have a very negative impact on the
economy and the development of neighbouring
countries, now mainly transit routes of illicit traffic.
While they are only transit routes, they are increasingly
becoming consumption markets, bringing devastating
socio-economic consequences and posing a security
threat to the whole region.

Therefore, we believe that the lead nations, as
well as the rest of the international community, should
reinforce their assistance to the drug-control efforts of
Afghanistan's transitional authorities, particularly in
developing and strengthening African drug control and
law-enforcement agencies, in assisting in the creation
of a judicial framework and institutions consistent with
international conventions, and in enhancing regional
cross-border cooperation. The production and
trafficking of illicit drugs in Afghanistan constitutes a
global challenge. The Afghan Transitional
Administration can succeed only if the international
community continues to provide its support for the
sustainable development and long-term security of the
country.

Let me reaffirm my country's firm conviction that
peace and security will be possible in Afghanistan only
if and when the international community succeeds in
decisively redressing the growth of opium cultivation,
which makes it the crux of the war that is still to be
fully controlled in that country. In that connection, and
in conclusion, I should like to express my delegation's
full support for the presidential statement that will be
issued as the outcome of this Security Council meeting
on the problem of drugs in Afghanistan.

