Ms. Lnj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association (EFTA) country member of the
European Economic Area - Iceland - align
themselves with this statement.

I would like to start by congratulating you,
Madam President, on Colombia's presidency of the
Council for the month of December.

Furthermore, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr.
Oshima, for having introduced the report before us.
Their statements and the report itself provide good
insights into the challenges facing us in our endeavours
to address the question of how to protect civilians in
armed conflict.

The European Union welcomes the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report. Together with the recommendations in the two
previous reports, they provide a good basis for further
action. The roadmap will provide a solid basis for the
further development of the concept of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

The European Union welcomes the recent
initiatives taken by the Security Council, as well as by
other United Nations bodies, to discuss the issue of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict in relevant
forums such as the Security Council's workshop on the
Mano River Union in July. As stated by the Secretary-
General in his report, the effective protection of
civilians is critical for making peace processes succeed.
The issue must remain at the top of our agenda.

During the First World War, 95 per cent of the
victims were soldiers. In the wars of the twenty-first
century, this is no longer the case. Today civilians -
most often women and children - rather than
combatants are the casualties of conflicts. We should
therefore be aware, in discussing how to protect
civilians in armed conflict, of the particular danger to
which women and children are exposed.

Recent discussions on the follow-up of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) have shown that we
need to strengthen efforts to ensure gender
mainstreaming in peacekeeping operations and in post-
conflict reconstruction. The insights that women can
provide are not always utilized to their fullest. Equal
participation of women in our peacekeeping and peace-
building efforts could help to ensure that the special
vulnerabilities of women are taken into account.
Furthermore, women can play an important role in
brokering durable peace through their participation in
peace operations and negotiations.

It is a cruel fact that armed conflicts affect a large
number of children in many parts of the world. Many
of them are uprooted from their homes, maimed or
killed. Others are orphaned, abused and exploited.
Protecting children in times of conflict is therefore
crucial, both to alleviate suffering and to safeguard the
future generations of the countries concerned. The
European Union welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-
General and of the Council itself to respect the need to
protect children when formulating the mandates for
United Nations peacekeeping and peace-building
operations. Including child-protection staff in
peacekeeping and peace-building operations is a
promising new element in these efforts, as is the effort
to strengthen the expertise available for these
operations in the areas of human rights and of
humanitarian and refugee law.

According to the Secretary-General, 31 million
people - more than the populations of all of the
Nordic countries combined - have been uprooted and
displaced by conflict during the last decade. Many do
not get a chance to return to their homes before a new
violent conflict erupts. We need to ensure special
protection for these internally displaced persons,
particularly in times of armed conflict.

It is encouraging that an increasing number of
States, United Nations organizations and regional and
non-governmental organizations are making use of the
Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement to
strengthen the legal framework on the protection of
internally displaced persons. We encourage all States
and organizations to ensure a coherent implementation
of these Guiding Principles. We also welcome the
Agenda for Protection recently presented by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), and look forward to cooperating in the
process of its implementation.

Combatants mixing with refugees and internally
displaced persons are a serious threat to the security of
civilians in armed conflict. The European Union
therefore fully supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that Governments should make use of
the aide-memoire adopted by the Security Council on
15 March 2002 and of UNHCR's Agenda for
Protection in situations in which combatants and
civilians are intermingled. This will ensure that
international legal standards are observed when
Governments respond to perceived security threats.
UNHCR's cooperation with the national authorities in
separating combatants and civilians in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone constitutes
an important example of how to try to ensure that
civilians are not dragged into zones of fighting.

Helping civilians in armed conflict is an essential
part of our humanitarian efforts, but it can deprive
humanitarian workers of their lives. On 22 November a
United Nations worker, Iain Hook, was the latest
victim. Mr. Hook was shot while trying to evacuate
civilians and United Nations staff from a United
Nations compound in the Jenin refugee camp. This
deeply worrying incident not only was a tragedy for
Iain Hook's family, it also draws our attention once
again to the urgent need to ensure the security and
protection of aid workers and humanitarian personnel
at all times. Only then can we guarantee full access to
civilians during conflict.

In this context, we appeal to all States to become
parties to the Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel of 1994, and we
support the ongoing efforts to improve the
implementation of the Convention.

Ensuring the protection of civilians means
securing that the danger of conflict is removed in the
long run. In this regard, one of the first priorities must
be a comprehensive disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme to ensure that former
combatants are disarmed and reintegrated into society.
The European Union commends the efforts made by
the United Nations, as well as by its funds and
programmes, in this area.

The international community must ensure the
prosecution of perpetrators of human rights violations
and breaches of international humanitarian law. The
European Union recognizes and respects the untiring
and impartial efforts of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, as guardian of international
humanitarian law, to uphold the universally recognized
rules of protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
strongly support the work of the International Tribunals
for the prosecution of genocide and other grave crimes
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, just as we
remain strong supporters of the International Criminal
Court.

In closing, I would like to reiterate the European
Union's unfaltering commitment to protecting civilians
in armed conflict. We stand ready to assist the Security
Council and the United Nations system in ensuring this
goal.

