Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom) (spoke in Chinese):
Like other speakers today, Mr. President, I would like
to welcome your leadership on this issue, and I thank
Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

(spoke in English)

As my United States colleague mentioned earlier,
two ships were attacked off the coast of Nigeria earlier
this month. I would like to echo her concern about the
crew members who were kidnapped that day and to call
for their release. Those two ships were flagged to Malta
and Liberia; their cargo came from Turkey, Greece and
Nigeria; and the eight crew members whom we just heard
about came from Egypt, the Philippines and Turkey.
So on just one day on the seas off West Africa, piracy
struck at the people, property and prosperity of seven
Members ofthe United Nations. It should concern us all
that there were around 100 similar incidents in the Gulf
of Guinea last year. It does not take a mathematician to
see that the damage done by those acts is not isolated in
a far-off place, far removed from the Security Council's
attention. Such attacks strike at the interests of all of us
and therefore require each of us to focus on them.

When the security of shipping and global trade
is threatened in this way, the prosperity and stability
of the regional States of West and Central Africa are
threatened, as is the security of their peoples. That threat
can and must be tackled together, through regional
leadership and coordinated international support.

The United Kingdom commends the efforts that the
region has been making so far. We fully support the
Yaounde Code of Conduct Concerning the Repression
of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships, and Illicit
Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa. We
welcome the commitment shown by the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and their members. That
commitment is seen in their efforts to develop a regional
framework for countering piracy and armed robbery
at sea. Such a framework will allow the sharing of
information and the coordination of operations needed
to make a real difference on the seas in the Gulf.

But a framework is just a start. We urge those
bodies and their members to continue their efforts to
establish and fully operationalize the regional network
of maritime coordination centres, which include the
Interregional Coordination Centre in Yaounde, the
Regional Centre for Maritime Security in Central
Africa in Pointe-Noire in the Republic of the Congo,
and the Regional Centre for Maritime Safety in West
Africa in Abidjan.

The United Kingdom is also playing its part. Our
resources and diplomatic efforts to tackle this threat
are carefully coordinated with the Gulf of Guinea
region, the maritime industry, the European Union and
other partners. We are an active member of the Group
of Seven Plus Friends of the Gulf of Guinea, which is
meeting again soon and is a valuable forum for experts
from regional States and donor countries to coordinate
and deploy our resources. We look forward to the next
meeting, to be held under Portugal's chairmanship.

We recognize, however, that coordination alone will
not solve the problem. That is why the United Kingdom is
making concerted efforts to assist in building maritime
capacity across the region. We are helping to mentor
maritime police and navy units in Ghana and Sao Tome
and Principe, and we are building port facilities in
Sierra Leone to provide a platform for maritime law-
enforcement operations. We have enhanced the region's
capacity through our contributions to the International
Maritime Organization's West and Central Africa
Maritime Security Trust Fund.

Improving regional coordination and building
maritime capacity to stop the pirates are the first steps
of the process. What comes next is just as important:
investigations and prosecutions. The knowledge that
there are long-term consequences to choosing a life of
piracy is the best way to deter those who might follow
this path. That is why we support bolstering the rule-of-
law capacity in the States of the region and why we are
currently considering other ways to develop the region's
ability to prosecute those involved in maritime crime.

Through such steps and more, we know we can
make a difference. The incidence ofhij ackings for cargo
is falling, but the battle is not yet won. The first quarter
of this year has seen a marked increase in the number
of kidnaps for ransom. I would therefore like to close by
returning to the issue of the two ships attacked earlier
this month - the tanker Pali and the container ship
Turquoise. Together they lost eight crewmen in those
attacks. They are still missing, and their families and
friends are still fearful for their safety. As we debate
today how best to tackle this problem, we should do so
with all those sailors in mind.

