Mr. Roed-Larsen: It was with sadness that, on
my arrival in New York, I learned of three suicide
bombings against Israeli citizens in 24 hours. My heart
goes out to the families of the victims of those
senseless acts, which are unjustified on any moral or
political grounds. It is my sincere hope that the parties
will not be diverted from the quest for peace by this
terrorism.

Since the last briefing on the situation in the
Middle East, on 16 April, we have seen the tentative
budding of a new and fragile Middle East peace
process. The events that led to this new beginning were
the confirmation by the Palestinian Legislative Council
of Abu Mazen as the first Palestinian Prime Minister
and the subsequent presentation to the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian Authority of the Quartet's
road map for Middle East peace.

These are necessary and positive beginnings,
but - I will recall - they are only beginnings.
Peacemaking is a long, difficult and painful process,
not a single, spectacular event. We must temper
optimism and hopefulness with the realistic
understanding that the road map - and indeed the road
to the road map - will be strewn with obstacles, as we
have seen lately.

Success will depend upon the good faith and
performance of the parties and on the determination of
the Quartet, key regional actors such as Egypt, Jordan
and Saudi Arabia and the broader international
community. They will have to stay the course.
Especially in these early days, we must continue to
work hard for the implementation of the road map and
to assist the parties to follow its path. We must always
keep in view the plan's goals: a viable, sovereign and
democratic Palestine; a secure and prosperous Israel;
and a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
region.

The obstacles to those goals are numerous. Since
the last briefing to the Security Council, 95 people
have lost their lives to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict - 79 Palestinians and 16 Israelis. That raises
the total death toll since September 2000 to 2,648
Palestinians and 751 Israelis.

On 29 April, the same day that Abu Mazen was
confirmed as Prime Minister and his cabinet was
approved by the Palestinian Legislative Council, a
suicide bomber struck a pub in Tel Aviv, killing three
and injuring dozens. On 24 April, a suicide bomber
again tragically exploded a bomb in the Israeli town of
Kfar Sava, killing one and injuring 13.

The Secretary-General has consistently
condemned such cowardly and heinous terrorist acts.
He has also recently called on the Israelis and
Palestinians not to allow extremists who carry out such
repugnant attacks to hijack the peace process and
dictate agendas. Above all, terrorists should not have
the power to hold hostage a process that has the
potential of ending the terror, providing security for
Israel and alleviating the plight of the Palestinian
people. The groups responsible for terrorist acts should
immediately cease all forms of violence and remove
that obstacle to peace.

The Palestinian Authority must bring to justice
those involved in planning and carrying out those
attacks. Under the first phase of the road map, the
Palestinian Authority is obligated to "undertake visible
efforts on the ground to arrest, disrupt and restrain
individuals and groups conducting and planning violent
attacks on Israelis anywhere".
We, of course, recognize that Abu Mazen and
Minister of State for Internal Security Mohammed
Dahlan need assistance, as called for in the road map,
to "rebuild and refocus" the Palestinian security forces
in order to effectively provide security for Palestinians
and to prevent terror attacks on Israelis. Support from
the Government of Israel is necessary to help Abu
Mazen and Mr. Dahlan to carry out that task.
Reciprocal confidence-building measures are essential
in order to create legitimacy and popular support for
Abu Mazen's anti-terror policies.

Here we find a natural dependency between
Israelis and Palestinians. The terror will not stop unless
both sides take reciprocal acts in parallel. But such
progress will require, first and foremost, determination,
focus and will on the part of the new Palestinian
Government. Rapid progress on that front will be an
important test of the capability of the Palestinian
Authority to take the steps necessary to implement the
road map.

Under the first phase of the road map, Israel is
required to take "no actions undermining trust,
including attacks on civilians" or "confiscation
and/or demolition of Palestinian homes and property as
a punitive measure".

Only hours after the presentation of the road map
to the Israeli and Palestinian Prime Ministers, on 1
May, Israeli military operations in Gaza City resulted
in the deaths of at least 13 Palestinians and injury to
many more. Yet the killings of Palestinian civilians and
the destruction of their property continue. House
demolitions continue at an average rate of 70 houses
per month, a trend that seems to be increasing. The
amount of destroyed agricultural land increased by
almost 100 per cent in six months.

I wish to make it clear that we do not question
Israel's right to self-defence in the face of repeated
terrorist attacks. The United Nations must, however,
repeat the call on the Israeli authorities to abandon the
use of excessive force in densely populated areas and
to protect the safety of civilians and preserve their
property in keeping with Israel's obligations under
international humanitarian law.

It is important in this context to point out that
illegal armed elements in Palestinian areas bear a
heavy responsibility for violence that affects
Palestinian civilians by basing themselves in civilian
areas, contrary to international humanitarian law. I note
that Prime Minister Abu Mazen has stated that his
Government has the goal of disarming such groups.
We also restate our opposition to extrajudicial
killings and call on the Government of Israel to desist
immediately from such acts. We believe that the best
way to ensure the security of Israelis is by resolving
the conflict, precisely through the road map.

At each briefing we have informed the Council
about the situation regarding humanitarian and socio-
economic conditions in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. As we have stated on many occasions, the
humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and Gaza has at
its core the movement restrictions imposed by the
Israeli security regime. Movement in and out of
Palestinian population centres in the West Bank
remains restricted due to more than 100 checkpoints
and 300 to 400 ditches and earth mounds blocking
roads. Those impediments prevent people from
reaching medical facilities and from going to schools.
Checkpoints and roadblocks are the single largest
impediment to the Palestinian economy. My Office is
about to release a periodic report on the effects of
closure on the people of the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, and some preliminary findings are available.

In the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, poverty
rates increased from approximately 25 per cent, in
1998, to 60 per cent - rising to 75 per cent in Gaza by
the end of 2002. In the past two years unemployment
rates increased more than 20 per cent, to 53 per cent,
according to conservative estimates. Since the current
crisis started, in September 2000, closure has led to
Palestinian losses of $5.4 billion, one year's worth of
national income.

Closure continues to dominate the day-to-day
reality of most people in the West Bank. Curfew, which
restricts people to their homes, is the severest form of
closure. During the last six months of 2002 there was
an average of 130 days of military-imposed curfew in
each of the major towns of the West Bank.

Movement restrictions handicapped Palestinian
markets and production in 2002 by hindering both the
local and the external marketing of goods. That has
created a rapid deterioration in the productive sectors,
in effect pushing the Palestinian economy out of
production. It has been well documented that Israeli
closure policies have dramatically reduced the number
of Palestinians working in Israel, which is currently at
nearly one third of pre-crisis levels. But domestic
employment has also been hit hard by the current
Israeli policies.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the water and hygiene
situation continues to worsen. There is strong evidence
that water-related diseases have increased among rural
communities, who have been forced to use
contaminated water sources. Some 178 Palestinian
communities have no water-distribution networks.

More than $1 billion in donor assistance annually,
notably food aid and budgetary support, has been
critical in stopping the complete economic collapse of
Gaza and the West Bank. In 2002 nearly 83 per cent of
that total went to emergency and budgetary support,
such as paying Palestinian Authority salaries. In the
same period food aid distribution managed to stem
hunger in areas where markets were severely
handicapped and where income loss had impoverished
large segments of the population. Such aid is merely
slowing the ongoing economic decline and creating a
system of dependency, and not providing support for
essential sustainable development.

In the face of rising misery among Palestinians, it
is essential that the closure regime be lifted in a way
that meets Israel's security needs while easing the
plight of Palestinians. I would like to say in that regard
that we must recognize that Israel is facing a troubling
dilemma. In effect - if I may say so - they are
"damned if they do and damned if they don't". Only an
ending of closure can revive the Palestinian economy
and improve living conditions. Such measures,
however, might lead to an increase in terrorist attacks.
My deep belief is that the road map provides the best
way to bridge those concerns. Its approach is to place
security and humanitarian obligations on both sides
while strengthening the Palestinian Authority's security
apparatus on the basis of the new Palestinian Prime
Minister's anti-terrorism programme.

This grim situation is exacerbated in the Gaza
Strip by a draconian closure regime recently instituted
by the Israeli authorities that has resulted in the closing
of Gaza to all but those with diplomatic passports. This
new situation has been characterized by confusion
caused by a lack of effective and appropriate
communication from the Israeli authorities and a policy
regime that has changed on an almost daily basis. The
events of the past few weeks bear fuller description.

Following the suicide bombing in Tel Aviv on 30
April new security measures were imposed at the Erez
crossing from Israel into the Gaza Strip, necessitating
security checks, including interrogation and body
searches, for all internationals not holding diplomatic
visas. The average crossing time was extended from
the normal 20 minutes to between two and two and one
half hours, and in some cases up to nine hours.

On 8 May, the donor grouping, the Task Force on
Project Implementation (TFPI), was informed of a set
of rules that would be imposed on a permanent basis.
The Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator
in the Occupied Territories is the representative of the
United Nations family on the Task Force, which has
responsibility in the donor community for access
issues. These rules include the following.

All international staff members who do not hold a
diplomatic passport and visa will be subject to a car
search and metal detector search on entering Gaza
similar to, but more thorough than, the checks that are
already in place for international staff members that are
leaving Gaza. Secondly, all staff entering Gaza will be
asked to sign a declaration that effectively attempts to
abrogate Israel's responsibility for the safety and
security of United Nations staff, facilities and
equipment.

On 9 May, the TFPI was informed that the
declaration introduced on 8 May would not be
applicable to United Nations staff, but that the Erez
crossing would be closed to all foreigners travelling on
tourist or work Visas issued to staff of non-
governmental organizations. On 11 May, the TFPI was
informed that, until further notice, the Erez crossing
would be closed to all except those holding diplomatic
passports and visas. Holders of valid United Nations
laissez-passer and service visas for Israel are now
barred from entering or leaving Gaza, leaving
significant numbers of United Nations staff stuck on
either side of the boundary and unable to carry out their
work. As of today, some United Nations staff members
have been allowed to enter and leave Gaza.

However, the core of the matter is that these
policies are violations of the privileges and immunities
of United Nations personnel. They run counter to
Israel's international humanitarian law obligations as
the occupying Power for the well-being of the people
of Gaza. The measures employed at the Erez crossing
severely hamper the ability of the United Nations to
provide needed assistance to the Palestinian population
in the Gaza Strip, which is already under strain.
Potentially, hundreds of international staff members
will be hampered in the performance of their duties.

On 9 May, the TFPI wrote to the Israeli
Coordinator for Government Activities in the
Territories requesting a formal notification of the new
security measures imposed in the Gaza Strip and
urgently requesting a meeting to address the access
issue. In addition to the efforts of the Task Force, the
Secretariat and the United Nations agencies on the
ground are taking steps to express to Israeli authorities
the United Nations strong concerns about this situation
and to bring about a change in policy. Last Thursday, I
met with senior officials of the Israeli Ministry of
Foreign Affairs to discuss the situation. As a result, the
Ministry agreed to meet with me in my capacity as the
Special Coordinator and the heads of United Nations
funds, agencies and programmes to hear our concerns
and recommendations. I hope that this meeting will
lead to the creation of mechanisms that would avoid
such fundamental obstruction of United Nations
operations essential to upholding a minimum level of
Palestinian living conditions.

I wish to state clearly and unequivocally that if
these efforts do not result in a significant improvement
in access to the Gaza Strip for United Nations staff, it
will become progressively impossible to carry out
United Nations operations in Gaza. I spoke again to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) Commissioner-
General Hansen this morning about this issue. He
asked me to convey to the Council that he is making
every effort to keep the Agency's services functioning,
but that he cannot do so if these Israeli measures
continue. As members of the Council know, nearly two
thirds of the population of the Gaza Strip are refugees
who depend on UNRWA for health, education and
social services. He has confirmed that, in the current
situation, it has become already impossible to carry out
many humanitarian operations in a satisfactory manner.
I must point out that, as the Occupying Power, Israel
has prime responsibility for the humanitarian well-
being of the Palestinian population under occupation.
At present, the United Nations provides a wide variety
of essential services in the Gaza Strip. We would
expect that, if Israel effectively prevents the United
Nations from working, it would recognize and accept
its obligation to provide the needed assistance to the
Palestinian people of Gaza. In our next briefing to the
Council in one month, I hope that we will be able to
report that this issue has been resolved.

The humanitarian situation significantly
complicates the task ahead for Palestinian Prime
Minister Abu Mazen. We welcome his Government's
endorsement of the road map and willingness to begin
its implementation. This is an important step. The road
map, however, is a document that requires of the
parties concrete action. I know from my recent
discussions with Prime Minister Abu Mazen that he
appreciates this feature of the road map.
In his most recent briefing to the Council,
Mr. Turk referred to the impressive progress already
achieved by the Palestinian Authority in a number of
areas. Indeed, Abu Mazen's appointment is a landmark
achievement. A number of these accomplishments are
called for in the road map and, as a result, Abu Mazen
can correctly claim to have made substantial progress
in implementing important steps in the first phase of
the plan. Such steps include the appointment of a prime
minister with empowered executive authority;
immediate action on a credible process to produce a
draft constitution for Palestinian statehood; continued
appointment of Palestinian ministers empowered to
undertake fundamental reform; and the establishment
of an independent Palestinian election commission. We
welcome such progress and look forward to working
with the Palestinian Authority to consolidate and
deepen these reforms.

We also look forward to progress in the area of
security reform as called for in the road map. This is an
area in which the Palestinian Authority has tragically
failed over the past two years. The fate of Abu Mazen's
Government is critically dependent on a radical and
credible change of policy. Until the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples feel safe and secure, the ultimate hopes
of the road map will seem illusory.

As stated in the last briefing, and it bears
repeating, Abu Mazen will have two main tasks in the
area of security. He will need to restore law and order
in Palestinian areas and reverse the breakdown in
internal security. Simultaneously, he must take
immediate steps to curb terrorism and to bring to
justice those involved in carrying out terrorist attacks.
He must ensure that Palestinian areas are not launching
pads for attacks on Israelis. The Prime Minister made a
good programmatic start along these lines in his speech
to the Palestinian Legislative Council when he spoke of
disarming armed groups to ensure that the Palestinian
Authority is the only authority in Palestinian-controlled
areas.

Abu Mazen's work will be greatly aided by the
planned renewed attempt by the Government of Egypt
to induce all Palestinian groups to agree to a ceasefire.
Such a ceasefire would be an important step toward
Abu Mazen's goal of having arms only in the hands of
a "rebuilt and refocused Palestinian Authority security
apparatus", to quote the road map. We commend the
Government of Egypt for its determination to achieve
this end and stand ready to provide the support of the
United Nations to the effort. This effort underlines the
importance of the active participation of the
Governments of Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia as
partners with the Quartet and the parties in the
effective implementation of the road map.

The Government of Israel has yet to endorse the
road map and commit to its implementation. We hope
that Prime Minister Sharon's meeting with Prime
Minister Abu Mazen last Saturday has increased
Israel's comfort with the peace process and will lead to
Israel's support for the road map. We firmly believe
that the road map is very much in Israel's interest. It is
encouraging that, according to recent opinion polls, a
strong majority of Israelis, including voters of Prime
Minister Sharon's own Likud Party, support the road
map as well.

I find it hopeful that Prime Minister Sharon
repeatedly has endorsed the two-State solution and
called for the implementation of United States
President Bush's 24 June 2002 vision, which calls for
the end of the occupation that began in 1967. President
Bush has also stated that the road map is a part of this
vision.

The parties' endorsement of the goals of the road
map and their willingness to begin to take steps along
its path are essential. The road map is designed to be a
process that requires the parties to take steps in
reciprocity and in parallel. While this principle of
parallelism does not imply a requirement for acting in
lockstep, it does provide for actions by each party
within defined periods of time that would build the
confidence of the other.

I turn now to the situation along the Blue Line. I
visited the Blue Line late last week and was provided
with a helicopter tour of the Line by Major General
Tewari, Force Commander of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). I am pleased to
report that, despite the tense situation that exists along
the Line, the parties have acted with restraint and
maintained an overall calm in the area. Council
members may recall that the last violent breach of the
Blue Line took place in late January. Since then, it
appears that all concerned have followed their stated
intent to avoid escalatory situations. We hope that this
reflects the commitment of all of the parties to
respecting the Blue Line.

Notwithstanding this positive situation, I regret
having to draw attention - again - to continuing
breaches in the form of Israeli air violations of the Blue
Line and the anti-aircraft fire by Hizbullah. Hizbullah's
anti-aircraft fire has raised an additional concern
during this reporting period. On 18 February, an anti-
aircraft gun was placed in close proximity to UNIFIL
position 8-32. Despite repeated requests to the
Government of Lebanon, the gun remains in place.
Furthermore, on 28 April, a shell fired from an anti-
aircraft gun landed approximately 10 metres outside a
UNIFIL position. Shrapnel from the shell hit and
pierced the roof of a prefabricated cabin at that
position. Although no injuries to UNIFIL personnel
were reported, the incident illustrates the dangers from
such anti-aircraft fire.

Both the air violations and the ensuing anti-
aircraft fire threaten to disrupt the calm that has
otherwise characterized the situation along the Blue
Line. Once again, we call upon the Government of
Israel and the Government of Lebanon to cease these
violations and to respect fully the Blue Line. We also
call upon the Government of Lebanon to ensure the
safety of UNIFIL personnel, so that they will be able
effectively to perform their required functions.

In a difficult regional environment, we can
celebrate the third anniversary of the Israeli withdrawal
from Lebanon, in full compliance with United Nations
resolutions. Despite serious and tragic violations such
as cross-border raids in which Israelis have been killed
and abducted, the border between Lebanon and Israel,
and Lebanon and Israeli-occupied Syria, remains
calmer than it has been in decades. This should remind
us of the power of the Security Council and of Security
Council resolutions, the legitimacy that the United
Nations can confer on a peace process, the
effectiveness of negotiating under United Nations

auspices, and the usefulness of international law.

The road map went through a nine-month
gestation. At the end of last month, it had a fragile
birth. It will require care from the parties and from the
international community to help it grow. But we should
not have any false illusions. The birth marked only a
beginning, and now the hard work begins.

One should not underestimate the importance of
this period in the history of the Middle East conflict.
The road map might not be a flawless document, but I
believe that it is the best chance to achieve peace that
is now available. In addition, it may well be the last
chance for the parties to achieve a two-State solution
for a very long time.

Two factors contribute to this belief. First,
continuing Palestinian terror contributes to the
radicalization of the peoples of both communities. It is
difficult to imagine that a continuing cycle of violence
would make Israelis or Palestinians more willing to
make peace in the near future. Secondly, Israel's
ongoing expansion of settlements, construction of the
separation wall and other public-works projects in the
West Bank would, over time, make the creation of a
viable Palestinian State, part of which would be on the
West Bank, more and more difficult.

If this assessment is accurate, the international
community should focus on getting the parties to begin
to move along the road map as quickly as possible.
Only through the cooperation of Israel and of the
Palestinian Authority, with the active support of the
Quartet, key regional actors and the rest of the
international community, will the vision of peace be
achieved.

I should note that no other Middle East peace
plan has enjoyed such wide regional and international
backing as does the road map. That backing should
help sustain the parties even as rejectionists try to
derail the process through violence and other means.
We must all stay focused on the ultimate goals in the
face of such attacks.

In the end, however, the parties themselves must
follow the road map, cooperate with each other in its
implementation and endure the challenges to its vision.
They must learn to work together during the
implementation of the road map if they are to live side
by side, as foreseen, at the end of the path. That end -
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace between
Israelis and Palestinians and between Israel and its
other neighbours, as envisaged in the road map and
consistent with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) - is deeply in the
interest of all of the peoples of the Middle East.

