Mr. Ballestero (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
will now speak in my national capacity. Like the other
delegations that have spoken before me, I would like to
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Ambassador Zalmay
Khalilzad for the presentations of the reports on the
work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq
(UNAMI) and on the multinational force in Iraq.
Likewise, I would like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al Bayati, for his
statement. For me it is always a personal pleasure to
see him in this Chamber.

My delegation is pleased to take note of the
positive news contained in the Secretary-General's
report on UNAMI (S/2008/688) concerning the
progress made in the country's reconstruction and the
establishment of a federal, pluralistic and unified Iraq.

In particular, we are pleased at the holding of
provincial elections next year, because we believe it is
important that Iraqi authorities strengthen their
legitimacy in the eyes of the all Iraqi people through
the consolidating of democratic processes. We urge
UNAMI to continue to contribute, through technical
assistance and advice, with a transparent election
process that offers representation guarantees for Iraq's
citizens.

My delegation supports UNAMI and, in
particular, the efforts by Mr. de Mistura in the very
positive role they have played in offering the necessary
electoral assistance. We believe it is fitting to remind
all political players of the Security Council's support
for UNAMI, to counter any attempt to manipulate in
any way the results of the elections.

We are also pleased by the news of the increase in
diplomatic contacts between Iraq and neighbouring
countries, a process that will make possible better
integration of Iraq into the regional framework and that
helps to strengthen the mechanisms of dialogue and
cooperation. Costa Rica believes that the stability of
Iraq depends to a great extent on cooperation with its
neighbours and a stable and secure relationship with
them.

My delegation is also pleased to see the progress
made in the development of institutional capacity in
Iraq, in particular with regard to the management of
public budgets for the delivery of local services. We
note the importance of implementing initiatives, such
as the United Nations Assistance Strategy for Iraq
2008-2010, recently signed by the Government of Iraq
and the United Nations. My country also observes that,
thanks to progress in the field, as stated by the
Secretary-General,

"the Government of Iraq is increasingly able to
fund its own reconstruction agenda thanks to
greater stability and oil revenues, which have
been rising through 2008." (S/2008/688, para. 59)

Costa Rica certainly is pleased to note this.

In the midst of this positive picture, we continue
to be concerned by the ongoing political violence, by
terrorist attacks, as well as the deaths of civilians,
which take place within the context of military
operations.

Lastly, we would like to point out the Secretary-
General's statement in paragraph 40 of the same report,
to the effect that, "systematic human rights violations
remain constant, but are less visible and less widely
reported". The protection and promotion of human
rights necessarily require reliable and effective
reporting mechanisms. For this reason, we urge the
Iraqi authorities to continue to fight this culture of
impunity, as well as the culture of silence, through the
implementation of legal mechanisms to this end.

In this context, my delegation also believes that it
is important that the Iraqi authorities adopt the bill to
establish an independent human rights commission.

Lastly, we are concerned by the delay of the six-
monthly report of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq on human rights. We hope that we can
soon have it before the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I have the honour of giving the floor to Mr. de
Mistura to respond to the comments and questions that
have been raised.

