Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): For
almost two decades now, both the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
have been guided by the demand for justice for those
who suffered in those two respective regions.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the activities of
the Tribunals. It is therefore my pleasure to welcome
today Judge Theodore Meron and to congratulate him
on his assumption of the presidency of the ICTY for
the second time. I also wish to extend our welcome to
Judge Khan, President of the ICTR, as well as to the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals, Mr. Brammertz and
Mr. Jallow. Their respective briefings have provided
detailed and comprehensive accounts of all the
activities in the reporting period. Those reports are also
testimony to their dedication to justice and the fight
against impunity. Here, I would also like to underline
the great contribution of the staff of the Tribunals and
to thank them for their tireless work.

We take note of the Tribunals' continuing efforts
to successfully complete their work, mindful of the
highest standards of fair justice. Their steadiness in
fulfilling their remaining judicial functions is
commendable, particularly in the face of unforeseen
challenges beyond their control. However, what
concerns us most with respect to the cases proceeding
to the pre-trial phase are the steps being taken to
reconcile the requirements of the completion strategy
with the demands of presenting cases in a way that
fully reflects the gravity and scope of the crimes
committed. We hope that, in their final stages, the
Tribunals will move towards meeting those demands
first and foremost, as well as meeting the requirements
of the completion strategy.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is still facing a large
number of cases that remain to be prosecuted. We
believe that there can be no meaningful peace and
reconciliation without justice. We therefore once again
underline that all those responsible for war crimes must
be brought to justice. Furthermore, we fully agree that
cooperation between the countries in the region is
highly important, and that every effort should be made
towards improving and enhancing cooperation through
numerous bilateral agreements that will address
possible deficiencies.

Finally, as the mandate of my country in the
Security Council comes to a close, we are particularly
pleased to be able to participate in such an important
chapter of the Tribunals' history. With the adoption of
resolution 1966 (2010) and the creation of the Residual
Mechanism, we ensured that their legacy of
groundbreaking contributions to international
jurisprudence and the international justice system will
be permanently preserved. It is our sincere hope that
this legacy will ensure that atrocities such as those
committed in our country and Rwanda will never be
repeated.
