Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Ambassador
Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.

The current situation in Burundi is generally stable.
The preparations for the country's 2020 elections have
been steadily advancing. The National Independent
Electoral Commission published the electoral calendar
in June, while in July it updated its list ofrepresentatives
of civil society organizations that are involved in the
electoral preparations. Progress has been made in
terms of the return of Burundian refugees. The report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
(S/2019/837) published on 24 October shows that 8,000
Burundian refugees have voluntarily returned to the
country since 15 June. The overall security situation
in Burundi has continued to improve. The Government
and the people apparently have made achievements
in pursuing peace and seeking development. China
welcomes those developments.

The peace, stability and development of
Burundi depends on the support and assistance of
the international community. The Council and the
international community should play a constructive
role in helping Burundi achieve lasting peace and
stability. In View of the current situation, China would
like to emphasize the following three points.

First, we must respect the leadership of the
people and the Government of Burundi on the issue
of elections. Since the end of last year, in preparation
for the 2020 elections, the Burundian Government
has been actively engaged with the various parties
in the country to establish the National Independent
Electoral Commission and develop the electoral road
map, and it has repeatedly promised to raise funds
independently. These steps fully demonstrate the ability
and determination of the Government and the people of
Burundi to solve problems on their own. As elections
fall within the realm of the internal affairs of a country,
the international community should fully respect the
choice of the Government and the people of Burundi.

Secondly, we must continue to increase
humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the
country. We hope that the international community and
international partners will honour their commitments
in a timely fashion by helping the refugees return
to their homes and assisting the country as it
relaunches its socioeconomic development, in line
with the development plan drafted by the Burundian
Government. The relevant international organizations
and agencies should resume their economic cooperation
with, and development assistance to, Burundi as soon
as possible. China appreciates and supports the ongoing
constructive assistance the Peacebuilding Commission
and the country team are providing to Burundi.

Thirdly, the current situation in Burundi should
be viewed objectively and fairly. The Government of
Burundi has stated on many occasions that Burundi no
longer poses a threat to regional peace and security,
and therefore should not stay on the Council's agenda.
The Council should heed the country's views and make
necessary adjustments in a timely manner and based
on the latest developments, so that it can concentrate
its energy on emergency situations that endanger
international peace and security.

China has been actively supporting Burundi's
political process and national reconstruction. Within
the limits of our ability, we have provided assistance
in many fields, such as agriculture, education and the
building of infrastructure. We stand ready to continue
contributing to peace, stability and sustainable
development in Burundi.

