Mr. Chergui (spoke in French): | would like to thank you, Sir, and the Belgian presidency for including this important issue in our discussions. I would like to underline the exceptional nature of the address by His Majesty King Philippe, King of the Belgians, to the Security Council today. I know how great his commitment is to young people in general and to young people in fragile situations in particular. Reconciliation processes in conflict-affected societies are of particular interest to him, and we agree. His statement in this Chamber will raise the profile of the noble cause of the protection of children in armed conflict, a topic that Belgium, like the African Union, has long been put on the international agenda at the United Nations but, above all, through His Majesty the King's support for UNICEF and development cooperation. I also take this opportunity to welcome the commitment shown by Her Majesty Queen Mathilde. As Honorary President of UNICEF-Belgium and a Sustainable Development Goals Advocate, she has participated in numerous humanitarian missions, particularly on the African continent. Her Majesty has systematically emphasized the rights of children. I know how much the issue, particularly the question of physical and psychosocial rehabilitation for child victims of armed conflict, is close to her heart and I thank her for it. (spoke in English) I thank the presidency for the invitation to participate in this high-level debate on integrating child protection provisions in peace negotiations and peace and ceasefire agreements. Indeed, children must be at the heart of all our efforts to prevent and resolve violent conflict, including concrete measures to avert and respond to all forms of abuse, neglect and exploitation. During peace negotiations, the best interests of children must be the first priority and no related decision should entail any further violence for them. Conflict disproportionately affects children, who may become victims of forced participation in conflict or be killed, maimed, recruited, used, sexually exploited, trafficked or denied access to humanitarian assistance. Schools and hospitals are attacked, preventing children from accessing basic services, such as education and health care, in contravention of international law. It is imperative - in fact, integral to sustainable peace - that violations of children's rights be not only prevented but addressed before, during and after conflicts. Unaddressed violations of children's rights perpetuate a culture of impunity, injustice and lawlessness that may have given rise to the conflict in the first place and provide fertile ground for a relapse into violent conflict. If guns are to be sustainably silenced in Africa, fundamental rights and liberties, including the rights and welfare of children, must be protected through therule of law. That is one of the principles that underpins the African Peace and Security Architecture and the African Union's efforts in preventing, managing and resolving conflicts in Africa. Given the devastating impact of violent conflict on children and particularly on the erosion of their basic human rights and freedoms, it is critical that all actors engaged in mediation and peace processes incorporate child-protection language and provisions in peace agreements. It is important to highlight that our Peace and Security Council, at its 491st meeting, held on 9 March 2015 in Addis Ababa, reiterated that the African Union should include children's interests in peace agreements, in the post-violence arrangements for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, and truth and reconciliation commissions. Over the years, the African Union and the regional economic communities and mechanisms have invested time and resources in ensuring that peace processes and peace agreements systematically address and prevent violations of children's rights, as well as provide for the meaningful participation of children in peacemaking and peacebuilding efforts on the continent. There are several concrete examples of the efforts of the African Union and other partners in this regard, including the 2000 Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi; the Sudan's 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement; the 2015 Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan; and last year's Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. In Burundi, in addition to a declaration that was agreed in December 2008, which mandated the parties to immediately and unconditionally release children recruited or used, the Arusha Agreement provided that no child shall be used directly in armed conflict and that children shall be protected in times of armed conflict. The Comprehensive Peace Agreement, on its part, obliged its signatories to demobilize all children in their ranks, and a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration commission was established to oversee this. A provision in the 2015 South Sudan Agreement states that the parties shall offer special consideration to conflict-affected children and provides for a child- friendly transitional justice system. In the Central African Republic, where I had the honour to mediate the peace agreement, we addressed all violations against children and provided a full-fledged monitoring and verification system headed by the African Union. While our continental organization, the African Union, has this rich experience integrating child rights, protection and welfare into peace processes, we are yet to establish a standard framework or guidelines for doing so. That is why the African Union welcomed and participated in the high-level dialogue organized last year by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, in partnership with the Government of Belgium, in Brussels, to deliberate on a draft practical guidance on the integration of child-protection issues in peace processes. In this regard, in addition to our zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse in peace-support operations, I welcome and am proud of the African Union's contribution to the Secretary-General's practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. This will be an invaluable tool not only for African Union mediators and special envoys but also for African Union member States engaged in peace processes. Let me reiterate once again my appreciation to Belgium and its King Philippe and Queen Mathilde for having created this timely opportunity for all of us to contribute to restoring precious smiles to our children's faces and to giving them hope for the future.
