Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to begin by thanking Nigeria for its initiative to
convene this open debate. I also welcome your
presence, Foreign Minister Ajumogobia of Nigeria, to
preside over today's meeting. My thanks go also to
Deputy Secretary-General Migiro and to Ms. Cliffe of
the World Bank for their presentations.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is a basic
principle of the United Nations and a major
responsibility of the Security Council. Preventive
diplomacy is an important means for the settlement of
disputes. The Charter of the United Nations offers
philosophical guidance and a basis for action in
diplomatic efforts to prevent crises and conflicts. For
many years, the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations and Member States have
been engaged in preventive diplomacy in many forms
and have made significant contributions to easing
tensions, resolving hot-spot issues and restoring
regional peace and stability.

In today's world, the nature of conflicts and
disputes is undergoing profound change. Traditional
conflicts between States are evolving towards a blend
of inter- and intra-State conflict. Some regions in
Africa have witnessed frequent conflicts; these remain
a threat to the peace and stability of Africa and hamper
the continent's development.

This new situation poses new challenges and
requires that we move with the times, intensify our
input and invigorate preventive diplomacy so as to
make a greater contribution to international peace and
security.

First, we must strengthen the concept of
prevention and give priority attention to early
prevention. Experience has repeatedly shown that
remediation yields only limited results compared to
prevention. If we cannot take rational and legitimate
action in the early stages of a crisis and seek to settle
disputes peacefully through mediation and other
means, then we will have to spend several times more
time and energy to remedy the situation once a crisis
has erupted.

In recent years, United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been overstretched, and the gap
between supply and demand has widened. If we can do
a good job at conflict prevention, we will be able not
only to save resources and increase the efficiency of
peacekeeping, but also to save people from the scourge
of war. We must therefore strengthen the concept of
prevention and put it into practice.

Secondly, we must adopt comprehensive
strategies in the light of local conditions. The Security
Council must study the root causes of disputes and
conflicts of different natures and forms. It must come
to objective and accurate judgements concerning
disputes and offer appropriate proposals and
procedures. Here, the Council must strengthen its
coordination with other United Nations entities and
work to resolve crises through good offices, mediation
and other means.

For post-conflict countries, priority attention
should continue to be focused on preventing the
recurrence of conflict. Crisis management alone is not
enough in conflict prevention: there must also be a
commitment to helping the countries concerned to
develop their economies, extricate themselves from
poverty, achieve sustainable development and eradicate
the economic and social root causes of conflict.

Thirdly, we must respect the views of the parties
concerned and must give full scope to the comparative
advantages offered by regional and subregional
organizations. The key to the success of good offices,
mediation and other means of preventive diplomacy is
adequate political will among the parties concerned.
The United Nations must enhance communication with
the parties concerned, secure their cooperation and lay
a solid foundation for preventive diplomacy.

Regional and subregional organizations have
unique advantages in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. In recent years, the African Union (AU) and
African subregional organizations have been actively
engaged in mediation efforts addressing hot-spot issues
in Africa, and they have achieved positive results. The
Security Council should establish or deepen strategic
partnerships with the AU and should fully motivate the
AU and other regional and subregional organizations in
the sphere of preventive diplomacy. It should
encourage them to play their front-line role and should
create an enabling environment and conditions for
them. At the same time, the Council should provide
more assistance to them and should help them with
capacity-building.

Fourthly, we must strengthen coordination and
form synergies. The prevention and resolution of
conflicts should follow a multi-pronged approach with
political, security, economic and social dimensions.
The Security Council, the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission should enhance their exchanges and
cooperation, complement one another's advantages,
yielding synergy.

In recent years, the Secretary-General and his
representatives have been actively engaged in resolving
regional conflicts, and they have achieved fruitful
results. In future, the Security Council should continue
to support the Secretary-General in his active role.

China has always maintained that disputes should
be settled peacefully, through dialogue and negotiation.
We support a greater role for the United Nations and
the AU and other regional organizations in preventive
diplomacy.

I thank Nigeria for its preparation of today's
presidential statement. China supported the Council's
endorsement of that statement in order to demonstrate
to the international community the Council's political
will in its support for preventive diplomacy.

