I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his enlightening presentation. I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. It has been almost four years since the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace was reached. Much has been achieved thanks to the efforts of the Colombian Government and people, and we must welcome this. We must also clearly recognize that, with regard to the ambitions of 2016, a number of provisions of the agreement remain insufficiently implemented. The peace agreement is a package whose various components are inseparable. I will come back to four specific issues. First, we regret the continuing violence in Colombia. We condemn the multiple assassinations that have taken place in recent months, including those of children and young people, as well as those of former combatants, civil-society leaders and human rights defenders. Such crimes must stop and those responsible brought to justice. As the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/943) points out, simple measures can be taken quickly. Better use must be made of the early-warning system under the Office of the Ombudsman. The National Commission on Security Guarantees should be encouraged to finalize a public policy for the dismantling of criminal organizations. In the long term, it is imperative to strengthen the State's presence throughout the country, including in the most remote areas. Secondly, France wishes to recognize the efforts that have been made in recent months to reintegrate former combatants despite the pandemic and the impact of confinement on productive projects. Those efforts must continue, with a focus on ex-combatants residing outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. It is also important to resolve the long-standing issue of access to land. Thirdly, the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition is a cornerstone of the peace agreement, as we have regularly stressed in the Council. We would like the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to contribute to the verification of the implementation of the sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We stand ready to entrust it with that role when the Colombians request it. Finally, another area in which further progress is expected is the National Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of Illicit Crops, which represents an immense source of hope for thousands of families. It is crucial that that programme obtain the necessary resources, especially to finance alternative productive projects, which are a prerequisite for its long-term success. The chapters of the agreement dealing with ethnic and gender issues must also receive special attention. The peace process in Colombia faces challenges that we cannot ignore. France, in its national capacity, will continue, within the Security Council and the European Union, to give its full support to all those in Colombia who are mobilized daily to meet these challenges.
