Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui for her briefing. We also appreciate the
statement by Ms. Josephine Mbela.

As indicated in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/882), progress has been made in the
implementation of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo electoral calendar. At this critical juncture,
it is important that all national stakeholders engage
constructively in facilitating the holding of the elections
according to the provisions of the 31 December 2016
political agreement. It is vital for the peace and stability
of the country that the Congolese people be allowed
to exercise their democratic rights and choose their
leaders in an inclusive and transparent election on
23 December to ensure a peaceful transfer of power.

We are encouraged by the peaceful conclusion of
the 29 September political rally in Kinshasa, which was
organized by seven opposition leaders; the 1 October
demonstrations in Kananga, Central Kasai; and the
4 October meeting of the Independent National Electoral
Commission with the 21 presidential candidates or their
representatives, who have exchanged information and
views on the electoral process.

We hope that all national stakeholders and
politicians will respect the interests of their people and
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric. In this context,
we agree with the call of the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo, which highlighted the importance
the implementation of the confidence-building measures
by the Government, as provided in the agreement.

We encourage the Independent National Electoral
Commission to utilize United Nations readiness
to provide technical and logistical support for the
successful conduct of the 23 December elections. The
advisory support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) in warehouse management, as
well as the development and implementation of training
strategies and procedures for 440,000 polling staff,
besides women's participation, is commendable.

We want to welcome the outcome of the ninth Heads
of State summit of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - the Regional Oversight Mechanism - held
in Kampala on 8 October, which was encouraged
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and all concerned national stakeholders to
create conditions conducive to credible, inclusive and
peaceful elections. We also note with satisfaction the
invitation extended to the African Union Commission
and the Southern African Development Community,
which are preparing to deploy electoral observers to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Finally, we welcome the visit of the Director-
General of the World Health Organization and Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix to the epicentre of the
Ebola outbreak to meet with health workers, civil
society representatives, United Nations peacekeeping
troops and local authorities. Following the adoption of
resolution 2439 (2018), the visit by the two senior United
Nations officials sent a very good message highlighting
the gravity of the Ebola situation and the security
challenge. We reiterate our appreciation to MONUSCO
for its continued support to the Ebola-response efforts.

