We thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing. There is no doubt that the pandemic has affected the way in which we address conflict resolution, including the political settlement in Syria, but the Special Envoy is continuing his efforts nonetheless. We welcome the agreement by the Syrian parties on the agenda of the third round of negotiations within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. When that meeting will take place, nobody can predict today - the sooner the better, but only the World Health Organization (WHO) knows. We will still continue to support the Special Envoy; to engage with the Syrian parties; and to facilitate dialogue between Damascus and territories in the north-east of the country. News of the death of Astana, which some of our colleagues rushed to announce in the Security Council Chamber last month, proved to be fake. A teleconference of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Turkey and Iran took place on 22 April. The Ministers underscored the leading role of Astana in promoting a Syrian settlement, including the stabilization of the situation, the facilitation of the return of refugees and the resolution of the humanitarian problems facing the civilian population, as well as the intra-Syrian dialogue within the Constitutional Committee. The Ministers agreed to continue intensive contacts in order to prepare for the next Astana-format summit. The ceasefire in Idlib established as a result of the Russian-Turkish protocol of 5 March is generally being observed. The situation has de-escalated significantly, but illegal armed groups and terrorists from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continue to perpetrate violations. Hundreds of civilians died in February and in March. Yesterday we all heard about a suicide bombing that claimed more than 40 lives in Afrin. In the north-east, from 20 to 31 March alone 82 people died and 100 were wounded. Radicals are impeding the work of the Russian and Turkish military in Idlib, organizing provocations and creating blockades. It remains necessary to divorce the moderate opposition from terrorists. The pandemic cannot be used as a pretext to whitewash terrorists. We see the picture clearly. The situation is difficult in those Syrian territories that are not under the control of the Syrian Government. And, as before, we do not have a clear picture in areas that are illegally occupied. We hear many appeals to the Syrian Government - what it should do and what it should not do. But we hear very little about what is happening in areas under occupation or out of the control of Damascus. We would recall once again that the responsibility and accountability for everything that happens there lies with the occupying Power. We hear about riots in prisons in the north-east and prisoners escaping to neighbouring countries in the region. We hear about aid sent by the coalition to the north-east, supposedly to fight the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), that included batons, shields and other anti-riot equipment. We would be interested to learn what is happening in the Rukban and AI-Hol camps and what measures are being taken there to prevent the spread of COVID-19. On our part, we would like to share with the Council this story. Two weeks ago, a group of 34 militants belonging to the Jaysh Maghawir Al-Thawra was able to leave Rukban and surrender to Government forces. They fought their way out, because one cannot just leave Rukban freely. Those people told Western reporters what was happening in the camp, in particular that they had been trained in subversion operations and that the humanitarian assistance that reaches Rukban camp is resold. I would ask members to read their interviews themselves and broaden their horizons. A simple conclusion: without the return of the entire territory of Syria to the control of its legitimate Government, the prevailing problems will not be solved. This also applies to the fight against the pandemic. We would recall also that appeals to Damascus to step up its efforts to fight the pandemic are irrelevant, as 30 per cent of its territory is under the effective control either of foreign troops, the opposition or terrorists. Those controlling the territories should be responsible for that. We state once again that unilateral sanctions are not only crippling the Syrian economy and affecting the population first and foremost but also blocking the supply of medicines and equipment to the country, thus exacerbating the difficulty of the fight against the pandemic. Syrians live throughout Syria, not just in Idlib or in the north-east. We urge our colleagues not to exploit the current situation but to actually help all Syrians. There is a positive side of this story: we welcome the steps taken by several Arab States to establish contacts with the Syrian Government in the interests of helping that country overcome the economic and humanitarian crisis and combat the coronavirus. Syria is an integral part of the regional landscape. Syria needs to return to the Arab family. That will both facilitate a Syrian political settlement and improve the overall situation in the Middle East. In response to the statement by the representative of the United Kingdom, I wish to say the following. I will be brief. I will not engage in a dialogue with Christoph, who, as I understand it, co-opted himself in the Board of Inquiry. I must say frankly that his inquiry does not ring a bell with me. If it does, I will come back to him on that. But I would recommend concentrating on those Syrians who during the nine years of conflict have been tortured, beheaded and killed by the terrorists. I think that there is ample room for inquiry here. However, I wanted to address another issue. I admire the power of deduction of our British colleague, who so elegantly presented his deep analysis of the Board of Inquiry. The members know that we do not recognize the Board of Inquiry established by the Secretary-General in excess of his authority. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that, even using a magnifying glass, the board could not establish a single civilian death caused by, to quote the report, alleged shelling by the Syrian air force or its allies. But the board did manage to uncover victims of shelling by terrorists. According to the report, not a single medical facility was destroyed; only minor damage is reported. We know that some of the members were not very pleased by that finding. In fact, some were immensely disappointed. But the finding represents a clear trend, whatever the members might say to the contrary. We have been saying it for long time, and, strangely, now it has been confirmed by an unusual source, namely, the report of the so-called Board of Inquiry.
