Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the Bolivian presidency for convening
this meeting and Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, Joint Special
Representative for Darfur and Head of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), for his important briefing.

Peru appreciates the recent improvement in security
in Darfur and hopes that it can be extended across the
whole territory, including the Jebel Marra area, where
clashes are still arising between Government forces
and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid. We also
underscore the need to put an end to intercommunal
conflicts and clashes over land and natural resources,
which discourage the return of internally displaced
persons to their places of origin.

We reiterate that only a political agreement will
allow the establishment of sustainable peace and, in that
regard, we regret the fact that, despite the negotiations
under way and the efforts of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, there is still no agreement
with the non-signatory armed groups of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We deem it necessary
that the African Union Peace and Security Council
must adopt strict measures against groups that do not
join the peace process by December, as laid out in their
communique 19 September. That topic should also be
considered by the Council, as Mr. Mamabolo indicated.

We trust that the new UNAMID mandate and
close cooperation with the United Nations country
team will allow the root causes of the conflict to be
addressed more effectively, among other important
factors, thereby contributing to the development of the
institutional environment required to peacefully settle
land ownership disputes.

We highlight the need for the donor community to
contribute during the transition period in the long-term
perspective required for sustaining peace. That also
requires the promotion of an institutional capacity to
protect and promote human rights, guarantee the rule
of law and combat impunity for serious human rights
violations reported in Darfur, to which women, children
and displaced persons are particularly vulnerable. We
must reiterate our condemnation of any form of sexual
violence by expressing our concern about and deep
sympathy for the violations suffered by 80 minors over
recent months, and stressing that their medical and
psychological care must be a priority.

We underscore the importance of the cooperation
framework with the United Nations announced by the
Government to counter human rights violations and
in particular sexual violence linked to conflict. In
that regard, we highlight the importance of the recent
sentencing of a member of the Sudanese Armed Forces
to 20 years' imprisonment for the rape of a minor. We
also highlight the progress made by the Government in
preventing the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. Furthermore, we recognize the improvements
made to access for humanitarian assistance, and in
particular the decision of the Government to allow
assistance in the rebel-held areas in Blue Nile and
South Kordofan.

Before I conclude, we would like to express our
support for the benchmarks and indicators for the exit
of UNAMID proposed by the Secretary-General, and
stress the need to continue supporting Darfur during
the transition period. UNAMID will require funds
and personnel in order to build sustainable peace. We
believe that a decrease in peacekeeping costs should
allow for more investment in sustainable development.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the African
Union and the United Nations to attract potential
donors, as well as the creation of a group of friends of
the transition.

We express our support also for the recommendation
that the joint strategic review of UNAMID to be
presented in May 2019 also include an assessment of
the implementation of the indicators of progress that
I mentioned.

