Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia
and Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus and
Malta align themselves with this statement.

We were very happy to see the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Canada here today presiding over this
extremely important open debate.

The European Union welcomes your initiative, Mr.
President, to hold this open debate on sanctions. The
European Union attaches great importance to
developments towards a more targeted and effective
sanctions regime with clear humanitarian exceptions and
effective monitoring systems. Your commitment and
perseverance in taking work in this area forward should
be commended.

The European Union also welcomes the Security
Council's establishment of an informal working group
with the mandate to consider issues related to United
Nations sanctions, which it considers can make a highly
significant contribution on the subject. The work of the
group will complement the note by the President of the
Security Council of 29 January 1999 on the work of the
sanctions Committees (S/ 1999/92), which contained
important proposals. That was a landmark in the Security
Council's thinking on sanctions, initiated in 1997 under
the Portuguese presidency of the Council.

In recent years, the Council has made increasing use
of sanctions under Chapter VII of the United Nations

 

Charter to combat threats to international peace and
security. In his millennium report (A/54/2000), the
Secretary-General notes that sanctions, as an integral
element of the collective security provisions of the Charter,
offer the Security Council an important instrument with
which to enforce its decisions. He also observes that
economic sanctions have proved to be a blunt and even
counter-productive instrument.

The European Union recognizes the concerns of the
Secretary-General and stresses that every effort should be
made to ensure that measures adopted by the Security
Council are carefully designed to have the maximum
impact on the political elites of targeted countries and/or on
their military capabilities, while minimizing the impact on
the general population, in particular its most vulnerable
members, and other unintended side-effects.

In support of developing better targeted sanctions,
expert seminars have taken place at Interlaken on financial
sanctions, and at Bonn on smart sanctions, in particular
arms embargoes and travel sanctions; these worked on
specific recommendations. The Secretariat and the Security
Council should draw upon this unique available expertise.

In his millennium report to the General Assembly the
Secretary-General also alludes to these efforts. The
European Union considers that Member States should take
careful note of the conclusions of these ongoing studies on
smarter sanctions and invites the new informal working
group on sanctions to take that work forward in its
discussions. The European Union further invites the
Security Council to bear these studies in mind when
designing sanctions regimes.

There is a general consensus on the desirability of
smart sanctions. In designing sanctions regimes, every
effort must be made to minimize the negative humanitarian
impact of sanctions on the general population. From the
outset, economic sanctions regimes must provide for
humanitarian exemptions. In this regard, the Security
Council or its sanctions committees should make periodic
assessments of their impact and effectiveness.
The Security Council, the sanctions committees and
the Secretariat all play an important role in this context.
The sanctions committees should take an active part in this
process, assisted by the Secretariat, not only in monitoring,
but also in evaluating the performance and efficacy of the
sanctions regimes they are charged to oversee. They should
report regularly to the Council for its consideration and
decision. For the Secretariat to perform this task as
required, it should, however, be given adequate resources
and expertise. The European Union supports the necessary
staffing of the Secretariat to that effect. On the other
hand, for the sanctions committees to deal adequately
with these matters, more of their time should be devoted
to them. It would also be useful to consider other ways to
enhance the efficiency of the sanctions committees in the
preparation of these assessments. Entrusting working
groups within the sanctions committees - chaired by the
Committee Chairman or Vice-Chairman - with specific
responsibilities in the assessment of the impact and
efficiency of sanctions would be one possibility.

I would now like to address the question of
monitoring sanctions. Effective monitoring of sanctions by
the sanctions committees in cooperation with Member
States, regional organizations and other relevant entities
is crucial to prevent violations of the sanctions regimes,
to ensure their effectiveness, and to see to it that
violations are prevented and that negative impacts on the
general population are kept to a minimum. For this
purpose, better information on sanctions regimes must be
ensured. More unified and precise terminology should be
used in sanctions resolutions to enhance harmonized
national implementation. Bearing in mind the important
role neighbouring countries play in implementing
sanctions and in preventing and punishing their violation,
it is crucial that technical assistance be provided to them
by the United Nations, under the supervision of the
sanctions committees.

The European Union encourages the efforts of States
towards developing means of better implementing
sanctions established by the Security Council. The
European Union and its member States, for their part, are
committed to fully and effectively implementing all
mandatory United Nations sanctions regimes, in
accordance with their obligations. To this end,
coordination is regularly undertaken by European Union
member States and the Commission in order to reach an
adequate and uniform implementation regime when
appropriate.

The visits of representatives of sanctions committees
to the countries of the region of the target State are very
useful, not only to ascertain the local needs and
conditions in this regard but also to better inform them as
to the scope and rationale of the mandatory measures.
Direct knowledge of the situation on the ground is most
important for the efficient implementation of sanctions.
We recall the successful visit of the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone, Ambassador

 

Dahlgren of Sweden, whose results were reported to us in
a public briefing of the Council in 1998. More recently, we
recall that the visits of Ambassador Fowler as Chairman of
the sanctions Committee on Angola were also part and
parcel of the report presented to the Council on the
workings and the failures of the sanctions regime imposed
on UNITA.

The European Union looks forward to continuing to
participate actively in further efforts to develop clear and
effective sanctions that reach their intended goals quickly
and successfully.

