Mr. Suarez Moreno (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to take the floor to speak on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

At the outset, on behalf of the member States of the
Movement, I extend our best wishes to the delegation
of the People's Republic of China in presiding over a
successful month in the work of the Security Council. I
would also like to express our appreciation for China's
efforts in preparing the concept note (S/2017/574, annex) for this session, which serves as the basis for
guiding our discussions today. We would also like to
acknowledge the diligence with which the delegation of
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, under the leadership
of Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Soliz, led the work
of this organ during the month of June. Similarly, we
would like to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio
Guterres, and the Commissioner for Peace and
Security of the African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for
their briefings.

As rightly pointed out in the concept note for
this open debate, Africa is the continent with the
greatest development potential. Nonetheless, that
potential could certainly be lost owing to various
security and developmental challenges faced by this
vibrant continent, including, among others, protracted
conflicts, climate change and transnational organized
crime. In that regard, its worth noting that, during the
seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement,
held in September 2016 on the Island of Margarita in
Venezuela, the NAM. Heads of State and Government
reiterated their determination to build a peaceful and
prosperous world by collectively addressing existing,
new and emerging challenges and issues of shared
concern to its member States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and
principles of international law.

As we well know, there can be no peace without
development and no development without peace,
bearing in mind how deeply those two processes are
interconnected. It is for that reason that the Movement
appreciates the convening of this open debate, aimed
at emphasizing the importance of assisting Africa
in enhancing its capacities in the areas of peace and
security. In that regard, the Non-Aligned Movement
underscores the important role that regional and
subregional bodies and mechanisms can play in
the promotion of regional peace and security and
in economic and social development by fostering
cooperation among countries in the region. We also
emphasize the importance of synergy between regional
and subregional initiatives to ensure complementarity
and the added value of each process in achieving their
common goals, such as political stability, economic
growth, and social and cultural development.

The member States of the Non-Aligned Movement
welcome the determination of the United Nations to
enhance its relationship and cooperation with regional
and subregional organizations, in particular with the
African Union, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. We
also welcome the stated support for the implementation
of the 2063 Agenda, adopted during the twenty-fourth
ordinary session of the Heads of State and Government
of the Assembly of the African Union, held from 30 to
31 January 2015 in Addis Ababa, in order to promote
peace, stability and socioeconomic development
in Africa.

The Security Council has in the past committed
itself to strengthening cooperation and coordination
with the African Union. Efforts must therefore be
redoubled to further strengthen the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
at the operational, political and tactical levels, with a
View to addressing in a holistic manner the challenges
faced in the fields of peace and security, including
the need to address the root causes of conflicts and to
promote stability and development. At the same time,
we must bear in mind that the African Union enjoys
acknowledged political authority in the region, as well
as the premise ofAfrican solutions to African problems
and the African Union's proven experience in assisting
in the peaceful settlement of disputes through political
dialogue and consultations, thereby contributing to
lasting peace.

While recognizing the important role that youth
and women can play in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, we would like to underscore, inter alia, the
African Youth (2009-2018) Decade Plan of Action as
a framework for multisectorial and multidimensional
engagement by all stakeholders towards the achievement
of the goals and objectives of the African Youth Charter,
including those of governance, peace and security, as
well as the African Peace and Security Architecture
Roadmap 2016-2020, including its initiative entitled
"Silencing the Guns, Owning the Future: Realizing a
Conflict-Free Africa by 2020".

Moreover, the Movement supports ongoing efforts
to strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities and
emphasizes the importance of implementing the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
was signed on 19 April, in the short, medium and long
terms in all relevant areas. The Non-Aligned Movement
also recommends enhancing an effective partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
in order to improve the planning, deployment and
management of African peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, we stress the importance of finding ways
to secure predictable, adequate and sustained financial
support to African Union-led peace operations so that
deployed missions can maximize their operational
effectiveness on the ground.

In conclusion, it is worth recalling that, in 2004,
former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
stated in an interview that

"[t]here is a greater fatigue concerning the African
problem today than five or 10 years ago. The
situation now in Africa is worse than it was 10
years ago".

Today, 13 years later, his assessment continues to hold
true. Therefore, the Non-Aligned Movement encourages
the international community to resolutely support
efforts in favour of peace, stability and socioeconomic
development in Africa, including capacity-building in
those areas.

