Mr. Carreras (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, our delegation is particularly
pleased that you are chairing the Security Council this
month, and we would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you once again and assure you that we will
support your successful management of our proceedings.

In the broad context of the complicated general
situation in Africa, the Security Council decided to devote
special attention to the situation in the Republic of Sierra
Leone, as part of the international community's effort over
the past three years - through the United Nations, in
coordination with the Organization of African Unity,
subregional organizations and the Governments of the
region - to restore pluralistic and representative
democracy, and promote respect for human rights and
peace and national reconciliation in that country.

This being so, the text before us today is not the
result of improvisation, nor does it correspond to a vague
and speculative position; rather, it is a clear demonstration
of a well-defined and sustained commitment we have all
made and resolutely keep, to the people of Sierra Leone
to promote the unconditional and speedy return to
democratic institutionality in that country.

The draft resolution we will soon be adopting also
reflects an important conceptual development in the
Security Council on the adoption of sanctions. In the case
of Sierra Leone, the Council, in the opinion of Costa
Rica, has taken the right course of action in defining a
model of "intelligent" sanctions to penalize and exert
pressure on the authorities of the junta and avoid greater
humanitarian difficulties for the civilian population.

Our delegation feels that this new definition is an
important signal and a timely confirmation the
international community, identifying the responsibilities of
those who from their positions of leadership cause
situations that threaten international peace and security.

Costa Rica trusts that the community of nations, and
this Council in particular, will adhere to this new political
and legal definition and thereby avoid a recurrence of the
kinds of situations that in the past have caused great harm
to innocent people and made it even more difficult to
reach objectives.

In this context, we should like to emphasize two
elements in the draft resolution that we believe
characterize this new vision. On one hand, on the premise
that these sanctions are not an end in themselves, but
rather a tool to achieve an objective, an initial 180-day
period has been set for their application. Furthermore,
they give the Sanctions Committee new scope for action
by giving it important tasks aimed at ensuring the
provision of humanitarian assistance.

In the case of Sierra Leone, as with other cases in
Africa, we are particularly concerned by the humanitarian
situation of the civilian population, especially the 100,000
displaced persons and refugees, whose conditions of
health and nutrition are worsening daily. We are
especially concerned about the child population, which is
being affected by epidemics, and we wish to call
particular attention to this. We trust that the international

 

community, through its official channels and humanitarian
organizations, will be able to attend to all of them. The
report on this matter, submitted by the Secretary-General to
the Council for consideration, demonstrates the growing
gravity of the situation and constitutes an important appeal
to Member States. Our delegation fully supports the efforts
being made by the Department of Humanitarian Affairs in
coordination with concerned countries and subregional
organizations to set up effective machinery to distribute
humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, as we said during the recent ministerial-
level Security Council meeting on Africa, the crises in
Africa are based on and supported by an unjust economic
and social structure. The case of Sierra Leone is no
different, and Costa Rica urges the international financial
organizations to take a broad-based and comprehensive
approach to promote reconstruction in that country, after the
restoration of democracy, which we all desire.

In keeping with my comments here, Costa Rica will
support the draft resolution before us and trusts that its
implementation will contribute to the restoration, without
delay, of the legitimate Government of President Kabbah,
to whom we express our resolute support and admiration.

