Mr. Badji (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for November. I am confident that, under your skilful
guidance, the Council's work will be carried out
constructively and effectively.

I also take this opportunity to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Kenzo Oshima, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his outstanding leadership
of the Council in October.

I thank you, Sir, and the other members of the
Council for giving me the opportunity, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this important debate on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

We meet today in the Security Council to
consider the deeply disturbing events that have taken
place in Beit Hanoun in the Gaza Strip. We all know
what happened. Nineteen Palestinians were killed in
the early morning yesterday when Israeli forces fired
artillery rounds on six houses in a city where most
people were still asleep. Seven children and six women
were among those killed. Some 53 other people were
wounded, including 25 children and 12 women.
According to certain sources, the Israeli military
operation in that region, which began on 1 November,
has already claimed 77 lives.

The Israeli army's continued excessive use of
force in the occupied Palestinian territories constitutes

an act of war against the Palestinian people. The use of
tanks, aircraft and combat helicopters, as well as
missiles and artillery guns, is clearly and blatantly
disproportionate. The number of Palestinian civilian
victims, including innocent women and children among
the killed and injured, continues to grow.

The Committee has also urged the Palestinian
militants to cease firing Qassam rockets into Israel
from northern Gaza, which provoked the violent
response of the Israeli army. Nothing whatsoever can
justify those acts, which violate international law.

The tragic developments in the situation have
dashed the faint remaining hopes of the Palestinian
leaders of finding a way to resume dialogue and revive
the peace negotiations. Not only has the Palestinian
people, which is already living in horrendous
conditions, been further downtrodden and humiliated;
it must also deal with dangers that grow day by day.

The latest Israeli operation in the Gaza Strip and
the West Bank has gone virtually unnoticed by the
international community, as have the ongoing building
of settlements and the separation wall and the serious
humanitarian crisis in the West Bank and Gaza. We
urge Israel, the occupying Power, immediately to end
its military operations, to conduct a credible in-depth
inquiry into yesterday's horrific incident, and to act in
conformity with the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Times
of War by protecting Palestinians. We call on both
parties immediately to cease all acts of violence and to
show the utmost restraint in order for calm to be
restored.

The Committee believes that the Security Council
needs to shoulder its Charter responsibilities and help
to end the bloodshed and suffering in the occupied
Palestinian territories. Israel must end its military
incursions into Palestinian territory and its targeted
assassinations of Palestinians. It must also lift the
severe restrictions that have imposed untold daily
suffering and difficulties on the Palestinian people.

For its part, the Committee will continue to work
with legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people, above all the President of the Palestinian
Authority, who support the principles of non-violence,
recognize the State of Israel and respect and abide by
all previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements. The
Committee also advocates a negotiated settlement to
the conflict leading to the emergence of a viable,
democratic and independent Palestinian State living
side by side in peace and security with Israel and its
other neighbours. Such a settlement would allow the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict to be resolved and the
occupation that began in 1967 to end, on the basis of
the Madrid conference; the principle of land for peace;
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003); agreements previously
concluded between the parties; the Arab peace
initiative; and the acceptance of Israel as a neighbour
living in peace and security in the context of a
comprehensive settlement. Only a comprehensive
settlement will enable the Palestinian people to
exercise its inalienable rights.

