Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank the presidency for
convening this debate. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing.

Continued instability in the Middle East region is of
great concern. Violence in Gaza remains intense, and,
as the Secretary-General has pointed out, we are at the
brink of another devastating conflict. We urge all sides
to exercise maximum restraint. Once again, we stress
that violence cannot bring about a solution and that
what is needed in the region is a surge in diplomacy. In
that regard, we commend international efforts to bring
about a ceasefire on the ground in Gaza.

Japan is also paying close attention to recent steps
being made in the Egyptian-led reconciliation process.
We hope those efforts will lead to the de-escalation of
the tension in Gaza.

The United Nations has played a central role in the
region with its numerous tools for peace: mediation,
good offices, humanitarian assistance, support
for early recovery and the enhancement of social
resilience, among others. Japan believes in the roles and
effectiveness of the United Nations. We will continue to
support its diplomatic efforts in the region.

As for the Middle East peace process, the United
Nations - inter alia, the Security Council - has built
the base for a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
through its resolutions over its history. Japan will
continue with its confidence-building efforts to assist
the parties in implementing those resolutions. We
believe in the realization ofa two-State solution in line
with relevant Security Council resolutions and known
parameters. We also emphasize the United Nations
essential role in addressing humanitarian situations.
We thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing on his ongoing
efforts in implementing projects for those in need in
Gaza. We will continue extending our support to the
Palestinian people, in close coordination with the
United Nations.

Allow me to briefly touch upon the situation in
Syria. Japan has been supporting the United Nations
efforts in implementing Security Council resolutions
and extending assistance to people in need. After seven
years of devastating war, we want to believe the Special
Envoy's recent words in the Council Chamber that we
are moving cautiously in the right direction on the
political front. While Japan will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to alleviate people's suffering,
we are ready, if necessary, to step up our engagement
towards a political solution.

Let me close as I opened, by reiterating the
importance of diplomatic solutions and the continued
role of the United Nations in achieving them. That simple
but critical message can be applied to the situation not
only in Palestine and Syria, but also Yemen, Libya and
elsewhere. Japan always supports diplomatic solutions
based on relevant Security Council resolutions.

