Mr. Mladenov: The past month has been marked
by some of the bloodiest incidents in the current wave of
violence throughout Israel and the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. On 8 March, a 28-year-old
American graduate student, Taylor Force, was killed in
Jaffa during a vicious stabbing spree by a Palestinian
that left a dozen Israelis and several tourists wounded.
Less than an hour before that, two Israeli police officers
were seriously wounded in a shooting attack near
Jerusalem's Old City, while at almost the same time an
Israeli man was stabbed in an attack outside Tel Aviv.
Thankfully he survived. Israeli security forces killed
the Palestinian perpetrators in the first two incidents,
while in the third the attacker was reportedly killed by
his own knife in a struggle with his intended victim.

Six months into this latest round of violence, which
has killed 30 Israelis and 198 Palestinians, with most
of the Palestinians killed while reportedly carrying
out knife, gun or car-ramming attacks, it is time that
the international community move beyond mere
condemnations of such acts of terror and violence. It
is time to send a clear message to both parties. To the
Palestinian people we need to say clearly: stabbing
someone in the street will not bring about a Palestinian
State, and neither will praising and glorifying violence
in the media. Those radicals determined to poison the
minds of Palestinian youth must recognize their central
role in the slow evisceration of the dream of Palestinian
statehood. By the same token, we must also be very
clear, and Israel should understand that building
more walls and increasing administrative detentions,
punitive demolitions and movement restrictions are all
actions that breed anger among people who feel that
they are being collectively humiliated, punished and
discriminated against.

Heavy-handed responses play into the hands of
extremists, undermine moderate voices and further
deepen the gulf between the two sides. Six months
after the initial upsurge of violence, it remains blatantly
clear that security measures alone will not contain the
forces that are perpetuating the violence. Israelis and
Palestinians must at long last face the stark realities
that continue to drive the violence and hold the two-
State solution hostage. First and foremost, that means
both sides actively taking steps that demonstrate
their commitment to, and create the conditions for,
an eventual return to negotiations to achieve a viable
Palestinian State and ensure Israel's long-term security.

We in the international community must also be
clear both in our understanding of the conflict and our
role in how to help resolve it. Our immediate priority
must be ending the violence that is tearing Israelis and
Palestinians apart when both face the rise of radicals
among their own constituents. We only need to look
at the rest of the region to see the dangers of religious
extremism, sectarianism and terrorism. But let us also
be abundantly clear that the current security challenges
cannot be addressed if we lose sight of the fundamental
problems that have led us here, namely, the persistent
inability to achieve ajust and lasting solution that meets
the national aspirations of the Palestinians and Israelis
and allows them to live in two States, side-by-side and
in peace, security and mutual recognition. That is why
today we must once again play an important role by
saying that the prospect of a two-State solution is not
dead and that it remains the best pathway for peace.

The time has come however to sound the alarm
that the two-State solution is slipping from our
fingers and that it is disappearing as the realities on
the ground - driven by ongoing settlement activities
and confiscation of Palestinian land, as well as the
ongoing lack of genuine Palestinian unity - make the
prospect of a viable and independent Palestinian State
less possible and less likely. The time has come for us
to speak clearly with regard to the risks that undermine
the two-State solution, but also point to the way to a
return to meaningful negotiations. That is why the
Secretary-General, the European Union, the Russian
Federation and the United States of America, all of
whom are members of the Middle East Quartet, have
stepped up their efforts to break the political impasse.
The Quartet envoys have started their work on a report
that will review the situation on the ground, identify
the dangers facing a two-State solution and provide
recommendations on the way forward. We remain
seriously concerned that current trends - including
continued acts of violence against civilians, incitement,
ongoing settlement activity and the high rate of
demolitions of Palestinian structures - are dangerously
imperilling the viability of a two-State solution.

And yet while the international community
explores avenues for constructive engagement, there
are trends that raise questions about the commitment
of the parties to seriously address the main challenges
blocking progress towards peace.Israel's settlement
enterprise continues, despite broad international
condemnation. In a particularly troubling development,
on 10 March, Israel classified 580 acres south of the
city of Jericho, in the West Bank, as so called State
land. The area includes the reported approval of 378
acres, which was widely condemned in January. That
is evidence of an ongoing Israeli policy of systematic
consolidation of its control of the occupied West Bank
in direct contravention of international law. Since the
early 19805, Israeli authorities in the West Bank have
adopted - based on a controversial interpretation of the
Ottoman Land Code - a policy of declaring land that
is not otherwise registered as private as State land. That
has resulted in the State seizing control over certain
areas where Palestinians claim ownership and has
proved to be a precursor for settlement construction.
Any such declaration, particularly ofa large scale, raises
justified concerns over further settlement expansion.
Settlements are illegal under international law, and I
urge Israel to halt and reverse such decisions.

The demolition and confiscation of Palestinian
structures across the West Bank has also surged in
2016, with 468 houses and other structures demolished
since the beginning of the year. On 23 March, Israeli
authorities demolished 53 structures in Khirbet Tana,
including 22 homes, the third demolition this year in
that community because Israel has declared the area a
firing zone. The total number of structures demolished
or confiscated in the first 12 weeks of 2016 has now
reached 85 per cent of the total number demolished
or confiscated for all of 2015. As Palestinians are
consistently denied permits to build legally, residents in
the affected areas are left with few options but to build
without permits, leaving them in constant fear of their
homes and livelihoods being destroyed. I urge Israel to
respect international humanitarian law and cease such
unfair and unjust planning processes in the West Bank.

Allow me to turn briefly to political developments
on the Palestinian front. Achieving genuine Palestinian
unity on the basis of non-violence, democracy and the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) principles
would constitute a crucial building block for the
foundation of a Palestinian State. The formation of
a national unity Government that abides by the PLO
programme and the holding of long-overdue elections
are important elements of that process. Sadly, we
are nowhere near that goal, since recent discussions
between Palestinian factions in Qatar have yet to yield
any agreement. I strongly encourage the factions not
to squander this important opportunity to reach a
consensus that can enable the advancement of long-
term Palestinian national goals as well as near-term
fiscal and development goals for the Palestinian people.

I take this opportunity to welcome the suspension,
on 12 March, of the month-long Palestinian teachers'
strike, following President Abbas's commitment to
fully implementing a 2013 trade union deal that gives
them a 10 per cent salary increase. I also note that, on
10 March, a Fatah member of the Palestine Legislative
Committee ended her 18-day sit-in at the Parliament
building after the Attorney General cancelled an arrest
order against her that had been issued after she had
raised allegations of corruption. Such allegations must
be duly investigated.

Turning to Gaza, the security situation remains
volatile, as a number of factors continue to produce
a highly combustible environment. Despite a relative
pause over the past month, the past weeks saw five
rockets fired from Gaza to Israel. In response, on
12 March, Israel conducted four air strikes, in which
two Palestinian children, Israa and Yassin Abu Khusa,
were tragically killed. Such incidents point to the
fragile nature of the current ceasefire. I call on all
the Palestinian factions in Gaza to uphold the current
ceasefire, which is vital to the Strip's recovery.

The Reconstruction Mechanism continues to enable
the purchase of materials for rebuilding and doing
critical repairs to homes in Gaza that were damaged or
destroyed in 2014. Unfortunately, the reconstruction of
homes that were completely destroyed continues to be
painfully slow, largely due to the slow disbursement of
donor pledges. I strongly encourage all Member States
that have not done so to make their disbursements
without delay. Failure to comprehensively address
the chronic problems affecting Gaza risks another
escalation in the future.

To touch on Lebanon, on 16 March the Security
Council was briefed by Ms. Sigrid Kaag, Special
Coordinator of the Secretary-General for Lebanon. The
Secretary-General welcomed the Council's subsequent
press statement reaffirming its united support for
Lebanon's stability and State institutions. The
Secretary-General is currently on a two-day visit to
Lebanon together with the President of the World Bank.
The visit in itself illustrates the strong commitment of
the United Nations and the international community
to helping Lebanon address the multiple challenges it
faces as a result of the Syrian crisis.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
there can be no peace without hope. But fostering
hope requires courageous leadership that is willing to
articulate a clear political horizon. It requires moving
beyond unilateral actions and ending the policy of
eternal management of the shifting status quo, and a
commitment to improving the dynamics on the ground
with the genuine aim of reaching a negotiated two-
State solution, which still remains the stated goal of
both sides. The obstacles are certainly many, but none
of them are insurmountable.

People often say that the lack of trust between
the parties precludes any advance towards peace.
Re-establishing that trust and laying the foundations
for a peaceful resolution must of course remain our
collective focus, but change unquestionably requires the
political will of the parties. Without it, Palestinians and
Israelis will continue to face an uncertain and dangerous
future as the violent and unpredictable tectonics of the
Middle East continue to shift around them.

