Greece would like to congratulate the French presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's open debate on children and armed conflict. Greece would also like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of the United Nations Children's Fund and Mariam from civil society for their comprehensive briefings. While aligning itself with the statement submitted by the European Union, Greece would like to highlight the alarming number of verified grave violations against children in armed conflict in 2019 - 25,000 according to the latest annual report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/525). Around the world, children remain the largely invisible victims of human rights violations and abuses, for instance be killed or maimed, recruited or used as soldiers, detained for their actual or alleged association with parties to conflict or terrorist groups, sexually abused or raped, abducted, deprived of education and health services due to military attacks against schools or hospitals, as well as denied humanitarian access. In addition to that, the current global health crisis due to the coronavirus disease pandemic, which is exacerbating existing vulnerabilities, has a cumulative negative impact on other dimensions of human security, namely, personal, food, economic or community security, especially for children, and impedes the equal enjoyment of their human rights. This cruel and devastating reality illustrates the urgent need to accelerate coordinated international action in order to achieve peace and sustainable human development for all, especially children since they are key actors in building peaceful, inclusive and resilient societies founded on the rule of law, justice and strong institutions, (Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 16). Therefore, the focus of the international community should be directed towards ensuring accountability for violations against children through child- and gender-sensitive criminal justice mechanisms, as those are considered the best way of preventing the recurrence of violations and contributing to sustainable peace. Moreover, precise legislation and guidelines for the armed forces enhance the protection of civilians, especially children. In addition, sustainable human development presupposes good quality education and lifelong learning opportunities for all, especially children (SDG 4). In fact, education and vocational opportunities facilitate the rehabilitation and smooth reintegration in society of children recruited and used as child soldiers. In this respect, as armed conflicts place the education of entire generations at risk by destroying or damaging educational facilities, priority should be given to providing education during emergencies, as well as to rebuilding schools once peace has been achieved. Effective coordinated international action to address the specific needs of conflict-affected children requires enhancing system-wide policy coherence by mainstreaming the children and armed conflict agenda together with a gender perspective throughout the whole range of United Nations policies so as to leave not even one boy or girl behind. Greece, as a dedicated supporter of the United Nations children and armed conflict agenda, places particular emphasis on the protection of children's rights, especially in times of armed conflict. Having ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and endorsed the Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups, the Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles, Greece is in the process of developing a national action plan on the rights of the child and another on women, peace and security, which prioritizes the protection of girls from conflict-related violations and abuses. In that light, Greece remains committed to joining forces with all international stakeholders in a common effort to adequately promote and protect the rights and welfare of conflict-affected children and, thus, to contribute to building a future peaceful, inclusive, resilient and gender-equal world.
