Mr. De la Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France welcomes the adoption of resolution 1559
(2004), which we co-sponsored.

Lebanon has been through several decades of
upheaval. It has been confronted by war. Its internal
stability and the stability of the region have been
repeatedly and seriously threatened.

After the war, Lebanon began to rebuild, and it is
committed to strengthening the rule of law, faithful to
its democratic aspirations. After a very troubled period,
Lebanon must be able to restore confidence and
prosperity. That will come through the full restoration
of its sovereignty and the free exercise of democracy.
Since 1978 - and long since it took note of
Israel's withdrawal - the Security Council has been
calling for respect for the territorial integrity, political
independence and sovereignty of Lebanon. It has
regularly reaffirmed those objectives. Today, the future
of Lebanon is being seriously threatened by Syria's
interference in the political life of the country and, in
particular, in the electoral process - the reason for the
current crisis - as well as by the continued occupation
and the persistent presence of armed militias.

France is deeply concerned that Lebanon might
retreat from the objectives that are constantly
reaffirmed by the international community. That is why
the rapid mobilization of and a decisive response by
the Security Council seemed essential to us. The
withdrawal of foreign forces from the entire territory of
Lebanon and the dismantling of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias should be delayed no longer.
The electoral process should proceed without any
foreign interference.

These demands, reiterated by the Security
Council today, are in keeping with the position that it
has regularly adopted for more than 25 years. The
Council is not committing an act of interference by
denouncing the risk to international peace and security
represented by the current crisis. Rather, if it refrained
from taking action, the Council would be sanctioning
the inadmissible interference by a State in the internal
affairs of another sovereign State.

France believes that by responding firmly today
the Security Council is showing its confidence in the
future of Lebanon. That future must include the full
restoration of its sovereignty - not increased external
interference.

