Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): With the
Council's permission, I shall confine myself to
reporting on the outcome of the most recent elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, because the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jacques
Klein, may come to New York in December, at which
time he will be able to meet with the Council himself.

On 11 November, the third general elections since
the signing of the Dayton Accord took place in Bosnia
and Herzegovina under the supervision of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). Elections were held to the House of
Representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Federation House of Representatives, the National
Assembly of the Republika Srpska and various other
bodies. Some 2.5 million voters were registered to
vote- 1,335,032 in the Federation and 1,102,913 in
the Republika Srpska. They voted at 3,600 polling
stations across the entire territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, monitored by 760 international
supervisors and 5,500 local monitors. Final
certification of the elections results is not expected
before 17 November, the deadline for the receipt of
postal ballots.

Turning to the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) during
the elections, the Mission helped monitor the detailed
security plans of the local police and oversaw their
implementation during the elections. In general, this
was done in an exemplary and professional manner. All
police officers from the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) received training on how to cooperate with the
local police in this situation. Similar close cooperation
was fostered - and took place - with the OSCE and
with the Stabilization Force (SFOR). On election day,
IPTF officers made it clear to the local police that
freedom of movement had to be ensured, that voters
were not to be intimidated and that polling stations had
to remain free of incidents that could disturb the proper
conduct of the elections. As a result, the atmosphere of
the elections was relatively calm. That was a tribute to
the fine work of the IPTF and to the ability of the local
police to act professionally.

Voter turnout appears to have been somewhat
higher than in the April municipal elections, when it
was 65 per cent. This time it has been estimated at 70
per cent of registered voters. Turnout varied from
region to region within Bosnia. Estimated voter turnout
in the eastern Republika Srpska seems to have reached
80 per cent; that is expected to provide an additional
boost for the Serb Democratic Party (SDS). Voter
turnout is estimated to have been lower in the western
Republika Srpska - about 50 per cent in Banja Luka.
Turnout among Bosnian Croats varied, although we
have indications that it was fairly high in the west part
of Mostar and the Posavina canton, but lower in the
Livno, West Herzegovina and Herzegovina-Neretva
cantons.

A number of irregularities occurred. The main
one, of course, was the Bosnian Croat "referendum", to
which I shall return later. Apart from that, other
irregularities appear to have taken place in Srebrenica,
where some double voting was noted, coordinated by
the local branch of the SDS, and possible intimidation
of some voters by an SDS official, who had in fact
been barred from public office. The OSCE will draw
the double voting to the attention of the Elections
Appeals Subcommission to seek corrective action.
Other complaints and incidents of which we were
informed were relatively minor.

(spoke in English)

I would now like to turn to the situation in the
Federation, on the one hand, and in the Republika
Srpska, on the other.

In the Federation, as I just mentioned, the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) carried out the
Bosnian Croat so-called referendum despite a warning
from the OSCE Provisional Election Commission that
it considers the expression of opinion to be a party
activity subject to its rules and regulations. The HDZ
failed to provide OSCE with a list of the locations for
the referendum polling stations, of which there were
389, placed beyond 50 meters from election polling
stations. The case has now been submitted to the
Elections Appeal Sub-Commission for adjudication.
Barring unforeseen developments, it is not expected
that the holding of the so-called referendum will result
in the invalidation of the elections.

The rhetoric of the President of the HDZ, Mr.
Jelavic, has intensified. After the polls closed, he
announced that HDZ was victorious, which, he
claimed, signals the end of the missions of the OSCE,
the Office of the High Representative and UNMIBH.
He also added that the Bosnian Croats no longer
recognized the administration of the international
community because it wanted to transform Bosnia and
Herzegovina "from a State of three equal nations into a
State without the Croat people." Jelavic claimed that
70 per cent of Bosnian Croats voted overwhelmingly
for the HDZ.

Though support for the Party of Democratic
Action (SDA) is shrinking, preliminary results show
that the party may not suffer the dramatic decline that
some had expected. Gains by the Social Democratic
Party (SDP) may not be as high as they were in the
municipal elections, and the Party for Bosnia and
Herzegovina (SBiH) may have experienced a strong
boost in support. It appears likely that Silajdzic will
play an important role as a coalition broker in many
parts of the Federation - particularly in Sarajevo -
and in the Federal institutions.

In the Republika Srpska, even though 80 per cent
of voters stated prior to the elections that they were
mostly concerned about economic issues, the Serb
Democratic Party, which did not put forth an economic
programme, stands to make great gains. This reflects
the disillusionment of Republika Srpska voters with the
performance of Prime Minister Dodik. Though the SDS
is expected to have a strong showing in the Republika
Srpska National Assembly, it is not expected to win an
absolute majority. The Party of Democratic Progress
(PDP) will again play a pivotal role. Its President, Mr.
Ivanic, is a strong candidate to be the next Republika
Srpska Prime Minister. Ivanic has openly precluded
cooperation with Silajdzic's SBiH.

What conclusions should we draw from these
results? Well, it had been hoped that this third set of
general elections since Dayton would produce local
political authorities who would work constructively to
consolidate a sovereign and multi-ethnic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Regrettably, that has not yet been fully
achieved. On the positive side, the multi-ethnic SDP
polled well, but not as well as many in the international
community had hoped. Smaller parties such as the PDP
and the SBiH also gained ground and will certainly
occupy a pivotal position as brokers and king-makers,
although in neither case is their true political
orientation clearly known. The Croat opposition
parties- the New Croat Initiative (NHI) and the
Croatian Peasants Party of Bosnia and Herzegovina
(HSS) survived.

As a counterpart to that not-as-good-as-expected
performance of the SDP, the traditional nationalist
parties have done better than expected. In the
Federation, the SDA remains a potent political force,
which nonetheless will go through a period of internal
reform that may see it adopt an even more conservative
posture. The HDZ has managed to consolidate its
supporters, and also the supporters of more right-wing
parties, under a banner of fierce criticism and open
defiance of the international community. The High
Representative and the OSCE are currently considering
taking measures against President Jelavic in view of his
defiance.

In the Republika Srpska, the SDS is indeed
buoyant with its victory. It has run a campaign of not
antagonizing the international community through
nationalist rhetoric. It remains to be seen whether that
approach will continue after the elections. Perhaps
more significant is the closer alignment now between
the likely Republika Srpska Government and the new
Government in Yugoslavia.

The priority for the Office of the High
Representative and the OSCE is now to convene the
elected legislative bodies. This will enable the cantonal
assemblies to elect the Federation House of Peoples,
which will in turn elect members of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Peoples. The Republika Srpska
National Assembly must also form a new Government
and elect members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Peoples. These processes are complex and
will take time, though hopefully not the six months it
took following the last general elections, in 1998.

