Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine): Ukraine alignes itself
with the statement delivered earlier this morning by the
observer of the European Union. I would like to make a
statement in my national capacity.

Ukraine welcomes this open debate of the Security
Council on the issue of children and armed conflict.
These are not just trivial words for my country. The
Council is well aware that Ukraine has suffered from
Russian aggression for more than a year already.
Unfortunately, we must admit that children are among
those who suffer the most from the conflict.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate Ukraine's strong
commitment to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child - a fundamental international instrument in the
area of the protection of children. The Convention and
its Optional Protocols are at the core of the international
system for enhancing and promoting children's right to
survive, live and grow in a healthy environment, with
adequate access to education, health, nutrition, safety
and security.

The Russian Federation's actions constitute a
blatant violation of international law, including that
Convention. We urge Russia to cease its subversive
activity, which is causing immense suffering to the
population, mostly women and children, in the areas
of eastern Ukraine controlled by illegal armed groups.
Time and again, we have reiterated our appeal to the
United Nations and tho the Council to undertake an
adequate assessment and to take necessary measures
in response to the Russian Federation's actions in
temporarily occupied Crimea and in the east of Ukraine.

In that light, I would like to recall the numerous
cases of abductions of children by the Russia-sponsored
terrorist groups in eastern Ukraine, including from
orphanages and medical facilities. Orphans are being
illegally moved outside the country, and children are
being killed and wounded as a result of the activities
of the Russia-backed illegal armed groups in the east
of Ukraine.

We all remember the shocking images following
the mass shelling by pro-Russian terrorists of
residential areas in Mariupol in January. As a result
dozens of people were killed and more than 100 were
wounded. Unfortunately, children were also among
the victims: two of them were killed, dozens were
wounded and orphaned and four schools and three
kindergartens were damaged as a result of that blatant
terrorist attack. According to the latest data from
UNICEF, at least 64 children have been killed and 170
wounded in eastern Ukraine since the beginning of
the conflict masterminded by Russia. The number of
internally displaced persons in Ukraine increased to
more than 1 million in the past month, with more than
60 per cent of them being women and children. The
Government of Ukraine is doing everything possible
to ensure the evacuation of children from areas in the
regions of Donetsk and Luhansk where they are at risk
of militants" shelling and other outrages. Legislation
is being drafted on strengthening social protection for
children and families with children displaced from
affected regions.

Ukraine reiterates its strong commitment to the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child at
the national and international levels. We reaffirm our
support for, and appreciate the work being carried out
by UNICEF, the Committee on the Rights of the Child
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui.

We would like to stress the vital importance of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, aimed at ending
and preventing the recruitment and use of children by
national security forces by 2016. Ukraine fully supports
the campaign. In that regard, we deem it necessary to
further build on resolution 1612 (2005), and request the
Secretary-General to include those parties to armed
conflict that engage in abductions of children in the
annexes to his reports on children and armed conflict.

