Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to start
by joining other Council members in thanking the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing.

We must acknowledge that, since our last discussion
in the Council on this matter (see S/PV.7698), the overall
picture fundamentally remains the same. More than
five years after the adoption of resolution 1970 (2011),
the perpetrators of the major crimes against humanity
referred to the ICC have not been held accountable.
However, it is not a result of the unwillingness of the
Libyan authorities to cooperate with the Court. On the
contrary, as highlighted in the twelfth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), the
Government of National Accord is truly committed to
implementing the 2013 memorandum of understanding
on burden-sharing and the Libyan General Prosecutor's
Office continues to cooperate with the ICC.

We take note of the continuation of the Court's
examination of crimes committed in the territory of
Libya and the collection of respective evidence. In our
view, a particular focus during such activities should be
given to atrocities committed by Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Ansar Al-Sharia and other non-State
actors in Libya. In that respect, Ukraine strongly
condemns attacks against civilians, abductions and
assassinations of Government officials and judges, as
well as the shelling of hospitals and looting of property,
which, regrettably, are still a common occurrence
across the country.

We consider that much more could be done to
ensure accountability for such crimes if the ICC
personnel were able to conduct investigations within
the territory of Libya. We fully agree that this will
require the stabilization of the security situation as well
as the provision of meaningful financial resources and
assurances with regard to the security of ICC staff. In
conclusion, I would like to stress that the Court will
be able to deliver justice to victims, only with the full
backing of the Council and the relevant United Nations
entities, including the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya and the States parties to the Rome Statute.

