Ms. Samson (Netherlands): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak at today's debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the observer of the European Union and
joins others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2017/508).

I would also like to thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his dedicated work, and Ambassador
Saikal for his statement.

Allow me to focus on three issues: the security
situation and political stability in Afghanistan;
reconciliation and meaningful participation by women
in Afghan society; and the review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

First, the attack on the army base in Mazar-i-Sharif
and the recent attacks in Kabul are a stark reminder of
the suffering that the Afghan people and the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces have had to
endure in ever-greater numbers. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands is deeply saddened by the loss of life. We
express our condolences and support to all affected by
such violence. In such challenging security conditions,
good governance and political stability are essential
for maintaining nationwide stability. We continue to
stand with the National Unity Government in facing
those challenges.

Secondly, in order to realize long-term stability in
the region, peace talks remain an important objective.
We join others in calling upon all parties involved to
cooperate within the framework of an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process. The
constructive engagement of regional partners is also of
paramount importance.

During the Kabul process on 6 June, President
Ghani Ahmadzai reaffirmed his commitment to the
peace process and to the start of a national dialogue.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes his strong
personal commitment. We commend President Ghani
Ahmadzai for his efforts to encourage the meaningful
participation of women, civil society organizations
and young Afghans in the process. If all Afghans
are represented in the peace talks - formal or
informal - sustainable peace can be reached.

However, there will be no peace in Afghanistan
without the active participation of women. We applaud
the results of the fourth Kabul National Symposium on
Afghan Women, held on the theme "Afghan Women:
Messengers of Peace" on 15 May. We commend the
leadership of Afghanistan's First Lady, Rula Ghani,
in her efforts to increase the political participation
of women in Afghanistan by boosting the number of
women taking part in provincial councils and provincial
peace councils. We call upon the Afghan Government
and all stakeholders involved to implement resolution
1325 (2000) as a matter of the utmost priority.

Thirdly, the Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
supports UNAMA'S work in accordance with its
current nationwide mandate. We would like to reiterate
our appreciation for the implementation of the broad
United Nations mandate throughout Afghanistan.
UNAMA's regional presence is crucial for its success,
and we emphasize the need for a strong regional United
Nations presence throughout the country. We hope
that the UNAMA review will support that notion and
safeguard UNAMA's regional presence in Afghanistan.

We would like to underline the importance of
UNAMA's role in regional political cooperation. We
support UNAMA as it takes on a stronger role in
such processes. We would also like to underscore our
appreciation for UNAMA's thorough reporting on the
human rights situation and on civilian casualties.

In conclusion, the international community should
not waver and should remain fully committed to the
situation in Afghanistan. UNAMA is a key partner
in achieving long-term stability in Afghanistan. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands remains dedicated to
supporting Afghanistan throughout the transformation
decade. During its membership of the Security
Council in 2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to support Afghanistan with the same vision
and commitment.

