Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, we would like to welcome the
fact that you are presiding over this meeting. We would
also like to welcome the Secretary-General and thank
him for his participation and for his valuable briefing.

We thank you, Sir, for selecting the topic of today's
debate and for the concept note (S/2018/524, annex),
which highlights many aspects of the conflicts from
which several countries suffer in the Middle East and
North Africa. Throughout history, the region has made
great and valuable contributions to human civilization.
It continues to hold geographic and historic significance
and is rich in natural resources and waterways. It has
strategic and vital significance to international security
and the global economy.

Since the beginning of the year, issues related to the
Middle East and North Africa have accounted for 46 per
cent of the Security Council's programme of work.
We discuss those issues monthly and, at times, daily
or weekly, as needed. The number of formal meetings
and informal consultations held about them since the
beginning of the year has reached 120. We have heard
detailed briefings on the activities of peacekeeping
operations and political missions.

The State of Kuwait supports the content of the
concept note (S/2018/524, annex) with regard to the
issue of the Palestinian question as a chronic crisis at the
core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The fact that the issue
remains unresolved will have negative repercussions
on the security and stability of the region as a whole.
We would like to recall that this month marked half
a century of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories.

Our position with regard to the Palestinian
question and the Israeli occupation is principled and
constant. We need a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution in accordance with resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative, leading to the
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied Arab territories
and to establish two States to live side by side in peace
along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
the capital of the State of Palestine, while stressing
the importance of a solution to the refugee issue, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).

The solution to conflicts must be based on
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, in particular non-interference in
the internal affairs of countries and respect for their
sovereignty. Dialogue and peaceful ways and means
should be the best way to conflict resolution.

We would like to express our deep regret about the
security, political and economic challenges in various
countries of the region, which have undermined
security and stability in the region and the world, in
particular in Syria, Yemen and Libya. The State of
Kuwait supports political solutions as outlined in
Security Council resolutions and resolutions adopted
by regional organizations, such as the League of Arab
States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as a means to ending the suffering of the peoples and
bolstering security and stability in those countries.

The State of Kuwait knows that such conflicts and
disputes have remained unresolved and exacerbated
feelings of disappointment and frustration among
the peoples of the region. Therefore, efforts must be
redoubled to reach a final and comprehensive settlement
to those conflicts and achieve national reconciliation,
in line with the aspirations of the peoples of the region
pertaining to security, development and a free and
dignified life.

We stress the importance of following up on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions. Ifthey
remain unimplemented, conflicts will continue and
become increasingly complex. That will also undermine
the efficiency of the Security Council and its ability
to carry out its responsibilities in accordance with
the Charter. We believe the Security Council must go
beyond its differences and remain united in its position
and implement its resolutions so that it can carry out
its historic and legal responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security.

We recall paragraph 8 of resolution 598 (1987),
which calls on the Secretary-General to consult with
the countries of the region to put in place measures to
enhance peace and stability in the region. We believe
those measures should be based on the principles of
international law governing relations among countries,
including respect for good neighbourly relations,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States,
respect for the sovereignty of countries and peaceful
coexistence in order to achieve security and prosperity
for the peoples of the region.

We believe that political, security, economic
and social repercussions resulting from tensions and
security instability were limited not only to the Middle
East and North Africa, but they had also an impact on the
world's continents in varying proportions. We see that
in the spread of several phenomena, such as terrorism,
displacement, migration and human trafficking. They
are all matters of concern to the Council and other
United Nations entities, such as the General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council.

Building and sustaining peace is a main goal of
sustainable development. The State of Kuwait believes
in the importance of the culture of peace and works
to enhance respect for religious, sectarian, cultural and
civilizational diversity. According to the Global Peace
Index 2018, Kuwait ranked first in the Middle East
and North Africa. That encourages us to continue our
efforts and endeavours to operationalize the principles
of the culture of peace, in particular our commitment
to engaging in dialogue to resolve conflicts, respecting
human rights and the rule of law, eradicating poverty
and unemployment and raising awareness among
peoples of their responsibilities in combating the root
causes of terrorism and radicalization.

Despite our achievements and those of the rest of
the international community to combat terrorism, it
remains a challenge to international peace and security.
We must therefore redouble our efforts in order to rid
humankind of the evil that is terrorism. Terrorism
has no religion. It targets civilians for the purpose of
harming them and their property anywhere and anytime.
Regardless of its motives, terrorism is despicable and
is at variance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. The State of Kuwait is
part of the international coalition to combat terrorism
and the so-called Da'esh. In addition to our efforts to
combat terrorism and radicalization and cut off the
sources of terrorism financing, we are working to
coordinate the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism and strengthen commitment to
international treaties and relevant Security Council
resolutions. Over the past two years Kuwait hosted
five meetings in the context of the Global Coalition
against Da'esh, and in November we will host a high-
level international conference to review the Madrid
principles, for we are committed to implementing
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
2396 (2017).

