Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to add our voice to the others congratulating
you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. We also congratulate Equatorial
Guinea for its hard work as President during a very
challenging February.

I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
briefing. We recognize and greatly appreciate the
invaluable contributions that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to regional
peace and security for more than 40 years. As a former
OSCE desk officer in the State Department, I am
personally particularly pleased to be participating in
today's discussion. I thank Mr. Lajcak for his briefing
on the OSCE's activities and for his leadership of the
organization. The United States applauds the OSCE for
its critical role in developing a robust regional security
architecture and promoting human rights, democracy,
peace and stability across the vast area ofits participating
States since 1975. The fundamental principles of the
OSCE, as a pillar of the international rules-based
system, must be upheld. We underscore its invaluable
role as a forum for addressing the most challenging
issues of the day through open and comprehensive
dialogue. Its unique field-office presence, particularly
in the Western Balkans, continues to play a significant
and influential role.
Nowhere is the OSCE's comprehensive approach to
security and its contributions to promoting the peaceful
settlement of conflicts more important than in Ukraine.
As has been pointed out, last month marked the fifth
anniversary of Russia's illegal occupation of Crimea
and its instigation of conflict in eastern Ukraine.
Moscow's aggression, beginning in 2014, marked
the first instance since the Second World War that a
European country has sought to redraw the boundaries
of another by force. It is particularly egregious that
the aggression was carried out by one OSCE member
against another. In November, Russia escalated its
aggressive activities against Ukraine when it attacked
Ukrainian naval vessels in the Black Sea. The United
States again strongly condemns that unjustified use
of force and again calls on Russia to return Ukraine's
detained personnel and seized ships.

The United States commends the OSCE's Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, which provides
the international community with the best source
of impartial information on the conflict in eastern
Ukraine. The OSCE's work in negotiating ceasefires
has also been critical in alleviating the suffering caused
by Russia's aggression. We applaud the courage and
dedication of the Mission's unarmed monitors.

As we have stated repeatedly in this Chamber, the
United States fully supports Ukraine's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, within its
internationally recognized borders, including its
territorial waters, as should all OSCE member States.
We do not, nor will we ever, recognize Russia's
purported annexation of Crimea. We join our European
and other partners in affirming that our Ukraine-based
sanctions against Russia will remain in place until
Russia fully implements its Minsk commitments, and
Crimea-focused sanctions will remain in place until
Russia returns full control of the peninsula to Ukraine.

The United States also opposes Russia's continuing
occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are
part of Georgia. There too Russia's actions contravene
its international commitments and violate Georgia's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
within its internationally recognized borders. And
again in Georgia we have a concerted effort by one
OSCE member to destabilize another. Although Russia
participates in the OSCE's 5+2 Transnistria settlement
negotiations, it has failed to honour its 1999 Istanbul
OSCE summit commitments to withdraw its forces
from Moldova. Russia has used the protracted conflicts
in these nations to hinder the region's gravitation
towards European and western institutions and to slow
the development of a rules-based order.

We have urged the OSCE Chairman-in-Office,
Slovakia, to support ongoing initiatives by the OSCE
and participating States, including the Geneva
international discussions and the 5+2 talks. The
international community must counter one State's
actions, which fly in the face of OSCE principles and
commitments, undermining the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of other OSCE participating States. The
international community must also help prepare the
ground for the peaceful resolution of these protracted
conflicts, which, as Foreign Minister Lajcak noted,
have undeniably gone on for far too long.

Additionally, we thank the OSCE Chair and
participating States for their support of the Minsk
Group process. The United States, Russia and France
are working together productively as co-Chairs to help
the sides reach a settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, between Armenia and Azerbaijan.

The OSCE's crucial role in strengthening human
rights, democracy, peace and stability in Europe for
more than 40 years cannot be overstated. The United
States reaffirms the OSCE's importance as a partner
to the United Nations and particularly to the Security
Council in addressing critical security challenges. We
will continue to support the OSCE's vital work in these
and other conflicts.

