Italy aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 25) and would like to add the following remarks in its national capacity. We thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing this open debate, which keeps the topic of sexual violence in conflict high on the Security Council's agenda 11 years after the establishment of the mandate of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. One year ago, upon the initiative of the German presidency, the Security Council adopted resolution 2467 (2019), putting a strong focus on the victims and survivors of sexual violence and calling upon Member States to address their needs as a priority action. That is all the more urgent as the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/487) once again depicts a gloomy situation, with sexual crimes still being used as part of a global war strategy by State and non-State actors, thus showing the importance of our collective engagement. The issue under discussion today represents a top priority for Italy. In 2017, it was at the core of our mandate in the Security Council and of our presidency of the Group of Seven. It continues to be high on our agenda as we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. We recommit to those principles. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak and the measures taken to combat the pandemic are exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and leading to a rise in sexual and gender-based violence. The restrictions imposed due to the pandemic are also limiting access to education, legal protection services and health services, including for sexual and reproductive health. Those negative effects are especially felt by women and girls living in conflict-affected areas, which face multiple risks and barriers. This is why the protection and promotion of the rights of women and girls must be placed at the heart of all our efforts to combat the virus and of all recovery measures. In that spirit, together with 145 States Members of the United Nations, Italy supported the Secretary-General's appeal to end gender violence during the pandemic. Tackling the root causes of violence is key, as the prevention of systematic sexual violence begins in times of peace, when national laws should be sufficiently robust to prevent abusive behaviours in times of war. We need a paradigm shift through the dismantlement of patriarchal rules that are at the basis of violence. We must also affirm a culture of full gender equality and women's empowerment by ensuring the complete and effective participation of women and girls in decision- making processes. Our action should seek to ban all forms of gender-based violence, including harmful practices that tend to be more widespread in times of war, in particular child, early and forced marriage. Training remains an essential component of our efforts and should include a wide range of actors - youth, leaders, military and police units and civilian personnel. Establishing a stronger women's presence in United Nations missions should also be a priority so as to facilitate dialogue with local populations and encourage victims to speak out, thus enhancing missions' ability to deliver on their mandates, particularly with regard to the protection of civilians. At the same time, it is fundamental to assist countries in situations of conflict in reforming their judicial systems and strengthening their rule-of-law and accountability mechanisms. Sexual violence in conflict constitutes a grave breach of international humanitarian law and human rights. Fighting against impunity and holding the perpetrators accountable should be a matter of primary concern in order to deter further violations and to allow survivors' access to justice. A survivor- centred approach also means providing them with all the necessary services they need to cope with the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence, including medical services, legal assistance and psychological support. To that end, Italy financially supports the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, which is committed to fighting impunity for sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict contexts. The Team's role in providing technical assistance to Governments by strengthening their capacity to address accountability for sexual violence has proved to be critical, as it has led to more criminal investigations and prosecutions. It has also led to strengthening legal frameworks in affected countries, carrying out notable work in the Central African Republic, Cete d'Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea- Conakry and South Sudan, as recognized in the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/487). We therefore call on all Member States to use and support this important tool. In order to enhance the commitment of State actors to ending the hateful practice of conflict-related sexual violence, we deem it important to include it as an automatic and independent designation criterion in all relevant sanction regimes. We also consider that the work of the Security Council would benefit from more systematic involvement by the International Criminal Court (ICC), in which the Office of the ICC Prosecutor could receive the necessary resources to conduct swift investigations. In our effort to combat all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence, we also continue to promote the widest possible implementation of the Council of Europe's Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women, known as the Istanbul Convention. The United Nations should lead by example in the fight against sexual violence and set a standard of good behaviour in that regard. For that reason, Italy welcomed the invitation to be part of the Circle of Leadership launched by the Secretary- General in 2017, and is the main contributor to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse. We are also a proud partner of the Call to Action on Protection from Gender- based Violence in Emergencies, aimed at including gender-based violence prevention services from the earliest stages of intervention in humanitarian emergencies. Finally, we commend civil society, especially women human rights defenders, for their role in raising awareness on sexual violence in conflict, often putting their lives at risk to fight injustice. Their work and advocacy are essential. We are aware that the problem is far from being solved, and that more efforts are required of us all in order to move from commitments to compliance through a whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach and to advance the agenda. Italy is ready to engage by supporting the work of the Secretary-General and that of his Special Representative in order to pursue better and increasingly concrete results.
