Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia congratulates you, Sir, and
the delegation of Japan on assuming the presidency of
the Council for the month of December. I also commend
Italy and Ambassador Cardi and his entire team for
having led the Council's work in an exemplary manner
throughout November.

Bolivia welcomes the presence of Her Excellency
Ms. Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovie, President of Croatia,
and Her Excellency Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister for
Justice of Serbia, in the Chamber today.

We are grateful not only for the reports but also
for the hard work of the President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Carmel
Agius; the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Theodor
Meron; and the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal
and the Mechanism, Mr. Serge Brammertz.
Bolivia wishes to express its highest appreciation
for the work of Ambassador Roselli Frieri of Uruguay
in his active and diligent chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals over the past
two years. We also take this opportunity to join the
Uruguayan initiative to draft a presidential statement on
the closing of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Bolivia also appreciates the work of the
Office of Legal Affairs, particularly for its assistance
and cooperation on this matter.

The work carried out by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda over the past 24 years has
contributed significantly to the fight against impunity.
They have played a vital role in the quest forjustice and
restoration of the rule oflaw. This being the last report,
and with less than a month before the culmination of
this enormous task and the closing of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, it is up to the Council
to provide the support necessary for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to
conclude the remaining processes transferred to its
jurisdiction in a timely and efficient manner. We are
certain that the Mechanism in carrying out its mandate
set out in resolution 1966 (2010) of 22 December 2010
will also assume an important role in strengthening and
complementing the work of national jurisdictions.

We emphasize that the effective implementation of
the completion strategy proposed by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia has made it possible
for that high-level court's work to finally be concluded
within the established time frame. Similarly, it is our
opinion that, in its composition, the final annual report of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (see S/20l7/662), which is
before us today, discusses the cross-cutting compilation
of good practices and lessons learned during the years
of the Tribunal's work. That valuable contribution will
serve as a compulsory reference for the work of other
tribunals in the administration of justice not only within
international forums, but also with regard to domestic
jurisdiction. We also appreciate the outstanding and
committed work of the Tribunal's staff and team during
the effective period of its mandate, as well as its follow-
up during the final stage, which resulted in the handing
down of sentences in its two pending significant cases.

Moreover, we underscore and marvel at the work
of promoting and preserving collective memory,
which the Tribunal has developed through what
has been termed "legacy dialogues" in the areas of
academic training, public information and digital
communication platforms. We believe that publicizing
the achievements and challenges that the Tribunal has
faced in implementing its mandate bear important
witness to the work carried out to strengthen the right to
truth, justice, reparations, the preservation of memory,
reconciliation and guarantees of non-repetition, and
serve as a reminder that dialogue and mediation are
the only means of resolving conflicts so that situations
such as those that occurred in the former Yugoslavia
are never repeated.

Lastly, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia has completed not only its work, but also its
historic mission. As the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals said so well
earlier, the last remaining task involves reconciliation
for which we are lacking clear political leadership and
which would allow us to close this final chapter.

