Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (Spoke in Spanish): I would first like to express our gratitude to
Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov and his team
for their comprehensive report (S/2019/251) and their
ongoing efforts to achieve a lasting peace in the Middle
East, particularly with regard to the Palestinian question.

Equatorial Guinea would like to begin today by
expressing its concern about the growing disengagement
between Israelis and Palestinians, fuelled by actions and
policies that have fomented hatred between the parties
this year. Since the conflict began, more than half a
century ago, the Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community have spared no effort
to find a viable solution to the issue. It is regrettable that
all the efforts of recent years have failed to encourage
the parties to resume the stalled negotiations. Instead,
we have received only reports of deaths, injuries and
material and infrastructure damage. It is therefore
appropriate that as we seek to improve the situation in
Gaza, we should be vigilant with a view to ensuring
that the West Bank and East Jerusalem do not also end
up in the same unfortunate situation of frequent attacks
and outbreaks of violence that we have been seeing
since the final months of 2018.

Israeli and Palestinian leaders must realize that

the international world is watching them. We see their
actions and policies. Equatorial Guinea has never wanted
the security of the State of Israel to be compromised
for any reason. We continue to hope that the parties
can exercise the utmost restraint and avoid any further
loss of human life. In that regard, we urge the parties to
refrain from taking unilateral decisions that are likely
to promote extremism and inflame this already strained
situation. We also want to point out that more than any
other conflict, the history of this issue has shown us
that violence is not the ideal way to find a solution that
suits the parties and the international community.
With regard to the situation in the Gaza Strip, we
deplore the fact that despite all the efforts devoted to
resolving the crisis that the area is mired in, the lack
of drinking water and the repeated blackouts continue
to infuriate the population, greatly affecting the
region's economy and its citizens' living conditions. In
addition, Palestinians' lack of regular access to fertile
land and fishing in the area also has adverse effects
on their development. However, where the security and
integrated organization of this Palestinian enclave are
concerned, we call on Fatah and Hamas to work on a
definitive agreement so that the Palestinian Authority
can function normally in Gaza, as it is doing in the West
Bank. In that connection, we thank Egypt, which has
the support of the United Nations and has been working
with the parties to that end.

Before concluding, I would like to underline the
importance of the taxes collected by Israel on behalf
of the Palestinian National Authority, which we believe
cover a significant part of the Palestinian budget. If
those funds cannot be used, some public services may
be affected, and we therefore urge the parties to resolve
the issue.

Lastly, Equatorial Guinea believes that a two-
State solution that ensures the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, living side by side in peace and security
with Israel, is the only way to put an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and achieve a broad regional peace.
In that regard, the Security Council, the United Nations
and the international community should intensify their
efforts to put the necessary pressure on the parties to
overcome the obstacles preventing the resumption of
direct negotiations.

