Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate Minister Wallstrom and
Sweden on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also congratulate the other new members
of the Council, namely, Kazakhstan, Italy, Ethiopia
and Bolivia.

The convening of this open debate is very timely,
as conflicts around the globe are increasingly complex
and the United Nations faces new challenges that test
its capacity to respond effectively and appropriately.
Nevertheless, that is the current situation in 2017, as the
Secretary-General rightly pointed out in his statement.
Prevention is not simply a priority, but the priority. We
have the benefit of the studies that have already been
mentioned here on the peacebuilding architecture,
on maintaining peace and, of course, on the issue of
women and peace and security, all of which reaffirm
the importance of focusing our efforts on prevention
and the sustainability of peace.

In 2015, we adopted the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, with the commitment to
leaving no one behind, with a particular emphasis of
combating the causes of many conflicts. We also have
the resolve and the political will of the new Secretary-
General, Mr. Guterres, as clearly evidenced by his
plan of action and in what was reiterated this morning.
Preventing conflict means strengthening institutions
and building resilient societies, prioritizing national and
international policies and protecting and empowering
women and girls - one of the most important steps in
sustainable development.

As is well known, my country is in the process of
concluding what could be a peace agreement after more
than 50 years. I want to share three relevant points that
may be significant lessons learned.

The agreement is anchored in Chapter VI of the
San Francisco Charter, as has been mentioned, and is
the result of direct negotiations between the parties
to the conflict, with the backing of the international
community, the Security Council and, of course, the
special political mission, as well as the resolute support
of our regional body, the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States. The agreement addresses the
causes of the conflict, and its implementation will
enable us to generate economic development and
well-being in the rural areas of Colombia that perhaps
have not experienced development and Government
involvement for many years because of the conflict.
And, of course, as has been carefully considered in the
Security Council, the case of Colombia shows that the
help of international donors for the implementation of
the agreements in their development components goes
far beyond the resources of the special political mission
that is now in the country, verifying and monitoring the
ceasefire and disarmament.

Finally, the presence of women at the negotiation
table and their contribution to the peace agreement
and its future implementation as part of the women
and peace and security agenda in Colombia is a truly
unique experience in a peace process that specifically
includes a gender perspective. As Minister Wallstrom
said this morning, investing in prevention is not only
morally correct, it is also smart, economically safe
and sustainable.

