Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting on policing issues in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We are grateful to Mr. Alexander Zouev, Assistant
Secretary-General for Rule of Law and Security
Institutions, and the Police Commissioners of the
Missions in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Haiti for their thorough and useful
briefings. We would also like to take this opportunity to
express our thanks to all police peacekeepers for their
selfless service and conscientious execution of their
duties, at times in extremely difficult circumstances.

The importance of police work in United Nations
peacekeeping today is clear to us all. As one of the
agents of peacekeeping work, police officers carry out
major tasks. They do not just help to keep public order
and support national Governments' efforts to protect
civilians in the countries where they are deployed, they
also play an important supporting role in reforming
law-enforcement institutions and building national
capacities in host States. More and more often they
have to provide assistance in addressing issues such
as combating organized crime, the illegal trade in
narcotics, human trafficking and other security threats.

It is often the police who serve as a link between
the people of host States and their Governments as well
as between the people and the peacekeeping presence.
When their work is successful it can strengthen citizens'
confidence in State institutions and create conditions
conducive to a return to normal life while establishing
the preconditions for lasting peace and national
reconciliation. In providing such assistance on behalf
of the entire international community, the police, like
all United Nations peacekeepers, must unswervingly
fulfil the Security Council's mandates and uphold the
Charter of the United Nations and the basic principles of
peacekeeping - the consent of the parties, impartiality
and refraining from the use of force except in cases of
self-defence and defence of the mandate.

Establishing constructive and trust-based
relations with the host country and taking their
nationally determined priorities into account are
extremely important components of effective mandate
fulfilment. It is a condition of success in this area that
the principles of national ownership and respect for
national sovereignty be observed. One can hardly speak
of effective international support if a United Nations
mission presence of many years has merely substituted
the efforts of United Nations officers for those of the
local police. Nor should we forget that it is local police
who have the primary responsibility for ensuring the
protection of civilians.

The mandates of police components deployed in
peacekeeping operations must be precise and realistic
as well as taking into account country specifics and
realities on the ground. The aims and scope of their
deployment must also be able to be adjusted rapidly
based on changes that occur in their host States. In
that context we encourage constant dialogue between
the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and host States on every aspect of the work
of peacekeeping operations, including the planning and
mandate-design stages.

It goes without saying that for police to do their
jobs effectively the necessary material, technical and
human resources should be in place. Missions must
improve their planning and management, increase their
efficiency in using the resources they have and avoid
unnecessary expenditures and duplication of functions.
Where those processes are concerned, it is important
that the Secretariat carefully consider the opinions and
recommendations of police-contributing countries.
As a police-contributing country, the Russian
Federation has continued to expand its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping activities and to deploy
officers with the relevant skills to missions. Since
1992 more than 500 employees of various bodies in
Russia's Ministry of the Interior have become police
peacekeepers, and it is important to us that United
Nations representatives have frequently noted their
great professionalism. We were pleased to note that
following the first United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit in 2016, Russia fulfilled the commitment
it had made to doubling the number of its police
peacekeepers. Today Russian police officers are active
in South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia, Kosovo, Haiti and Cyprus, and 20 per cent
of them are women. The contribution of women to
police work is also growing steadily in Russia itself,
and in 2017, as promised, we trained a group of women
officers to participate in police components of United
Nations missions. Altogether, 35 women from Russia
and a number of African countries participated in
the course.

The Russian Interior Ministry's United Nations-
certified training centre is training police peacekeepers,
including foreigners, on an ongoing and professional
basis. Since 2000 it has trained more than 1,600
Russian officers and 500 foreign police peacekeepers,
including commanders, from more than 50 countries.
Russia has unique experience in the area of peacekeeper
vocational training that we are ready to share. We are
also ready to deploy experts to participate in the work
of specialized police groups in United Nations missions
and to consider the issue of Russian police officers'
participation in such groups' projects, including jointly
with other countries, in anglophone missions.

