Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this debate.

At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
condolences and sympathy to the French people and
the families of the innocent victims in last Friday's
terrorist attack in Paris. That was a heinous attack,
and we strongly condemn it. We support the French
Government in its efforts to bring all those who were
involved in planning and executing the attack to
justice. Those attacks, which are the latest in a horrible
series, demand a larger, coordinated response on the
part of the international community, in the spirit of
solidarity. Slovenia is committed to a joint effort with
the international community in combating terrorism
and will contribute, to the best of its ability, to ensuring
international and European security, as well as its own.

Conflicts, violence and fragility have significant and
long-term consequences for sustainable development.
Without peace, efforts aimed at eradicating poverty
cannot yield the expected sustainable results, and, to
achieve the latter, serious actions oriented to long-term
goals are needed to tackle the root causes.. The recently
adopted 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1) recognizes a strong
connection and interdependence between peace and
security, human rights and development and gives
special attention to countries most in need, including
countries in conflict and post-conflict situations. At its
core is a multidimensional approach to development.
That is vital, especially given that the nature of conflicts
has significantly changed. The key drivers ofinstability
include a wide range of factors, some of which are
political, economic, social and environmental. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can be
considered to be one of the tools available for fostering
and strengthening cooperation between security and
development actors.

Recent developments have demonstrated the
severity of security challenges worldwide. A global
humanitarian and refugee crisis of this magnitude has
not been seen for the past seven decades. The crisis in
the Middle East persists, and humanitarian assistance
alone cannot solve the security challenges, which
require political solutions and efforts to tackle their
root causes. In the past several weeks, Slovenia has
been confronted with an immense refugee and migrant
flow. Policies addressing that issue will require close
cooperation on the part of the whole international
community, and should incorporate a human rights-
based approach. Cooperation between the countries of
destination, origin and transit must be strengthened.

Slovenia is committed to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. We believe that we should resort to diplomacy,
mediation and conflict prevention wherever possible.
To do so, we need to strengthen the conflict-prevention
capabilities of the Organization, and, in particular,
make greater and more effective use of Chapter VI
of the Charter of the United Nations on the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Within the United Nations,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping are only two of the
many tools available, and they should complement each
other. But as conflicts are becoming ever more complex,
we have to increase our cooperation with regional,
subregional and other organizations. Cooperation
between security and development actors, together
with national Governments, must be established early
enough in the peacebuilding process and maintained
during conflict-prevention efforts so as to effectively
address the root causes of conflicts.

If conflict prevention is to succeed, we need to
recognize potential threats to international peace and
security as early as possible, and we need to ensure
effective, collective action. In that regard, we welcome
the Human Rights Up Front initiative as a new tool
aimed at ensuring that the United Nations system
takes effective action to prevent large-scale violations
of human rights or international humanitarian law.
Women can and should play an important part in all
aspects of the peace and security agenda, including in
conflict prevention.

The promotion and protection of human rights
represent an important element in preventing conflict
and promoting development. Human rights violations
and abuses present one of the early signs for the need
to action. In particular, we must pay special attention to
the situation of women and vulnerable groups.

