Mr. Kolby (Norway): The recommendations that
have emerged from the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin
processes on financial sanctions, arms embargoes and
travel- and aviation-related sanctions are useful and
provide valuable tools for the Security Council in its
work. Norway supports these initiatives and
recommendations to improve the effectiveness of
sanctions.

Targeted sanctions exercise pressure on the
decision-makers and are designed to avoid negative
consequences for the general population. Targeting
individuals responsible for policies that threaten
international peace and security would increase the
effectiveness of sanctions. In designing sanctions,
attention should be given to ruling elites, rebel
movements and terrorists and the means of financing
their actions. The objective should be to change or
restrict their behaviour and to shield the civilian
population from excessive suffering.
The manual emerging from the Interlaken process
will be a valuable tool in the efforts to employ
standardized terms that conform to definitions used in
the financial sector when imposing financial sanctions.

Moreover, a system to enhance international
cooperation to prevent illegal financial transactions
should be developed. In this respect, resolution 1373
(2001), adopted recently, on threats to international
peace and security caused by terrorist acts, and the
subsequent work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
provide us with a model for implementation which
could be further explored for other sanctions regimes.

With the manuals now put forward by the Swiss
and German Governments, we have reached a
milestone in regard to drafting model resolutions. We
are grateful for the initiative taken by the Swiss and
German Governments and for the support they have
given. We must now focus on the implementation of
these recommendations. We will, on our part, work to
ensure that the models are reflected in future sanctions
regimes or when amending existing regimes.

Sanctions can be effective only if they are
respected and properly implemented at the national
level. The manuals give useful practical guidance
related to the legal and administrative requirements for
implementation. The effective implementation of
targeted sanctions will be a major challenge in the time
ahead.

In our view, there is a huge potential for
increased efficiency through more concerted efforts,
both globally and regionally. Again, we would in this
respect highlight the follow-up of resolution 1373
(2001) through the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We would also like to underline
the need for adequate technical and financial assistance
to United Nations members in implementing provisions
of the resolution.

The proposal to establish a permanent unit for
targeted sanctions is a welcome one and deserves
further discussion in the Security Council. A sanctions
unit could provide valuable support for the relevant
sanctions committees in the fulfilment of their tasks.
Furthermore, it would enable us to accumulate
institutional experience drawn from the different
sanctions regimes.

Lastly, we would like to thank Sweden for its
initiative to follow up the Interlaken and the Bonn-
Berlin processes. Norway looks forward to working
with Sweden and others to further enhance sanctions
regimes in order for the United Nations to effectively
exercise its responsibility for international peace and
security while minimizing the suffering of the civilian
population.

