Mr. Rudolph (Germany): My delegation would also
like to welcome the distinguished Member of the Collective
Presidency of the Liberian National Transitional
Government, Alhaji G. V. Kromah, and to thank him for
sharing with us his Views on the situation in Liberia.

Germany voted in favour of extending the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)
until 31 May 1996. We had already made our position clear
on the occasion of the public debate last week. We would
like, however, to restate some of the points we made on
that occasion. In this context, Germany fully supports the
statement made by Italy on behalf of the European Union.

We have to insist that Liberia must make substantive
progress in the peace process by the end of the present
mandate. This should prove that the Abuja Agreement can
be the lasting foundation for a peace settlement in Liberia.
We continue, however, to be extremely concerned at the
lack of progress achieved in the implementation of the
Abuja Agreement. We have not been able to observe any
concrete steps during recent months. The parties in Liberia
have fallen several months behind the agreed schedule.
Furthermore, the recent outbreak of fighting is a severe
setback to the efforts undertaken by the international
community to mediate in the Liberian conflict.

In this context, we would like to make clear once
again that the cessation of hostilities is also essential for
any reconstruction and development measures by which
the international community might help Liberia and its
people overcome the devastating consequences of the civil
war. The warring parties are called upon to make up for
the delays already incurred in the peace process. 31 May
1996 is the deadline for this. Until then, the political will
of the parties to achieve tangible progress will have to be
monitored very carefully. If there is no visible progress
soon with regard to maintaining the cease-fire,
disengagement of troops and disarmament, we will have
difficulty supporting a further extension of the mandate of
UNOMIL. The warring parties would be responsible for
this.

We welcome, however, the fact that the factions
represented in the Council of State seem determined to
adhere to the Abuja Agreement, and we urge them to
exert the necessary control over their military forces. A
wider deployment of ECOMOG throughout the country
should be a necessary accompanying measure, and it will
be an important stabilizing factor for the country as a
whole. In this context, my Government would like to
emphasize the important and useful role which ECOMOG
has been playing, and we would like to thank the
troop-contributing countries.

