The President: I thank Ms. Pillay for her powerful
briefing this morning.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/605, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Australia, Chad, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

Infavoar:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China,
France, Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria,
the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2171 (2014).

Before we proceed with statements, I would like
to recall that, in accordance with the provisions of
note S/2010/507, which encourages both members and
non-members of the Council to deliver their statements
in five minutes or less, it is our intention to use the
flashing light on the collar of the speaker's microphone
to indicate when five minutes have elapsed. I shall
strongly encourage both members and non-members of
the Council to conclude their remarks promptly once
the five minutes have elapsed.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour,
as we have a large number of speakers who wish to
participate.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United Kingdom.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their compelling and frank briefings today. I
also pay tribute to the exceptional work of Navi Pillay
during her time in office. Ms. Pillay has been fiercely
and fearlessly independent and principled. Her presence
today at this conflict-prevention debate reinforces the
critical link between peace, security and human rights.

This month, the world commemorates the start of
the First World War. We recall with grief and horror
the devastation that that and subsequent conflicts have
inflicted upon humankind, ravaging societies and
States. Last week in Belgium we discussed whether
we might have prevented the First World War had the
Security Council existed in 1914. My answer: not unless
the Council was prepared to take conflict prevention
more seriously than it currently does. Today's debate is
an opportunity for the Council to reflect upon its role in
preventing conflict and to recall the moral, humanitarian
and political imperatives of early preventive action.

The nature of conflict has changed in the past
20 years. Intra-State conflicts with complex root causes
have largely replaced conflicts between States. Because
of the international dimensions of such conflicts, the
Council's agenda is full and our capacity is stretched.

Yet we seem to have forgotten that prevention is
better than cure. The Council cannot continue to act
only in crisis mode. The Council was designed to be
a smoke detector, not just a fire extinguisher. That
is clear from Articles 1 and 24 of the Charter of the
United Nations and from its Chapter VI.

There are two main reasons that we have
sometimes failed to act on early warnings. First, the
root causes of brewing civil wars are complex; it can
be hard to predict exactly when they will flare. The
answer to that is regular and timely briefings on early-
warning indicators from early-warning actors across
the United Nations system. Secondly, the Council is
being constrained by a perceived tension between the
principle of sovereignty and its conflict-prevention role.
However, the true enemy of sovereignty is conflict itself,
as Ms. Pillay has just said. Conflicts can shatter States
and divide peoples. In contrast, early cooperation with,
and support from, United Nations or regional conflict-
prevention tools can bolster State sovereignty. A good
example of that was the deployment to Nepal in 2005
of a small civilian team, which supported the Nepalese
in ending conflict and launching a Nepalese-led peace
process.

While the Council has the rimary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
many actors have a role to play. Flexibility is key. Like
many other things, peace and security begin at home.
Individual States must develop the key foundations
for minimizing, managing and resolving tensions and
for respect for human rights, democracy and strong
institutions founded on the rule of law. At the United
Nations, we need more horizon-scanning and early
discussion of potential conflicts. We must make better
use of the conflict-prevention tools listed in Chapter VI
of the Charter, including negotiation and mediation, as
the Secretary-General has just reminded us.

We have had some successes. The proactive
engagement of Said Djinnit and the United Nations
Office for West Africa in Guinea has had a clear
stabilizing impact. In Yemen, unanimous Council
support for the good offices of United Nations Special
Adviser Jamal Benomar has helped paved the way for
peaceful, if fragile, transition.

But our success rate is patchy at best. Resolution
2171 (2014), which we adopted today, recognizes the
cyclical nature of conflict and the key role that United
Nations regional offices, special political missions,
peacekeeping operations and regional and subregional
organizations can play in breaking that cycle.
Peacebuilding is a thread that must be woven into all
such activities.

Another core element of resolution 2171 (2014) is
the recognition that serious violations of human rights
can be an indicator of conflict, as well as a consequence
of conflict. The use of rape as a weapon of war can
exacerbate conflict as well as ravage lives. That point
was made with characteristic clarity by Sergio Vieira
de Mello, whose tragic killing we commemorated
two days ago. He observed that what was missing
in geopolitics was the recognition that flagrant and
systematic violations of human rights were frequently
the principle cause of global insecurity.

In order to break the cycle of conflict,
accountability, including for the most egregious crimes,
is therefore critical. Societies must heal, and future
perpetrators must be deterred. For moral, political
and humanitarian reasons, the United Kingdom fully
supports the Secretary-General's drive to put rights up
front. He has called upon his staff to act with moral
courage by reporting early-warning signs of human
rights Violations. The Council must display the same
moral courage by heeding and acting upon all early
signs it receives from the Secretary-General and United
Nations protection actors.

As the threats the world faces change and as our
understanding of the root causes of conflict deepens,
our collective security system needs to adapt. As we
seek to plan for tomorrow while managing the crises
of today, the Council must consider the best preventive
medicine and who should administer it. In short, the
Council needs to switch from a culture of reaction to
a mindset of conflict prevention. Only then shall we
properly fulfil the responsibility given to us by the
Charter of the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.


