Ms. Alsabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We take note of her briefing on
her Office's thirtieth report on the Sudan.

The Sudan has entered a new era of freedom, peace
and justice. Darfur, which has emerged from conflict
and has begun a new phase of peacebuilding, is an
integral part of the Sudan. That is why the Security
Council must take into account the new changes and
developments on the ground, especially as the peace
process involving the Sudanese parties continues on
the path towards achieving peace. Justice must also
be the result of an agreement among the Sudanese
themselves and based on their national laws in the first
place. Accordingly, we hope that the proceedings of
the ICC will not hinder the efforts to achieve peace in
the Sudan.

We also hope that the Sudanese people will be
allowed to move forward on the transition process
and promote stability and security in the Sudan in a
manner that meets the aspirations of the brotherly
Sudanese people.

The ICC judgement against the former President of
the Sudan, Mr. Omer Al-Bashir, has not been endorsed
by international organizations of which the Sudan is a
member, such as the League of Arab states, the African
Union and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Those organizations are part of the international and
regional partnerships with the United Nations in line
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

As our term on the Security Council is coming to an
end, and as the Council's only Arab member, the State
of Kuwait recalls decision 514 adopted by the League of
Arab States at its twenty-second Summit held in Sirte
in 2010. The decision represents the position of Arab
States on the proceedings of the ICC. The decision
also rejects any attempt to politicize the principles of
international justice or exploit them to undermine the
sovereignty, unity or stability of other States.

In conclusion, as this is our last discussion of
this issue for this year, we reiterate our commitment
to respecting the principles of the Charter, including
those calling for respect for the sovereignty of States.
We stress the importance of respecting the sovereignty
and independence of the Sudan.

