Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today's meeting. I would also like to thank Special Representative Zerrougui for her valuable insights. Over the past few weeks, the members of the Security Council have heard several briefings on developments in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Red Cross and others. Regrettably, similar to what we heard today, the message has been that the situation on the ground is not improving. Security in the eastern provinces is deteriorating along with the humanitarian situation. The number of human rights violations and abuses continues to increase. The number of internally displaced persons has surpassed 5 million, the number of people suffering from food insecurity has reached 10 million, and more than 1,300 civilians have been killed in the past six months alone. I join the Secretary-General in condemning in the strongest terms the continued attacks by armed groups on civilians, including humanitarian workers. It is also regrettable that a large number of humanrights violations continue to be perpetrated by State security forces. Accountability for such violations must be established in order to avoid the prevalence of a culture of impunity and build trust in the country's security forces. As I have mentioned before, strengthening rule-of-law and justice institutions is a critical component of efforts to address the root causes of conflict. As we discuss the future of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) here, it is important to keep in mind the challenges facing the Mission and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the multitude of responsibilities that the Mission is currently shouldering: protecting civilians, advancing the women and peace and security agenda, addressing violations against children, supportingsecurity- sector reform and community-based disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, to name but a few. A refocusing of MONUSCO and a gradual transfer of its responsibilities must ensure that there are no setbacks in the progress made. The drawdown of Mission activities in various regions should be phased and should follow related benchmarks. Its timelines should be flexible and be adjusted to developments on the ground. The Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations country team must be ready and able to fill the gaps created by the refocusing of MONUSCO. This would be further improved by including the main humanitarian partners and other international and national civil-society organizations in the development and implementation of the joint strategy. I would like to end my statement by commending MONUSCO, the Congolese authorities and all partners for their continued commitment to establishing peace in the country.
