Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. Foreign Minister, we
are grateful to the Algerian presidency for organizing
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and warmly welcome your personal
participation in, and your presiding over, this important
meeting. We are also thankful to Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland for his comprehensive briefing
and review of various conflict situations in the context
of the 10-point platform. We also particularly welcome
the presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting.

About five years ago, the United Nations began
systematically to approach the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Stark and disturbing
evidence makes it clear that civilians, particularly
vulnerable groups such as women and children,
continue to bear the brunt of armed conflict and remain
the prime victims in such situations.

I should like to make eight points on the subject
under discussion.

First, the most important problem, as we see it, is
to ensure full respect for international humanitarian
law. In situations of foreign occupation, human rights
organizations have extensively documented the
incidence of harassment, extortion, abduction, search-
and-cordon operations, unlawful detentions, and
arbitrary and extrajudicial killings. Rape has frequently
been used as an instrument of war, to dehumanize
women and humiliate the communities to which they
belong. Such crimes are committed without any
accountability for the perpetrators. There is no
possibility of justice for victims under foreign
occupation.

The Secretary-General rightly stressed in his
report of May 2004 that

"Compliance by all parties to conflict with
international humanitarian, human rights, refugee
and criminal law is critical in all of these
situations, whether they are situations of armed
conflict, occupation or transition." (S/2004/43], para. 3)

Article 48 of the Protocol Additional to the
Geneva Conventions stipulates that

"In order to ensure respect for and
protection of the civilian population the
parties to the conflict shall at all times distinguish
between the civilian population and combatants."

Unfortunately the disproportionate use of force,
excessive rules of engagement, indiscriminate
deployment of high-yield weapons and ill-treatment of
prisoners have rendered such injunctions largely
meaningless. Resolution action on the part of the
international community is required to reverse these
unacceptable trends.

Secondly, it is imperative to bring an end to the
culture of impunity. The parties guilty of harming
civilians must be identified and the perpetrators
brought to justice swiftly. All available legal
mechanisms must be fully utilized to investigate,
prosecute and punish the culprits.

Thirdly, immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to civilians in all conflict
situations is critical to saving lives. No party should be
allowed to deny or obstruct such access in any phase of
the conflict.

Fourthly, provision of emergency relief assistance
to civilian victims of conflict is vital. Besides
mobilizing resources through voluntary contributions,
consideration must be given to providing funding
through the regular budget as well.

Fifthly, deliberate violence against humanitarian
and United Nations personnel is an unacceptable and
relatively recent phenomenon. Measures should be
taken to hold perpetrators accountable in line with
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003).

Sixthly, sexual violence and other abuses of
women and children are inexcusable. Consideration
should be given to the adoption of a declaration that
the targeting of women and use of rape as an
instrument of war constitute a war crime. Concrete
steps must also be taken to bring the abominable use of
child soldiers to an end. In this context, we welcome
the Secretary-General's attention and efforts to address
the problem of sexual violence by United Nations
peacekeepers or civilian personnel.

Seven, a coherent and integrated approach by all
actors is essential. Closer coordination must be
guaranteed among the national players - the
International Committee of the Red Cross, the United
Nations, regional and subregional arrangements and
humanitarian organizations providing protection and
relief assistance to civilians in armed conflict.

And eight, regular monitoring and consistent and
objective reporting by the United Nations system
across all conflict situations must be ensured with a
View to encouraging necessary responses from the
international community. In our view, there should be
no neglected emergencies, no ignored conflicts.

In conclusion, let me say that strengthening the
framework for the protection of civilians in conflict
situations, which are characterized by an increasingly
challenging environment and diversity of actors, is not
an easy undertaking. The Security Council should
remain focused and keep individual civilian victims of
conflict at the centre of attention. But this must also be
done within a larger framework that puts an equal
premium on conflict prevention, conflict resolution,
addressing root causes and providing long-term
assistance to tackle the developmental and
reconstruction challenges of States affected by or likely
to be engulfed by conflict. As the Secretary-General
has stressed, our efforts to promote a culture of
protection can achieve moral authority and credibility
only through principled, consistent and effective
practice.

