Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we wish to extend our warm congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. We also thank
Kuwait for its presidency of the Council last month. We
commend you, Sir, for having chosen such an important
topic for discussion today.

The Sudan is a vast country bordered by seven
countries. Those borders are long and difficult to
control. For that reason, we are particularly mindful
of the need to combat terrorist groups trying to take
advantage of open and difficult-to-control borders. The
fight against terrorism and organized crime is therefore
a top priority for my country and all its institutions,
as well as a fundamental fulcrum of our coordination
and cooperation with neighbouring countries and the
international community.

The Sudan has ratified all international conventions
concerning the fight against terrorism and organized
crime, in addition to the relevant African and Arab
regional conventions. My country is playing an active
role in the context of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to combat terrorism and organized
crime. The Sudan believes that the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is one of the most
important international legal frameworks aimed at
guiding national laws and legislation coherently and
harmoniously in the area of counter-terrorism, which
has had a positive impact in curbing the activities of
extremist elements and groups and reducing the spread
of terrorism and organized crime.

The danger of terrorism lies in the challenge posed
by the growing nexus between organized crime and
terrorism. Their great structural similarity has led
some to consider terrorism as a form of organized
crime, especially given that the actions of organized
crime groups and terrorist groups sometimes overlap to
the point of forming close alliances among them. There
is therefore an urgent need to understand and address
the evolving links between terrorism and transnational
organized crime, as well as the extent to which those
links differ across various regions and contexts.

In order to combat organized crime in the context
of its links to terrorism, we need to implement cost-
effective and innovative measures to combat global
criminal and terrorist networks, based on the promotion
of bilateral and collective cooperation and coordination
among States. Urgent measures must also be taken
to prevent and combat terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, while recognizing that international
cooperation and any steps taken to prevent and combat
terrorism must be in line with our obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and relevant international conventions and
protocols, in particular human rights law, refugee law
and international humanitarian law.

Tackling poverty, achieving balanced development,
supporting reconstruction and advancement
programmes in developing countries, especially
African countries, and promoting North-South dialogue
all form a comprehensive approach to addressing the
dangers and manifestations of terrorism through efforts
to create a fair and balanced international order.

Our national efforts to combat terrorism and
organized crime within the framework of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy require
technical support in building our capabilities and
enabling international mechanisms to fully play
their role on the basis of cooperation and mutual
respect, without undermining national ownership and
sovereignty. That requires a collective effort on the part
of States and civil society organizations, as well as the
media and research centres that identify and monitor a
variety of related phenomena, provide deep analysis and
lead efforts to improve awareness and understanding.

In conclusion, my delegation hopes that the United
Nations, including its relevant institutions and donor
States, will continue to provide capacity-building to
States, where necessary and appropriate, in order to
assist them in addressing the threat posed by terrorism,
which benefits from transnational organized crime.

