Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you and your team very much, Mr. President. Like
the rest of my colleagues, I wish to acknowledge your
work, not only during the month of your presidency,
but throughout the two years we have shared on the
Council. It is clear that we do not take the same view
on all matters, and that is good, but we have learned to
engage in dialogue and respect our differences.

You brought that same spirit to your presidency- the
spirit of your delegation and your country, a democratic
country capable of dialogue. It is a spirit of listening to
different positions and of launching initiatives of great
value and interest for your delegation so as to fulfil the

responsibility we all have as members of this Council,

and to fulfil it without lowering the standard, but to

prioritize, seek and work tirelessly to attain consensus.

This is how the Council makes progress. A lack of
consensus in the Council means there will be more

victims in the real world. Therefore, we want to note

that our appreciation is not only for one month, but for

a shared experience.

We also welcome the present wrap-up session.
Ten members of the Council convened such wrap-up
sessions during their presidencies in 2014, and we hope
that the practice can continue, as I have said before, so
as to continue building confidence and not only change
the programme a little, but build trust among the
membership so that they may come to participate in the
knowledge that they are not merely passive spectators
but equal protagonists in the international community.

November - as everyone has noted and as my team
and I myself agree - has been an intense month with
the numerous obligatory activities, such as mandate
renewals and meetings required by prior decisions
of the Council, in addition to emergency meetings
and the three valuable initiatives of the presidency:
counter-terrorism, police components in peacekeeping
operations, and sanctions. As it would be imprudent to
talk about all of them, I will focus on Australia's three
initiatives.

The open debate on terrorism (see S/PV.7316) led by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia, to whom
we convey our greetings once again, stressed that today
the threat posed by terrorisms - and I am speaking in
the plural - is once again at the centre of the attention
of the Council, of the mass media, of the international
community and of the collective fear. That threat is at
the centre of the measures to prevent the extension of
that horror.

However, we also have also understood that it is not
the terrorism of the past that is returning to the centre
of our attention. It has become much more complex in
terms of how it operates. It has multiple configurations
and it uses sophisticated and innovative channels to
induce terror in the peoples the world over. These are
forms of violence whose roots we are not yet fully able
to grasp. It is not enough to say that they are fanatics.
We cannot simply say that they appeared overnight with
such determination. We are talking about individuals
from developed countries joining terrorist groups to

fight in poor countries - extremely poor countries,
decimated by conflict.

Within the Security Council and elsewhere,
we must therefore reflect profoundly - which will
require more time than the five minutes established
by note S/2010/507 - on what is going on. Why are
these terrorisms ensnaring ever younger individuals,
including women and children, as noted by the
representative of Luxembourg, and using them to
commit heinous acts?

Argentina's conviction, as we expressed in the
debate, is that while the response to the terrorisms,
including the new challenge of the recruitment and
participation of foreign terrorist fighters, requires
a military component, we cannot reduce the matter
to that. We failed when we reduced the fight against
terrorism to the military dimension alone. We still
need, at the presentjuncture of military action, to fight
terrorism in the framework of the rule of law and with
respect for due process. Measures adopted by States to
fight terrorism must fully respect international law, in
particular international human rights and humanitarian
law and refugee law. Such measures must also respect
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations, such as sovereignty, territorial
integrity, the political independence of States and the
principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
States.

The second issue is your decision, Mr. President,
to convene the first-ever meeting of the Security
Council on United Nations police (see S/PV.7317), at
which the first resolution on the same topic (resolution 2185 (2014)) was adopted. This is an issue to which
Argentina attaches enormous importance, being our
region's leading contributor of police observers to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope that
you, Sir, have sowed a seed that will bear fruit in the
years to come, receiving the attention it deserves in the
Council.

We believe that resolution 2185 (2014) provides
an important description of the evolving and growing
relevance of the role that police components play in
peacekeeping missions, in particular in the protection of
civilians. We welcome the resolution's reaffirmation of
the role that police components can play in facilitating
the participation and inclusion of women in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding, as well as the need to
increase the number of women police deployed and the
coordination of police components with advisers on the
protection of women and children.

Unfortunately, however, we are concerned at the
lack of specific mention in the text of the resolution of
the mandate of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which is the only forum in the United
Nations entrusted with the broad consideration of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects, including
measures to improve the capacity of the Organization
to carry out such operations. The Secretary-General
should therefore take that mandate fully into account
when developing and implementing standards,
guidelines and procedures for improving the activities
of peacekeeping operations, including those of police
components.

Thirdly and finally, we highlight Australia's
proposal to consider measures aimed at improving the
quality and consistency of the assistance that the United
Nations system provides to the Council, its committees
and expert groups and, in turn, at improving the quality
and consistency of the assistance the Council provides
to Member States in the implementation of sanctions.

It will be recalled that at April's wrap-up session
(S/PV.7166), I said that, as the Security Council appears
to be moving more resolutely towards using sanctions
in a more responsible way, it is essential that we look at
what we can do in order better to preserve international
peace and security.

With respect to sanctions, on this rainy day I agree
with most members of the Council and with you, Sir,
that something has to be done about sanctions. When it
is raining we use umbrellas. If we use umbrellas with
holes in them, we know we are going to get wet. What
do I mean by that? We complain and set up sanctions
and then those sanctions are not complied with, so
either we change umbrellas or we face up to the storm
and try not just sanctions as the only way to go, but we
put on the table the various alternatives available to the
Council. Argentina will certainly continue to maintain
its position on our proposal for extending the mandate
of the Office of the Ombudsperson to other persons
and entities included in the lists of the all the sanctions
committees.

I am not saying that the spirit in the Council is
like an umbrella without holes, but sometimes there is
a feeling that sanctions are selective and random, and
that there is a certain kind of punitive arbitrariness.
Speaking of punitive arbitrariness, in my region and in
my country, when our democracy was less democratic
our penal system caused poor people, immigrants,
people of African origin and young people to be thrown
in prison. The jails were full of such people. We began
to realize that this selective, arbitrary and punitive
system did not strengthen peace or the democracy of
social cohesion. Therefore, having improved these
punitive systems in the very heart of our countries, I
think that we have to really think sincerely and fairly
about the necessary meaning of sanctions. I believe that
they are necessary, but they also have to be legitimate
and not just arbitrary.

Mr. President, I would like to thank you and your
team. I would like to welcome the new delegations. It
is like in restaurants, when the tables are full, there are
always people standing in line to sit down. I see six
Venezuelans waiting up there. I give them my seat. I
welcome them. I welcome all the new countries that are
going to be non-permanent members of the Security
Council. It is indeed a challenging responsibility. I
would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for this final
meeting as President of the Security Council and for
his professionalism and his sense ofinstitutional ethics.

Finally, I would like to extend to Chad my very best
wishes for good luck in December, a month in which
many of us, believers and non-believers alike, celebrate
the desire for peace on Earth. I hope we will have a
peaceful month.

I would like to address a comment made by a
colleague. It is true that the new members will find that
Africa takes up a lot of our time on our agenda. Violent
zones, organized poverty and conflict are all found
more in Africa than anywhere else. It is true that there
are very complex political situations, power struggles,
new violence and old, but it is also true that Africa must
stop being the object of daily unrestrained greed for
profit and body-shopping.

