Ms. Haq: I would just like to take this opportunity
to thank all the speakers here for their supportive and
encouraging statements about the good work done by
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). I also take this opportunity to thank Deputy
Prime Minister Jose Luis Guterres for his kind remarks.
I want to express my appreciation to everyone who has
clearly supported an extension of the mandate of
UNMIT for a period of 12 months, and those who have
expressed agreement with the Secretary-General's views
that any major restructuring of UNMIT at this stage
would be premature and that the United Nations should
maintain the integrated support provided through the
Mission in all the major areas of its mandate.

Many speakers have highlighted that the four
objectives of UNMIT's medium-term strategy and their
related benchmarks remain critical to addressing the
challenges that gave rise to the mandate and to
providing a solid foundation for achieving sustainable
stability.
A number of speakers raised concerns about the
resumption of responsibilities by the Policia Nacional de
Timor-Leste (PNTL). I would just like to say that the
Mission's leadership has openly and constructively
raised issues with the authorities of Timor-Leste and will
continue to do so. We are confident that we will
continue to address them together. In that context, while
we know that we all aim towards the goal of completing
resumption by the end of 2010, I want to reassure the
Council that that is not a deadline but a goal.

Also in that context, the support expressed by
everyone with regard to the institutional development
of the PNTL - including ensuring that we get the
required technical expertise for a sufficient number of
trainers - is something that we will take on board
very seriously. Issues were also raised concerning the
delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the
PNTL and the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste.

Many speakers also raised issues about impunity
and accountability for past crimes. We heard very
clearly from the Deputy Prime Minister about the
Government's position on that.

Lastly, many speakers highlighted the need to
ensure that socio-economic development and policies
provide for the employment of the growing number of
young people in the population.
30
I would like to assure all members of the Council
that we will continue our good offices with the
Government and with all other relevant stakeholders.
We will also continue to coordinate with international
partners as we pursue the Mission's mandate to address
the priority areas.

I would once again like to thank all the members
of the Council and all the speakers for their support
and guidance this morning.

