Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I would like to welcome
Judge Pocar and Judge Byron, the Presidents of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as well as Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow. I thank them for their
respective reports.

The establishment of those two Tribunals by the
Security Council 15 years ago was one of the defining
moments in the development of international criminal
justice. My country, Croatia, was one of the early
proponents of their establishment, having been directly
affected by the most painful experience of war crimes
committed by the aggressors against its citizens in the
early 19905. Today, as the Tribunals' mandates are
drawing nearer to the completion date, we can say that
many of the goals for which they were established have
been largely accomplished. However, before we can
confidently state that their mandates have been
completed, the international community has to make
sure that every effort has been made to bring those
most responsible to justice, however long it takes.

We have listened attentively to the reports
presented to the Council by the representatives of the
two Tribunals. We welcome their commitment to
ensure that every measure is taken to expedite the work
of the Tribunals and to implement their respective
completion strategies at an early date. As part of that
exit strategy, the Council will have to take decisions on
certain mechanisms, the existence of which will be
necessary even as the current trials area concluded, in
order to ensure the continuation of a certain number of
essential residual functions. Croatia will continue to
engage in those discussions with a view to a timely
articulation of such mechanisms. In that respect, I
would like to point out two things related to the legacy
of the ICTY in particular.
First, when addressing the issue of residual
mechanisms, it is crucial that the Council make it clear
that the core mandate of the Tribunals should not be
compromised. It is therefore essential that fugitives
face trial. In the case of the ICTY, that means that all
four remaining fugitives - Radovan Karadzic, Ratko

Mladic, Goran Hadzic and Stojan Zupljanin - must
face international justice. Without it, the Tribunal's
mandate will remain unfulfilled and its legacy
incomplete. Any decision on the possible transfer of
such trials to national jurisdiction may only be taken
by ajudicial instance.

Secondly, the interests of the long-term legacy of
the Tribunals make it imperative that optimal solutions
be found for balancing the interests of the most
affected countries with the interests that the
international community as a whole has in preserving
that legacy. The issue of archives is an important
element of future residual structures. Bearing in mind
that their significance extends beyond judicial
processes, we look forward to finding a solution that
reconciles the interests of all stakeholders in the region
and beyond, most notably those of victims and
survivors, as well as those pertinent to ongoing or
future trials.

As it has stated on many occasions, Croatia
firmly believes that one of the most important
determinants of the long-term legacy of the Tribunals
is to ensure that it has been embraced by the countries
under their jurisdiction. That is why the active
involvement of national jurisdictions in the prosecution
of war crimes is important. Not only does it add to an
effective completion strategy, but it also demonstrates
national ownership. The Croatian judiciary has clearly
demonstrated its ability to conduct trials of even the
most sensitive cases, including the one case that was
transferred to it by the ICTY. Within the framework of
the Tribunal's completion strategy, Croatia stands
ready to take over any other remaining cases involving
Croatian citizens or crimes committed in Croatia.

Furthermore, my country is ready to assume
responsibility for the residual functions relating to the
serving of sentences and is interested in concluding an
agreement to that end with the ICTY so that the
sentenced persons who so wish may serve their
sentences in Croatia.

As stated before, we think that the directions
guiding current practice are obsolete, as the
circumstances have changed substantially since the
inception of the Tribunal, thereby justifying the serving
of sentences in the country where the crimes were
committed, as is already the case with the sentences
delivered by the Rwanda Tribunal. We see no reason to
continue the discrepancy in the practices between the
two Tribunals.

I would now like to say a few words and provide
some precise information on recent developments in
Croatian cooperation with the Tribunal. Croatia is and
will remain actively engaged in supporting the work of
the Tribunal, including by providing the documents and
information necessary for the preparation and conduct
of trials. Over the past year, the Croatian authorities
have developed an excellent working relationship with
the ICTY prosecution. Croatia also has a permanent
role in advancing regional cooperation in the war
crimes trials. We have taken note of today's remarks by
the Prosecutor. We see no grounds for questioning what
has previously been described as a generally
satisfactory level of cooperation as the willingness of
the Croatian authorities to engage in regional and
international cooperation on war crimes trials remains
exemplary.

The extensive working relationship developed
between the relevant Croatian authorities and the
representatives of the Tribunal has in no way subsided
over the past reporting period. The Prosecution has
been given full access to the State archives, including
those of the Ministry of Defence. So far, more than
9,000 documents have been handed over to the
Prosecution, including those emanating from the
highest ranking military officials. Nearly 800 requests
for assistance have been received so far, of which only
one remains partially unfulfilled. The outstanding
request No. 739 has been given full attention by our
authorities, and the ICTY has already received
extensive documentation - 1,833 documents -
pertinent to the request. We are conducting several
internal investigations in the country with a view to
discovering the possible existence of other
documentation sought by the Prosecution. The
Prosecution has been regularly updated on those
activities. An early effort has been made to bring them
to a prompt conclusion.

Croatia continues to believe that justice is an
essential prerequisite for lasting peace. It attaches great
importance to the fair and expeditious trial of all
perpetrators of war crimes. However, the failure to
establish individual criminal accountability undermines
that goal and threatens to undermine the long-term
legacy of the Tribunals.

Last fall, the judgement delivered by the Tribunal
in the case of the so-called Vukovar Three provoked
strong reactions in Croatia, particularly among the
victims, their families and their associations. We took
note of the appeals by the Prosecution in the Mrksie
and Sljivancanin cases, who were part of the Vukovar
Three. However, it is difficult to comprehend why no
appeal has been filed in the case of the acquitted
Miroslav Radie, the remaining third participant in the
massive crime, in which, among other things, more
than 260 persons were summarily executed. We
continue to hope that the appellate judgement in the
Vukovar case will render justice that can stand the test
of time.

Let me conclude by quoting the Prime Minister of
Croatia, Mr. Ivo Sanader, who addressed the General
Assembly on this issue last fall.

"The issue of punishment for war crimes relates
to responsibility in a broader sense. It relates to
the responsibility of the international community
to ensure effectiveness in preventing conflict and
protecting and promoting human rights,
humanitarian law and the rule of law in general."
(A/62/PV.25, p. 10).

It is precisely for that reason that the Tribunal was
established in 1993. Prime Minister Sanader also stated
that ensuring

"a just outcome of prosecution is the only way to
discourage those who might consider repeating
such crimes, today or in the future. Just
punishment offers a measure of respect for the
victims. Just punishment is the best deterrent.
Just punishment also serves truth and opens the
way for lasting peace, security and
reconciliation". (ibid., p. 8).

