Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): As an African member
of the Council, let me first of all express our sincere
thanks for the words of congratulations on the
launching of the African Union. It is indeed a new
beginning for Africa.

My delegation is particularly pleased that a
meeting such as this is being conducted before the
adoption of a draft resolution on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it adds to the transparency and
openness of the Council that we are all striving
persistently to achieve. This is most appropriate and
timely, as any future decision regarding peacekeeping
operations will be able to mirror the views and
comments not only of the 15 States members of the
Council, but also of the wider membership of the
United Nations, which is actively participating in the
debate today.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) has been playing a significant
role in the maintenance of peace and stability in the
Balkans. Its presence on the ground has been
instrumental in the establishment of law and order in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any hesitancy in the renewal
of its mandate will create serious doubt in the minds of
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Continued
uncertainty in UNMIBH's operations will be
counterproductive and may undermine the progress
achieved so far.

We have recently had one renewal of UNMIBH's
mandate for three days, followed by another one for 15
days, which will lapse on 15 July. The Mission's
continued operation now depends upon the concerns
raised by one delegation as regards the applicability of
the provisions of the Rome Statute. That delegation, as
a non-party to the Rome Statute, insists that the
Council adopt a resolution to ensure that its
peacekeepers and those of other contributing countries
not party to the International Criminal Court (ICC)
enjoy complete immunity from the jurisdiction of the
Court. We do not share that view, as we do not believe
that peacekeepers, by the very nature of their duties,
would be involved in any crime falling under the
purview of the ICC. In fact, past history does not
include any instance where any peacekeeper has been
the author of a crime that could fall within the Court's
jurisdiction.

In any case, it must be emphasized that the ICC is
complementary to national justice systems and that,
since status of forces agreements entered into between
host countries and contributing countries provide for
the repatriation and prosecution in the contributing
country of any peacekeeper allegedly accused of
misbehaviour. We therefore do not understand how the
ICC can pose a threat to any peacekeeper. Indeed, we
have complete trust in the justice systems of all law-
abiding States.

My delegation has strong reservations about the
proposal for blanket immunity to be granted to any
particular individual or group of individuals from the
jurisdiction of the ICC. Mauritius believes in the
constitutional principle of equality before the law. The
Rome Statute, establishing the International Criminal
Court, has been elevated to almost universal
acceptance by the signatures of more than 139
countries and the ratification by 76 of them within four
years of its adoption. It would indeed be inappropriate
to undermine such a universally accepted international
treaty.

The United States has proposed that article 16 of
the ICC Statute be used by the Council to provide
blanket immunity to peacekeepers. Mauritius maintains
that article 16 of the Rome Statute should be invoked
only on a case-by-case basis when the Court is seized
of a specific case. We fully subscribe to the view
expressed by the Secretary-General that the provisions
of article 16 mean that the Security Council can
intervene to request the ICC prosecutor to defer the
process of investigation and prosecution on a case-by-
case basis. Doing otherwise would be tantamount to re-
writing article 16, which itself could then in fact be
challenged by the Court. Mauritius also believes that
the concerns raised by the United States would be best
addressed in forums other than this Council, more
specifically in the tenth session of the Preparatory
Commission for the Court. The Rome Statute contains
built-in checks and balances, and the treaty has a strong
mechanism to ensure that the Court is used only as a
last resort.

As a party to the Rome Statute, Mauritius firmly
believes that any provision undermining the
jurisdiction of the ICC as provided in the Statute would
be inconsistent and incompatible with the precepts of
international law based on the will of the comity of
nations.

