Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): My Government places
importance on the consolidation of peace in unstable
post-conflict societies. In our view, efforts to realize
justice and the rule of law in the transitional period
until peace is consolidated are of the utmost
importance. However, we must not forget that societies
in the transitional period are extremely fragile. It is,
therefore, necessary to search for the best way to
achieve justice and the rule of law while maintaining
ownership by the people. In the long run, capacity-
building will be the most important issue. In the short
term, various elements need to be taken into
consideration. On occasion there may be cases in
which things could go wrong if they are not undertaken
with a high level of flexibility.

From such a perspective, Japan wishes to focus
on three points. First, it is important for Member States
to exert efforts in establishing justice and the rule of
law within their own borders, in parallel with
assistance extended by the United Nations. Since the
United Nations is a world forum enjoying the most
universal membership, a framework achieved through
extensive discussions within the United Nations gives
us every right to expect the full cooperation of the
international community in its implementation.

Efforts to achieve justice and to establish the rule
of law in peacetime provide a basis for preventing
conflicts from recurring. Furthermore, at times when
the United Nations is conducting its operations in
failed States and other problem areas, or when the
United Nations becomes responsible for administration
on a temporary basis in the transitional period, its
activities sometimes play a direct role in the
establishment of the rule of law. These cases, however,
should be regarded as exceptional, and the United
Nations should make every effort to transfer primary
responsibility to the administrative organization
concerned at the earliest possible opportunity.

Secondly, when the United Nations undertakes
assistance in the establishment of justice and the rule
of law, it is essential to pay due respect to the support
and participation of the people of the recipient States.
For example, in Timor-Leste, while the serious crimes
of the past are being prosecuted by the courts through
the legal process, the activities of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, whose aim is to
realize reconciliation through earnest reflection on past
conduct, are proving to be effective. The work to
establish the rule of law serves not only to punish the
criminals but also to discourage the commission of
such crimes in the future and, thereby, to prevent
conflicts from recurring.

If we want the results of such work to take root in
the region, it is indispensable for the people of the
region in question to have a sense of ownership
regarding the significance of the rule of law. For that
reason, we should not overlook the importance of
publicity and educational activities.

Thirdly, the significance of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) should not be underestimated in
any way. However, it should be borne in mind that the
ICC is not a panacea for all humanitarian tragedies. In
particular, the atrocities that occurred prior to the
establishment of the ICC in 2002 still need to be
addressed. In this connection, when societies or States
concerned were incapable of reacting appropriately in
the immediate aftermath of conflict, the international
community established tribunals, such as the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) and the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. These courts fulfil multiple purposes -
bringing to justice persons allegedly responsible for
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
establishing the foundation for post-conflict public
order and realizing universal justice.

In Cambodia, work is continuing towards the
establishment of extraordinary chambers within the
existing national court, in cooperation with the United
Nations, for the prosecution of Khmer Rouge leaders.
One of the lessons we have learned from the
management of ICTY and ICTR is that the
administrative organizations of tribunals financed
through assessed contributions can grow to be far
bigger than is necessary. The international community
is obliged to design a structure that will yield
maximum efficiency and effectiveness for international
tribunals. My Government will continue to closely
monitor the activities of the ICTY and the ICTR to
help ensure that their intended objectives will be
achieved through the endorsed completion strategies.

Japan also has been working on the early
establishment of the Khmer Rouge trials extraordinary
chambers with assistance from the international
community, and welcomes the fact that the Cambodian
National Assembly recently approved an agreement
with the United Nations concerning the prosecution of
former Khmer Rouge leaders. Japan expects that
further steps will be taken towards its prompt
ratification by Cambodia. The establishment of these
chambers will be an important step for justice and the
rule of law in Cambodia, and, for that reason, Japan
urges Member States to cooperate to the best of their
abilities to assure the success of these trials.
