Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate on the important issue of preventing
and combating the financing of terrorism. I also want
to commend France's leadership in facilitating the
adoption of resolution 2462 (2019) this morning. We
are pleased to join the international community in
fulfilling all its obligations. I congratulate all Security
Council members for their important contribution
to the resolution. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Voronkov and the other briefers for
sharing their insights on the issue at the beginning of
the meeting.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and I would like to add the following points
in my national capacity.

Terrorism and violent extremism are major
challenges to global peace and security and development.
Bangladesh is no exception to the suffering from that
menace. As I speak, five Bangladeshi families still
mourn the deaths of their near and dear ones who were
killed in the terrorist attack carried out in a mosque in
New Zealand on 15 March.

As our Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has
reiterated time and again, Bangladesh maintains
a policy of zero tolerance towards all forms of
terrorism, including the financing of terrorism, both
nationally and internationally. Bangladesh believes
that no act of terrorism shall be condoned because
of its circumstances, method or objective. In other
words, a terrorist must be identified only as a terrorist,
irrespective of his or her race, colour, creed or religion.
As a matter of principle, Bangladesh does not allow its
territory to be used by any individual, group or entity
against any other State or individual. Bangladesh also
continues to adhere to the relevant human rights and
humanitarian principles in counter-terrorism efforts.

I would like to share with the Council what
Bangladesh has done and is doing at the national and
international levels to prevent and combat terrorism
financing. We formulated and enacted the Money
Laundering Prevention Act and Anti-terrorism Act in
2002 and 2009, respectively. Those Acts later went
through several amendments to meet the international
standards. They contain appropriate provisions to
respond to the request of foreign countries to identify,
freeze, seize and confiscate the proceeds of crime and
related property. Our Government has also established a
Cabinet-level task force to strengthen the investigation
and to coordinate the activities on countering
extremism, terrorism and terrorist financing.

To complement those policy efforts, we have
also brought about reforms at the operational level to
implement the provisions of such Acts and rules and
on countering illicit financing. We have set up and
redesigned the relevant institutions. The Bangladesh
Financial Intelligence Unit is one such organization,
which works as the national central agency for
receiving, analysing and disseminating suspicious
transactions reports, cash transaction reports and
any information related to money laundering and the
financing of terrorism.

A counter-terrorism and transnational crime unit
was also established within our police authorities to
deal with any form of cybercrime and transnational
crimes such as making fake currency notes, drug
trafficking and smuggling firearms. For the necessary
coordination among intelligence and law enforcement
agencies on the counter-terrorism and anti-terrorist
financing drive, a high-powered working group was
formed with representatives from all intelligence and
law enforcement agencies.

As part of our international cooperation and
obligations, Bangladesh has taken all possible
measures in compliance with the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and resolutions 1373 (2001), 2178 (2014),
2347 (2017) and 2396 (2017), including updating our
domestic laws and setting up the mechanisms that
I have just shared with the Council. As part of our
commitment to the eventual elimination of terrorism
in all its forms, Bangladesh acceded to all 14 United
Nations and international anti-terrorism conventions
and protocols. Bangladesh is very much engaged with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001), the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.

In order to provide broader international
cooperation, our Financial Intelligence Unit works
very closely with the Asia/Pacific Group on Money
Laundering, the Financial Action Task Force and the
Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units.

Although the influence and financial strengths of
terrorist outfits are diminishing to a certain extent,
we cannot underestimate their potential capacity.
Therefore, we must remain vigilant. In that regard, we
may consider the following elements.

The first is awareness-raising and knowledge
sharing. In view of sustainable development approaches
and the promotion of inclusive financing mechanisms,
the risk of the misuse of funds is increasing. We therefore
need to expand and broaden awareness against terrorist
financing to reach a wider public.

Secondly, to fill the existing knowledge gap, we
can work to build a new financial security toolkit based
on the field-level experiences of different countries and
share that new knowledge with all relevant stakeholders.

With regard to capacity-building, further training
and capacity-building to equip Governments and
institutions with the necessary knowledge to counter
modern technology-oriented Internet-based terrorist
financing are necessary.
On the coordination front, coordination among
field-level mechanisms within and among countries,
including coordination across sectors such as money
laundering, drug trafficking, human trafficking
and organized crime, can be increased. National
Governments should devote more efforts to coordinating
with non-governmental organizations and charitable
organizations to prevent the misuse of their funds for
terrorism-financing purposes

In conclusion, let me once again affirm that
Bangladesh, as a responsible and responsive nation,
will work closely with the international community to
deny transit, sanctuary or safe haven to foreign terrorist
groups and to develop and implement further global
standards to combat terrorism and terrorist financing.
We also look forward to working closely with the
United Nations system, in particular with the Security
Council, to facilitate the full implementation of the
resolutions relating to terrorism and terrorist financing,
including the one adopted today.

