Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
endorses the statement made by the representative of
Angola on behalf of the African Group, including the
African members of the Security Council.

Chad notes with regret that a resolution as
important as the one just voted upon by nine members
of the Security Council (resolution 2220 (2015)),
whose aim, we were told, is to help the most affected
regions by the destabilizing impact of small arms and
light weapons, more specifically Africa, was adopted
without involving the representatives of the continent
in th Council. For the African countries in general, and
Chad in particular, the major challenge to be taken up
in combating the use, that is to say, the abusive and
illegal use of small arms and light weapons, remains
the issue ofthe illicit transfer ofthese arms to non-State
actors, including, inter alia, armed groups, terrorists
and criminal networks.

The concept of non-State actors has been defined
by the Security Council through resolution 1540 (2004)
in the context of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Ironically, when it comes to the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons and their
illicit transfer to non-State actors, the reference to these
concepts gives rise to great opposition from certain
prominent members of the Council. Non-State actors,
illegally supplied with arms and munitions, provoke
conflicts and destabilize States, commit egregious
crimes and human rights Violations, sow destruction
and plunge civilian populations into desolation, thereby
jeopardizing any prospects of development for the
States concerned. Therefore, for us in Chad, the refusal
to include a provision in this resolution that would
make it illegal to transfer small arms and light weapons
to non-State actors is tantamount to a refusal to prevent
crises and conflicts and tantamount to encouraging
destabilizing efforts against fragile States.

Throughout the discussions on the draft text leading
up to today's vote, the African delegations showed great
flexibility by submitting various proposed amendments
with a View to having a balanced consensual text that
would accommodate all the concerns of all members of
the Council. Unfortunately, these valid concerns, such
as expressed by us, did not attract even the slightest
attention from those who rejected them with some
degree of condescension. We are deeply disappointed
and shocked.

Nothing is more frustrating than when it comes
to issues as important as those concerning Africa, the
African members of the Council are marginalized and
the only reason given is that their concerns have no
impact on the adoption ofthe resolution. This historical
injustice must be remedied through a reform of the
Security Council, such that Africa can take its rightful
place in the Council, alongside other continents, and
that it can make its voice heard. Given the categorical
refusal to take our concerns on board and in the absence
of any possibility of dialogue on subjects as sensitive as
these, Chad had no choice but to abstain in the voting
on this resolution.

Either way, convinced of the justice of our cause
and the relevance of our arguments ,we insist on the
importance of and need to find a solution to the illicit
transfer to small arms and light weapons to non-State
actors. We will continue our efforts until we can make
our voices heard.

