Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's meeting on collective action to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Director Fatimata Toure' for
their briefings.

We support the Secretary-General's focus on
improving the effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and his emphasis on
the importance of achieving political solutions to
conflicts. Indeed, the main task of the United Nations
peacekeeping presence is assisting the parties in
reaching political agreements on peaceful settlements
and ensuring that they are implemented as quickly as
possible. In the absence of progress on the political
track, missions can remain in countries for years. Of
course, United Nations peacekeeping initiatives need to
be adapted to the realities of today. They are deployed
in difficult and dangerous conditions and increasingly
in situations of domestic political crisis, compounded
by grave humanitarian and socioeconomic situations.
The most acute challenges of all are those presented by
transborder issues such as the movement of weapons,
organized crime, terrorism and drug trafficking.

However, even under such difficult circumstances
it is crucial to respect the Charter of the United Nations
and the core principles of peacekeeping - the consent
of the parties, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in self-defence and to protect the mandate. In
our view, the increasingly frequent proposals that have
lately been made to interpret them flexibly or revise
them are pernicious. That particularly applies to calls
to replace the ideology behind the implementation of
peacekeeping operations with so-called proactive and
robust peacekeeping and give Blue Helmets the right
to the first use of force. It is extremely doubtful that
such an approach can facilitate the desired goal, which
is reducing the number of deaths among peacekeepers.
On the contrary, it runs a high risk of producing the
opposite effect. If the Blue Helmets' neutral authority
is undermined, it can turn them into active participants
in conflicts, with an inevitable increase in the number
of clashes with opponents and therefore the numbers of
victims. Robust mandates cannot become routine and
must be finely calibrated for each individual situation
where they are deemed truly necessary, especially
considering that the experience available so far of
granting peacekeepers extra powers, for example in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Mali, has not
yet convinced us that the results on the ground fully
justify the sacrifices by the peacekeepers in those
operations. More than anything, we believe that the
greatest potential for increasing peacekeepers' safety
lies in strengthening their professional training and
their material and technical equipment.

The principle of impartiality is also key, including
in the context of implementing mandates for the
protection of civilians. Peacekeepers should never, on
any pretext, however well-meaning, side with one or
another party to a conflict, let alone cite any non-United
Nations principles that might permit the possible use of
force with regard to a host State.

The overall success ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
activities, as well as of each individual mission, depends
largely on the coherence ofthe efforts ofthe participants
involved in the process, above all the Security Council,
the Secretariat, the troop-contributing countries
and the host States. In that regard, it is important to
ensure not only that each link in the chain carries out
its responsibilities conscientiously but also that the
collaboration between each of those links is effective,
confidential and transparent.

As always, the Organization's new peacekeeping
challenges demand comprehensive discussion and
consideration on the part of Member States and the
Secretariat with a view to coming up with consistent,
balanced approaches, dealing with the fragmented
nature of the political and legal frameworks,
developing relevant doctrines and producing normative
documents in good time and based on analysis of
accumulated experience. In that connection, it is
important to ensure that any reform of United Nations
peacekeeping activities is carried out in strict accord
with the decisions of Member States. Any arbitrary
interpretation, as there has been with the concept of
information gathering and analysis for intelligence in
peacekeeping, could have a negative impact on Member
States' interaction with the Secretariat and could also
risk damaging the credibility of the United Nations in
the conduct of peacekeeping operations.

In our view, using intelligence for implementing
a peacekeeping operation's activities is something
that should be done based solely on the Charter of
the United Nations and with the consent of the host
Government, and only for the clearly defined and
limited legitimate purposes of ensuring peacekeepers'
safety and protecting civilians. Any use of intelligence
flexibly or for political purposes, including fulfilling
a mandate's political tasks, is unacceptable. We hope
that the relevant conclusions will be drawn and that
we will soon see results. It is also extremely important
to establish constructive cooperation with host
States, since the potential success of United Nations
operations is directly dependent on it. International
assistance should support local and regional efforts, not
replace them.

Peacekeeping operations' mandates should be
clear, realistic and fully capable of responding to
the challenges facing the United Nations and the
particular situation on the ground, with an emphasis on
addressing the specific reasons for individual conflicts,
not resolving various generic initiatives. In order to
optimize peacekeeping operations on the economic
front, it is advisable to accompany the modification
of their mandates with an emphasis on reducing these
kinds of side issues. Well-considered exit strategies
are also essential, along with plans, as needed, for
transforming peacekeeping operations into other types
of political presence or as support to United Nations
country teams' reconstruction and development efforts.
In that regard, it is important to take account of the
views of both the host Governments and the country
teams in order to avoid distorted interpretations of
missions' mandates or the possibility of overburdening
them, which will ultimately make their implementation
more effective.

A particularly important factor in implementing
peacekeeping operations is genuine partnership on the
part of the members of the international community.
The efforts of regional and subregional organizations
operating in their areas of responsibility, as outlined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter, have become increasingly
significant in that regard. In fact, no one has advanced
this issue further than the African Union. We believe
that it will be impossible to establish lasting peace
throughout the continent without the active efforts of
Africans themselves. It will therefore be important to
work to ensure that it is the countries of Africa that play
the major role in determining the pathways to peace
and security in accordance with their own principle of
African solutions to African problems.

The Russian Federation has solid experience
in training peacekeepers. Russian higher education
institutions have successfully trained personnel,
including women, for African law-enforcement
bodies. Since 2000, more than 350 foreign police
peacekeepers have been trained at the United Nations-
certified Preparation Centre of the All-Russia
Advanced Training Institute of Russia's Ministry
of the Interior in Domodedovo, outside Moscow.
The military educational and scientific centre of the
Russian Federation's combined land-based armed
forces military academy in Naro-Fominsk, as well as
our armed forces' international anti-mine centre in
Nakhabino, are also prepared to train peacekeepers
from developing countries. We have developed a
system that includes both general and specialized
training immediately prior to deploying peacekeepers
to specific missions. We will continue to provide all
necessary assistance for strengthening the capacities of
United Nations peacekeeping.

