Ms. Anderson (Ireland): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this annual debate on the working
methods of the Security Council and for the excellent
concept paper (S/2012/853, annex) that you circulated
to help guide our discussion today.

At the outset, let me state our clear view that the
question of improving the working methods of the
Security Council is a matter of legitimate interest to all
Member States. We fully respect the prerogatives of the
Security Council regarding its own working methods,
but we must never forget that the Council acts on behalf
of the world community on matters of peace and security
and that Member States are individually and collectively
bound by its decisions. Accordingly, we have a direct
interest in understanding its decision-making processes
and in working to ensure that those processes operate
with the maximum transparency and accountability for
all of us, who are pledged to be bound by its decisions.

Ireland has been a consistent supporter ofinitiatives
aimed at improving the working methods of the Security
Council, notably those proposed in recent years by
the group of five small nations. We acknowledge that
members of the Council have shown a willingness to
respond to aspects of those initiatives, as well as the
fact that steps have been taken internally by the Council
in the form of agreement on presidential notes. Those
developments address some of the concerns raised
by non-Council members. Such steps are welcome in
themselves, but we believe that much more needs to be
done to improve the transparency and accountability of
the workings of the Council.

A wealth of ideas and suggestions for improving the
Council's working methods has been proposed in recent
years. A number of them are set down in the concept
paper. For the sake of brevity, today I will confine
myselfto mentioning just a few elements that fall under
the overall headings of transparency, accountability
and openness.

First, there is the overriding requirement to take
measures that will add structure to the Council's
working methods and that make them more transparent
to the wider membership. That would ideally involve the
adoption of formal rules of procedure and the inclusion
of an analytical element on the implementation of its
working methods in the Council's annual report.

Secondly, there is the need to improve accountability
in relation to the missions and operations mandated by
the Council, which are a key output of its work. That
could, for example, include the provision of more
detailed and timely information to Member States on
all aspects of operations and missions, as well as more
regular participation by troop - and police-contributing
countries in informal discussions on the missions and
operations in which they participate, and on ways to
improve the drafting and refining of relevant mandates.

Thirdly, we wish to see greater openness towards
the wider membership with regard to the Council's
day-to-day work. There are many potential areas for
improvement in that connection. One example would
be the provision of regular briefings to the membership
on the work of the Council's subsidiary bodies. Another
would involve seeking the views of the membership on
the Council's annual report at the time of its drafting.
We believe that those and many other ideas are
worthy of consideration by the members of the Council.
Today's annual debate provides a welcome one-off
opportunity to discuss such issues, but what is really
needed is a rolling dialogue on the matters between
the Council and the wider United Nations membership
in the period ahead. For our part, we are ready to
participate in such a dialogue.

Finally, I know that some members have
expressed reticence about moving ahead on working
methods, noting that that issue is but one element of
the comprehensive agenda for reform of the Security
Council. I understand such concerns, given the sharp
divisions within the membership on certain aspects
of the overall reform agenda. Like others, we are
frustrated by the lack of progress on a comprehensive
reform of the Security Council, on which discussions
remain stalled after almost 20 years.

However, the issue of working methods is unique
among the elements of the prospective comprehensive
reform in that it applies to the currently configured
Council equally as it would to a reformed Council.
The role of the Security Council in today's world is too
important to leave on indefinite hold our wish to see a
more effective and transparent Council, accountable to
the community of nations on whose behalf it carries out
its vital work.

I believe that the great majority of States Members
of the United Nations want to see improvements in
the working methods of the Security Council that will
ensure that the work of the Council is more effective
and more transparent to the wider membership. It is
incumbent upon all of us to put aside our individual
political agendas and work for sensible and practical
changes that are readily attainable. Even modest
success in this important area will help to build the
wider confidence that will enable us over time to meet
the more complex challenges of comprehensive reform.

