As a founding Member of the United Nations, Ethiopia's commitment to the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations has been solid and consistent. It has always been a staunch supporter of the principle of collective security and multilateralism. Ethiopia's track record in this regard speaks for itself. It has always adhered to and actively supported and promoted these principles at the regional and international levels. In its entire history, Ethiopia has never caused a threat to any country. It has, rather, contributed to the cause of peace through its active participation in peacekeeping and peacebuilding since the early days of the United Nations up to this day. That said, let me be clear that Ethiopia does not believe that the issue being discussed today has a legitimate place in the Security Council. It is bound to set a bad precedent and open a Pandora's box. The Security Council should not be a forum for settling scores and for exerting diplomatic pressure. It is therefore regrettable that the Council has allowed itself to be politicized in this manner. As we have informed the Council, the tripartite negotiations between Ethiopia, Egypt and the Sudan have not yet been concluded. The three countries have in fact reached consensus on most of the prominent technical issues in the latest rounds of negotiation. That is why Ethiopia is of the view that progress is at hand and a mutually beneficial agreement is within reach. Even if the three countries fail to resolve their differences on the outstanding issues, the Agreement on Declaration of Principles on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam - signed in 2015 by their leaders - provides for dispute- settlement mechanisms, which are yet to be exhausted. Furthermore, the African Union (AU) has the necessary good will and expertise to help the three countries in bridging their differences and reaching a mutually acceptable solution. It is indeed lamentable, to say the least, that the principle of complementarity and subsidiarity between the United Nations and regional organizations, much talked about in this Council, was ignored when the issue related to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam was unjustifiably brought to its attention. It also contravenes Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations, which stipulates that parties to any dispute, among others, shall first "resort to regional agencies or arrangements". Members of the Council are aware that, three days ago, the Extraordinary African Union Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State held a meeting under the chairmanship of President Cyril Ramaphosa. As stated in the communique issued on 27 June 2020, the three countries agreed to resume negotiations and resolve the remaining issues through tripartite consultations, under "an AU-led process" in the spirit of pan-African solidarity and within the framework of African solutions to African problems. Therefore, the African Union is now seized of the matter, and it is only appropriate that the Security Council allow the AU-led process to take its course. Needless to say, the Nile is as important to Ethiopia as it is to Egypt and the Sudan as a source of livelihood and economic development. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is conceived as a centrepiece of our national development aspirations. Ethiopia generates 86 per cent of the total average annual flow of the Nile waters, but it has never benefited from the river at all. The 1959 agreement between Egypt and the Sudan has apportioned the entire waters of the Nile between the two of them, with Egypt securing the lion's share, leaving nothing for Ethiopia. That was the most unilateralist decision to have ever been taken concerning transboundary rivers. That is not all. In 1997, Egypt again took another unilateral decision and built the Toshka and Salam Canals, taking the Nile waters away from their natural course. Ethiopia's repeated complaints over these projects since the mid-1950s have fallen on deaf ears. The first complaint was made by the Government of Emperor Haile Selassie regarding the 1959 agreement. Egypt ignored Ethiopia's subsequent objections. Despite these historical facts, Egypt continues to accuse Ethiopia of taking unilateralist actions with respect to the building of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. Ethiopia is not asking too much; it is seeking to correct past injustices and share this precious resource in an equitable and reasonable manner. Despite being endowed with abundant water resources in the Nile basin, for years, the people of Ethiopia have been deprived of their rights to use this resource to extricate themselves from abject poverty. This is why, for Ethiopia, accessing and utilizing its water resources is not a matter of choice, but of existential necessity. The unfortunate reality is that today, in 2020, tens of millions of Ethiopians still use firewood as a primary source of fuel, with severe consequences to their health and the environment. All rural households, where 85 per cent of Ethiopians live and nearly two-thirds of school children are, are forced to stay in darkness. By contrast, nearly 100 per cent of the Egyptian population, both in cities and rural areas, has access to electricity. Therefore, Ethiopia believes it has a national and moral imperative to do everything in its power to improve the lives of its people. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is an answer to Ethiopian mothers' cries for help, so that they do not have to trek hours to collect firewood. The unfortunate reality is that pregnant mothers are still being carried on stretchers over long distances due to the lack of electricity to access life-saving emergency obstetrics care. The images of young girls with back-breaking loads of firewood on their shoulders are also a daily reality. Once completed, the dam will generate 15,700 gigawatt hours annually, bringing electricity and an opportunity for a dignified life to more than 65 million people who currently live in darkness. That is why we have emphasized again and again that the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is a development project and cannot in any way be a matter of security threat. If there is a security threat to be discussed, it has to do with the fact that there are millions of Ethiopians living under the poverty line. The dam is meant to uplift these people and, in a way, it is averting a potential threat rather than posing any. Seeking social progress and better living standards for our people - leaving no one behind - is indeed consistent with the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and the Sustainable Development Goals that we all aspire to achieve by 2030. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is also one of the megaprojects envisioned under Ethiopia's efforts to realize the African Union Agenda 2063. I should also underline here why the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is a people's project, which is being built by Ethiopians from all walks of life with unprecedented zeal. It is to be recalled that various obstacles have been created to prevent Ethiopia from accessing international support. My Government is just coordinating a public-owned and public-funded project. Therefore, it has a solemn responsibility to bring this project to successful completion. From the very beginning, Ethiopia has taken unprecedented initiatives to create understanding with both Egypt and the Sudan on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam by establishing, inter alia, an international panel of experts and a tripartite national committee to implement its recommendations, and later a national independent scientific research group to formulate various scenarios related to the filling and annual operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam. All these initiatives have failed to deliver the desired result because of Egypt's intransigence and its insistence on historic rights and current use. Egypt's consistent efforts to try to scuttle the tripartite negotiation has more to do with its own internal domestic situation than anything else. On the other hand, the Sudan knows full well the benefits of the dam, but we understand that the challenges of political transition with which the country is grappling at the moment are a factor. Be that as it may, Ethiopia has been guided by the internationally accepted principle of equitable and reasonable utilization and is not causing significant harm in building the dam. Ethiopia cannot harm Egypt and the Sudan through the dam because, if not releasing water is tantamount to harm, then building it in the first place would have been meaningless. We are all people of the Nile. Ethiopia therefore cannot harm Egypt without harming itself. The Agreement on Declaration of Principles clearly encapsulates Ethiopia's firm commitment to the principles of transboundary water utilization. In fact, Ethiopia's good faith efforts have been unprecedented in the history of transboundary rivers. My country does not deserve to be mistreated; it should instead be commended for demonstrating exemplary cooperation. Neither Egypt nor the Sudan consulted Ethiopia when they built dams on the Nile River. In October 2019, at the request of Egypt, the United States Government invited the three countries to Washington, D.C., for consultations. Ethiopia responded positively and in good faith, in the hopes that the presence of observers would help facilitate the negotiation. However, Egypt sought to impose unacceptable terms on Ethiopia by leveraging and instrumentalizing the process. Indeed, Egypt's actions unfortunately muddied the waters even further. Throughout the course of the negotiations, Ethiopia has shown a great deal of flexibility in the tripartite process to build the necessary trust and confidence. As a demonstration of its good faith, Ethiopia agreed to fill the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam reservoir over a period of four to seven years, although the dam could be filled in three years without causing significant harm to Egypt or the Sudan. Furthermore, Ethiopia agreed to postpone the second phase of the first stage of filling if annual inflow at the dam is below 31 billion cubic meters. The three countries have already agreed on the initial filling of the dam. Mother nature is in agreement, too. This year is an opportune time to begin impounding water in the dam reservoir. Currently, both the Blue Nile and the White Nile have above-normal flow. Lake Victoria is at a record-high level. The Aswan High Dam is also at its full supply level of 182 meters above sea level, which is a record high for the past four decades. During the first stage of impoundment, which is a testing or trial phase, Ethiopia will retain only about one-tenth of the average annual flow of the Blue Nile. By contrast, every year twice the amount of the water retained during the initial filling of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is lost to evaporation from the Aswan High Dam. This is in addition to the wastage through water-intensive flood irrigation practices in Egypt. Water is increasingly becoming a scarce commodity. More than 60 per cent of Ethiopia's surface area is dry land, with no sustaining water resources. On the other hand, Egypt is endowed with plenty of groundwater resources and has access to sea water, which could be desalinated for use. In any transboundary watercourse, drought management is the joint responsibility of all riparian countries. But Egypt wants Ethiopia alone to shoulder the burden of drought. This is not acceptable. Water-use or dam-operation rules are dependent on the availability of water; hence operation rules must have special guidelines, catering to different hydrological conditions, including drought. The three countries must therefore agree on drought thresholds and cooperative mechanisms for sharing the responsibility for addressing and mitigating any consequences of drought and climate change. Furthermore, Ethiopia believes that any future dispute arising from the use of the Blue Nile waters should be resolved in line with the principles agreed in the Agreement on Declaration of Principles, which provides for a mechanism that allows the three countries to address their grievances through "conciliation, mediation or [by referring] the matter for the consideration of the Heads of State [or] Government". Ultimately, Ethiopia believes that any agreement must not in any way constrain its sovereign rights to future use and upstream development on the Blue Nile. Finally, the involvement of the Security Council on this issue risks hardening positions and making compromise even more difficult. Instead of pronouncing itself on this matter, the Council should defer to the African Union and encourage the three countries to return to the tripartite negotiations as the only means of finding an amicable solution to the remaining outstanding issues. We also hope the Council will be cautious not to amplify differences and undermine the AU-led process. In this momentous year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, I wish to recall a moment in history when another Ethiopian leader, Emperor Haile Selassie, spoke before the League of Nations to make a moral case against the scourge of colonialism and the invasion of his country. He warned that "[i]t is us today, it will be you tomorrow". Unfortunately, the League of Nations did little to heed that call. It would be regrettable if Ethiopia's call today not to politicize or internationalize the issue of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam were not heeded by the Security Council. We can only hope that the Council will choose to be on the right side of history, for in many ways the matter being dealt with by the Council today is deeply rooted in a colonial legacy. Let me conclude by emphasizing the fact that the Nile basin countries enjoy one of the oldest relationships in human history. The seeds of our common development were planted thousands of years ago. Our time-tested links through the Nile should provide us with the truth and faith to do what is just for the betterment of all of our peoples. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam offers a unique opportunity for transboundary cooperation among our sisterly countries. It should never be an object of competition or mistrust. In this spirit, Ethiopia will pursue an amicable solution through win-win negotiations. We also seek the understanding of our brothers and sisters from Egypt and the Sudan. We are confident that, under the AU-led process, we will reach a cooperative agreement in the coming weeks.
