Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Ms. Virginia
Gamba de Potgieter for their briefings, which are always
very enlightening, but unfortunately also bleak, as well
as for their tireless efforts and those of their teams.

Civilians continue to be the victims and targets of
the regime's military strategy. The retaking of south-
west Syria is another episode in the humanitarian
disaster that has been unfolding in Syria since 2011.
What remains of the de-escalation zone and the
commitments undertaken by the guarantors of the
ceasefire to reducing violence and ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law?

In Idlib, the threat of a regime offensive that has
been publicly announced by Bashar Al-Assad is a
looming tragedy for the 2.2 million people present
there. Such an offensive would also be a source of
further destabilization not only for northern Syria and
Turkey, but also for the entire region, specifically as
a result of the dispersal of terrorist fighters to which
it will inevitably give rise. A new, bloody offensive in
Idlib will open chapter two ofthe Syrian tragedy - that
of a regional spillover of the conflict.

In that context, I would like to highlight three key
priorities that should serve as a guide for our action: the
protection of vulnerable people, ensuring humanitarian
access, and achieving a lasting political solution in
Syria with the support of the United Nations.

The first priority is the protection of all vulnerable
populations. I would like to echo Ms. Gamba's remarks
and stress the seriousness of the violations against
children in Syria, which has made it the most dangerous
country for children in 2018. Tens of thousands
of children have been killed or wounded since the
outbreak of the conflict as a result of indiscriminate
shelling by the regime. An entire generation has been
out of school, with consequences in terms of social and
professional integration and potential radicalization.
The recruitment and use of children, in particular by
terrorist groups, such as Da'esh, continue to increase.
Currently, 5.3 million children need humanitarian
assistance. There are tangible and immediately
operational measures and we call on all parties to the
conflict to urgently adopt them. It is important to refrain
from targeting schools and school infrastructure and
to protect civilian and residential areas in the conduct
of operations.

I also want to revisit the urgent need to ensure
the security of humanitarian workers. It is important
to ensure that humanitarian workers in areas that have
been retaken by the regime will be protected and that
humanitarian services for the people in those areas
will continue. We are heartened by the successful
rescue operation of a number of White Helmets, who
have saved many lives at the risk of their own and
have been constantly targeted by the Syrian regime.
Not all White Helmets have been evacuated and those
remaining in Syria are now under serious threat. We
must secure safety guarantees for those individuals and
their families and ensure that they are not the target of
retaliation by the regime.

I also want to raise the issue of the protection of
journalists and their families trapped in Syria. As the
Council is aware, this issue is a priority for France. I
call for further collective mobilizing to that end.

With regard to refugees, the conditions for a safe,
dignified and voluntary return have not been met. Their
safety is not ensured because the regime continues to
violate all ceasefires. Many of them are exposed to
abuses or are forcibly recruited into the regime's army
upon their return. Law No. 10, which makes population
displacement irreversible and is part of the regime's
demographic engineering strategy, constitutes a major
obstacle to the return ofrefugees and displaced persons.
Like the European Union (EU), we demand its repeal,
as well as indemnities and substantive work on property
restitution and recruitment. I would like to point out
that this question is not limited to a legal text, because
Law No. 10 merely formalizes and systematizes the
regime's practices.

Secondly, I would like to highlight the priority of
humanitarian access, which continues to deteriorate
in Syria. The Syrian regime continues to impose
unacceptable obstacles to the delivery of aid, in
violation of international humanitarian law. Letting
that indispensable aid through everywhere, especially
in hard-to-reach areas, is an obligation of all parties.
It is intolerable to deprive populations of vital aid of
which they are sorely lacking, whether in ldlib, eastern
Ghouta or Quneitra.

We are particularly concerned about the situation
in the south of the country, where no cross-border
convoy from Jordan has been arranged since 25 June.
Only aid from Damascus remains, but it is distributed
exclusively in areas under the control of the regime. We
therefore call on the actors with influence on the regime
to ensure that cross-border convoys via Jordan are
restored and secured as soon as possible. All convoys
must be able to move safely and unhindered throughout
the country, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and international humanitarian law.

It is imperative that the entire population in need
receive humanitarian aid on the basis of a neutral
evaluation conducted by the United Nations. France
has fully mobilized to meet that challenge. It is with
that objective in mind that President Macron and
President Putin decided to undertake a joint project to
deliver humanitarian aid to Douma, in eastern Ghouta,
where the needs of the population remain considerable
several months after the end of the fighting. Forty-
four tons of medical equipment and basic necessities
were transported from France to Syria via a Russian
plane during the night of 20-21 July. The distribution
of non-food items to beneficiaries took place yesterday,
26 July, in partnership with the United Nations.
Medicine and the medical equipment were received by
the Douma health centre.

In that context, I commend the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
United Nations agencies, which have spared no effort
to ensure that the people of Ghouta receive that aid
under the best possible conditions. That result remains
modest in relation to the magnitude of the needs, but it
makes a real difference to the people of a particularly
hard-hit area, which that aid would undoubtedly not
have reached otherwise. More needs to be done, as
Mark Lowcock rightly pointed out.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation will never
be addressed in a sustainable manner without a
breakthrough in the United Nations-led political
process. Despite its reconquests, the regime has achieved
nothing but victories without peace. As resolution 2254
(2015) recalls, without a political transition, Syria will
remain a lasting factor of regional destabilization, for
want of the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons, in safe and dignified conditions; the financing
of reconstruction by multilateral donors; and national
reconciliation that makes it possible to stamp out
terrorism, the presence of foreign militias and the
persistence of a civil war mindset. On these various
points, the deadlock will persist unless we advance the
political process.

In that regard, the pursuit of the regime's military
strategy undermines the efforts of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General to bring the actors in the conflict
closer together and relaunch the political process
around the formation of a constitutional committee.
It is imperative that the regime's supporters exert the
pressure necessary to ensure an environment conducive
to the continuation of the consultations launched by the
Special Envoy.

In the same way, I repeat here clearly before the
Council that we will not take part in the reconstruction
of Syria without the effective implementation of a
political transition, with a genuine constitutional
and electoral process. That is sine qua non for the
stability of the country and our contribution towards
financing reconstruction. Otherwise, there is no reason
why France and the EU should commit themselves to
financing reconstruction. To ensure the country's long-
term stability through a negotiated political solution, we
are sparing no effort to encourage concrete convergence
with key players in the conflict, particularly those in
Astana and the Small Group.

