Mrs. Vives Balmafia (Andorra) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the French presidency of the
Security Council for holding today's open debate,
which gives us an opportunity to pool our efforts to
address the plight of children in armed conflicts.

We fully support the statements delivered by the
representatives of Canada, on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, and Norway,
on behalf of the group of 35 States that have endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration. I would like to add a few
words in my national capacity.

Every child counts, everywhere, all the time.
We therefore welcome the report (S/2017/821) and
comments of the Secretary-General and of his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba. We also thank her Office for
their efforts over the past 20 years and all the actors
concerned on the ground, such as UNICEF. Thanks to
their ongoing work, we have understood the persistent
and disturbing nature of this problem in complex
situations of armed conflict with non-State actors.

However, we are also seeing hope. We see that
States are becoming aware of the situation through
their development of national action plans. That is an
encouraging outcome for the United Nations, which
has succeeding in creating the frameworks that make it
possible for the parties to armed conflict to respect the
rights of children.

Andorra wishes to work for peace and the defence
of children's lives and rights. When it deposited its
instrument of ratification for the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, in January 1996, Andorra deplored
the lack of a ban on the use of children in armed
conflict and voiced its disagreement with article 38,
which allowed for recruitment at the age of 15. As a
result, in 2000, the Principalityjoined the signatories to
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, which formally prohibits the recruitment of
children into armed forces.

We have also supported the Paris
Principles - the tenth anniversary of which we
are currently celebrating - so as to provide fresh
momentum to efforts to prevent the recruitment and
use of children in armed conflict. Over and above the
human cost, the destruction of infrastructure and the
interruption of economic growth, armed conflict has
devastating effects on the education of generations.
We therefore believe that it is essential to provide
genuine, unfailing protection to children, teachers and
associated personnel, as well as infrastructure. It is with
that in mind that Andorra endorsed the Safe Schools
Declaration, which aims to actively reduce the impact
of violence and conflict on educational institutions and
stresses the importance of guaranteeing opportunities
for lifelong learning, even in conflict situations. We ask
all States to adhere to and implement the Declaration.

A holistic approach to the reintegration of children
into their communities must also take into account the
issue of stigmatization. In that context, we wish to focus
on girl victims, who suffer the most sexual exploitation
and abuse. Their protection therefore requires even
greater levels of support. In that regard, we support
the zero-tolerance policy launched by the Secretary-
General in September.

The interest sparked by this open debate shows
that progress will continue to be made on all
dimensions of this issue. Children and armed conflict
are not compatible. Specific action plans and their
implementation require firm political commitment. If
peacekeeping plans and political action in general take
into account the best interests of children while focusing
on education for peace, we will undoubtedly create an
environment conducive to the prevention of conflict.
The future of our world relies on the implementation
of those values.

