Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): We too thank the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Lord
Ashdown, for the report transmitted through the
Secretary-General (S/2005/156, annex, enclosure) and
for his briefing this morning. My delegation also
welcomes the presence among us of Mr. Barisa Colak,
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Greece associates itself with the statement which
will soon be delivered by the representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

The tenth anniversary of the end of the war is
close. Bosnia and Herzegovina now faces a different
time; a Euro-Atlantic future will reward the efforts of
recent years. The launch of Operation Althea and its
successful conduct so far epitomize this new era.

Greece welcomes the continuous progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path of reform. The
importance of the achievements made to date should
not be underestimated or taken for granted. A new
State is being created - from the beginning in certain
areas. The country has come close to reaching its goals.
It is imperative to tackle the areas where more progress
and effort are required.

Full compliance and cooperation with the
International Criminal Tribunal for a Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) is a precondition for a European
future. The recent surrenders of accused individuals are
an encouraging sign that we cannot fail to welcome.
This trend should continue.

Progress in the establishment and
operationalization of the War Crimes Chamber is
another welcome sign of political maturity. It
strengthens the capacity of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to uphold the rule of law.

The news from the point of view of economic
reform is very positive. Progress towards the creation
of a single economic area is well under way, and the
impact on the everyday lives of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina cannot be emphasized enough.

Security sector reform and police restructuring
remain key factors, essential missing elements in the
overall picture of progress. The adoption of new laws
on police officials, on a new immigration service and
on the State Border Service, and the other reported
progress at the structural level, are welcome
developments. Nevertheless, implementation will be
the criterion upon which judgement will be passed and
on the basis of which results will be measured.

The return home of the one-millionth refugee
deserves to be seen as a turning point in the return
process since the Dayton-Paris Peace Accords. The
signature of a landmark memorandum of understanding
between the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Council
of Europe Development Bank for the permanent
housing of displaced persons is also a very welcome
development.

Today, we have heard an encouraging assessment.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is on the right track, and is
very close to reaching the end of the journey. We
encourage the authorities and the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to find the strength and the will to
complete this last mile.

