Ms. Vonta (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Luxembourg presidency for convening this important
open debate. I also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Mr. Sawaneh for their comprehensive briefings.

Let me align our statement with the statements to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of the Human Security Network.

My country welcomes the recent developments
in the Security Council discussions on children and
armed conflict, such as the focus on sexual violence, in
particular on justice and accountability, the increased
attention to the issues of child protection when setting
up or renewing United Nations mission mandates and
the attention of children in fast-changing situations
on the Security Council agenda. We also welcome the
regular briefings by Special Representative Zerrougui
to the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
as well as other activities for the greater accountability.
We would encourage all actors to continue with those
efforts and to enhance the efficiency of the tools at their
disposal.

We are deeply concerned that, although much
has been done since 1996, when the Machel report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306)
shocked the international community, children still
suffer in situations of armed conflict, such as in Syria
and the Central African Republic, as well as in too
many other places.

Slovenia remains concerned over the fact that
more than half of the parties listed in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict are persistent perpetrators. The
Security Council needs to address that issue urgently by
imposing targeted measures and by considering ways to
increase pressure on such persistent perpetrators in the
Working Group.

We also believe that there is an urgent need to
identify ways to approach non-State armed groups
and to conclude action plans with them, since the vast
majority of the parties listed in the annexes to the
annual report are armed groups. An important role is
played by the authorities in the countries concerned
that should allow unconditional access of the United
Nations to those armed groups.

As a strong believer in the power of education,
Slovenia remains greatly concerned over the increasing
reports of attacks on schools and about the military use
of schools. Attacks on schools and the military use of
schools put children and teachers at risk while denying
children their right to education. We welcome the
drafting of the Lucens guidelines for protecting schools
and universities from military use during armed
conflict and support their finalization, which should be
followed by broad endorsement by States.

My country also strongly believes in the importance
of accountability and the fight against impunity. The
primary responsibility for the prosecution of conflict-
related crimes, including violations committed against
children, lies with States. Greater effort is therefore
needed to improve criminal justice at national levels.
Among other actions, we need to strengthen the
international legal framework for judicial assistance,
including extradition, between States in order to
support effective prosecution of international crimes
at a national level. Having recognized that legal gap,
Slovenia, the Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina
are working together on the initiative to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
on mutual legal assistance and extradition for the
effective investigation and prosecution of the most
serious crimes of international concern by domestic
jurisdictions. We intend to continue with activities in
that respect in the framework of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and we invite other States to join the initiative.

The international community has been working on
the issue of child soldiers for a long time, yet children
are still recruited and used by parties to conflict. In that
regard, my country welcomes the campaign "Children,
not soldiers", launched yesterday not far from here.
Its goal, to prevent and eliminate child recruitment by
national security forces by 2016, should not be missed.

Let me conclude by stressing the need for
preventive measures in order to achieve our common
goal. We recognize birth registration as one of the most
important measures. In December 2013, a professional
training programme was carried out on a system of
civil status and migration for Afghanistan, co-financed
by Slovenia. That programme included training on
civil registration. The main goal of that development
assistance programme was to present and share
Slovenia's experience in that field.

Finally, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2143 (2014), on children and armed conflict, and its
aim to reinforce the implementation of the normative
framework that has been gradually developed in
the Security Council since the adoption of the first
resolution on this topic 15 years ago.
