Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): The events of
the last few weeks are further proof, if any more were
needed, that there is no military solution to the problems
of Afghanistan. Despite a month of bitter fighting, neither
side has gained any decisive advantage over the other.

As this war drags on, it is the people of Afghanistan
who suffer most. They are tired of conflict and poverty.
As Under-Secretary-General Sir Kieran Prendergast
pointed out, the latest clashes have served only to add to
their misery. We are disturbed at accounts of how the
Taliban have behaved in areas they have captured. Tens
of thousands of people are reported to have been
displaced, many of them forcibly, by the Taliban. The
Taliban have admitted to burning houses and crops. The
separation of men of fighting age from their families is
particularly worrying. Beyond Afghanistan, the region and
the wider world are affected by the prospect of instability
spreading from this conflict and the threat from terrorism
and drugs.

We must hope that the failure of the key objective
of this latest offensive - to deliver a knock-out blow to
the Northern Alliance - will have finally brought home
to the Taliban and their supporters that further fighting is
futile. They, and the Northern Alliance, must put the
interests of the Afghan people first. The only way
forward is to resume negotiations.

Afghanistan's neighbours must face these facts and
commit themselves wholeheartedly to a negotiated
settlement. The first step should be an immediate end to
military support. The Taliban should not have been given
the means to launch their latest offensive. All those with
influence over the parties must do everything possible to
encourage them to resume negotiations. Pakistan, with its
unique influence over the Taliban, has a particularly
important role to play.

Not long before the offensive was launched,
Tashkent gave us a glimmer of hope that a negotiated
settlement was possible. At Tashkent the Taliban and the
Northern Alliance at last acknowledged the "six plus two"

 

group as a valid mechanism which could help bring
progress. Ambassador Brahimi should be congratulated for
his efforts there and since. In the next few months, all
concerned must find a way to build on Tashkent and lock
the parties into a genuine negotiation.

