Mr. Mose: Let me start by conveying my whole-
hearted appreciation to all the members of the Council
who expressed their strong support for the Tribunals.
There is consensus vis-a-vis the two sets of obligations
incumbent upon all Member States. First, there is the
need to cooperate. Members unanimously stated that
all States must apprehend accused persons and
facilitate the transport of witnesses and the production
of documents, which would certainly be of value to us
in our daily work.

The second set of obligations relates to resources,
We have again been heartened to hear the unified
position of the Council, namely, that it is concerned
about the problems we encounter in that connection
and with regard to lack of manpower - people leaving
us - and the problems caused by the freeze. I think
that will also be a very helpful element in future
developments. Like President Meron, I have of course
been in touch with individual Member States and have
drawn their attention to the problems associated with
the economic difficulties. We have had some results,
but the possibilities will be greater when the Security
Council lends its full authority to financial requests.

Turning to the matter of agreements on sentences,
which was raised by the representative of Spain, I
simply want to say that our position is exactly the same
as that of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. We have six agreements in that
regard, but we would certainly welcome more. Thus
far, only one State has received all our convicts. But
there will be a need for more agreements, and we
appreciate any Government's willingness to enter into
such arrangements.

The representatives of the United Kingdom and
the United States raised the issue of the transfer of
cases to Rwanda and, in particular, the trial readiness
of that country. That decision is of course a judicial
one - again, I can echo what President Meron said -
and it will be for the Trial Chambers designated by the
President to make a determination under rule 11 bis as
to whether transfers should be effected or not. I
therefore think that, at this stage, it is better that I not
go into too much detail or prejudge the conclusion of
an individual Trial Chamber. But I note that, in the
light of the rather clear statements made in prominent
circles in Rwanda, there seems to be considerable
progress in that country in relation to the death penalty.
With regard to due process and the overall situation,
that is something we will have to revisit in connection
with the judicial context. That the Prosecutor may have
additional remarks on that issue, as he is actively
pursuing the matter.

The representative of Germany very kindly
pointed to the possibility that the Security Council
could meet at the seat of the Tribunals at some level. I
think that is an excellent idea. Of course, the Council is
master of its own procedures and will have to decide
upon the level at which it would wish to go to Arusha.
Let me simply reiterate the invitation I extended to the
Council on 29 June 2004, namely, that all members of
the Council are wholeheartedly welcome in order to
obtain first-hand observations of daily life in Arusha
and of our commitment to carry out our task.

I think that brings me to the end of the questions
and observations that need to be addressed at this
stage. Let me simply say that the year 2005 will be an
important one for the Tribunal and that I look forward
to reporting about the progress made at the next two
occasions.

