Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Let me take this
opportunity to thank the South African presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this important
debate. My delegation is also extremely pleased at the
tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, who has
devoted so much time to the cause of global peace and
security.

In June last year in Addis Ababa, the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council issued a joint communique
by which they committed themselves to the
development of a stronger and more structured
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council on conflict prevention,
management and resolution, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including post-conflict reconstruction
and development. They further agreed to strengthen the
relationships between all the relevant structures of the
United Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council.

We encourage close consultations between the
African Union and this important organ of the United
Nations, whose primary responsibility is the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Africa is inspired by the spirit of collective
security of the Charter of the United Nations. It was
out of that fundamental conviction and commitment
that the AU and the AU Peace and Security Council
were born to oversee Africa's regional peace and
security concerns. We firmly believe that collective
security should be applied equitably, without
discrimination.

To millions of Africans, tangible improvements
relating to development, security and the enhancement
of human security remain pivotal. That is why we are
encouraged by the report of the Secretary-General on
the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union,
in the maintenance of international peace and security
(S/2008/186). The operations of regional organizations
and their relations with the United Nations must be
predicated on the principle of multilateralism. Hence,
the efforts of the United Nations Security Council and
the AU Peace and Security Council are mutually
reinforcing. However, the Security Council has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The effectiveness of the AU's Peace and Security
Council is premised on three principles: first, the
ability to enforce agreed norms among AU member
States, secondly, the will to harmonize Africa's
regional security arrangements and, thirdly, the
commitment by African Governments to provide
sustainable and predictable financing for AU peace
initiatives.

Regrettably, for this new and struggling
organization that is grappling with a multiplicity of
problems, there are deficiencies in all three areas. That
is why we have come here to make an earnest plea that
peacekeeping operations undertaken by the AU be
covered by the regular budget of the United Nations.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Rwanda has made
reference to that particular aspect, as did President
Kikwete of Tanzania this morning.

The international community must demonstrate
similar concern and generosity to Africa as it did with
regard to Bosnia, Kosovo, East Timor and Afghanistan.
For instance, in 2000, while $2 billion was pledged for
the reconstruction of the Balkans, barely $150 million
was pledged for Sierra Leone. Thirty thousand NATO
troops were deployed in Kosovo, as contrasted with
16,700 United Nations troops in the enormous country
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The AU
Mission in Darfur was grossly underfunded, and it had
a shortfall of $200 million in July 2005. The United
Nations is dragging its feet in assuming its full
responsibility to deploy in Somalia.

In order to allay fears that Africa is a breeding
ground for terrorists, concerted efforts must be made to
stem the tide of State failure. That means that the
United Nations must invest not only in governance and
capacity-building but also in enabling African States to
address basic socio-economic problems such as the
provision of education and health services. Poverty,
alienation and dehumanizing conditions can lead to
desperation and terrorism.

Another issue of special concern to my delegation
is the need for the conclusion of a memorandum of
understanding between the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission and the AU and the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), to
establish a symbiotic relationship in the post-conflict
and reconstruction areas. Such a relationship should be
based on complementarity and the avoidance of
duplication. They should enter into mutual relations to
address the multiple challenges that war-affected
societies face. They should establish a network of
institutions and mechanisms to guide, plan, monitor
and evaluate post-conflict reconstruction efforts in
Africa, to make them coherent and practical on the
ground. The Commission should avoid being
politicized, lest it become irrelevant. There is a need
for a programmatic and well-funded United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission.
In conclusion, there is an overwhelming need for
the Commission to deepen its relationship with the AU,
NEPAD and other organs.

