Mr. Richardson (United States of America): My
Government supports this draft resolution to establish a
support group of civilian police monitors to continue to
monitor the performance of the Croatian police in the
Danube region after the termination of the mandate of the
United Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES). This
initiative, which Croatia has requested, will help solidify the
progress achieved during the two years of UNTAES and
will permit a smooth transition between UNTAES and the
monitoring efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in the region.

This past Monday, the Transitional Police Force
created under UNTAES was fully integrated into the
Croatian national police. A professional, capable and
unbiased police force and improvements in public security
are key to maintaining the secure environment necessary to
convince Serbs residing in the region to remain, and to
encourage Croats to return. Unfortunately, local confidence
in the police remains low.

The presence of United Nations civilian police
monitors in the region after 15 January 1998, as is being
authorized by the Council today, will help provide needed
reassurance and confirm the continuing commitment of the
international community to assist Croatia in implementing
its comprehensive programme of national reconciliation.

This new civilian police mission will work with the
OSCE mission in Croatia to promote the return of all
refugees and displaced persons to their homes, and to
promote the goal of full reintegration. Although there was
initial scepticism about the prospects for the peaceful
reintegration of Eastern Slavonia into Croatia, the
dedication, drive and diplomatic skill demonstrated by the
leadership and personnel of this United Nations effort
helped ensure that the parties met obligations under the
Basic Agreement and made UNTAES a model for United
Nations peacekeeping.

However, a large measure of the success of UNTAES
also belongs to the leadership of the Government of
Croatia, which has taken difficult steps to follow the path
of national reconciliation. We strongly support the
Croatian Government in this regard and look forward to
its continuing commitment to peace and reconciliation,
both within the region and throughout Croatia, in the
coming months.

More than four years of war and conflict in the
region have inflicted wounds that can fully heal only with
time. UNTAES, working with the Government of Croatia,
has helped to lay a foundation for healing and rebuilding.
Now we must test that foundation as we move towards
economic reconstruction and revitalization. All the
commitments, pledges and promises made on both
sides - by the Government and by the local Serb
population - must be made good.

I would like to express our appreciation to all the
countries which have contributed military and civilian
personnel, police observers, staff and financial and
material support to UNTAES. In particular, we note the
outstanding leadership of the UNTAES Transitional
Administrators, Jacques Paul Klein and William Walker,
and of the Force Commanders, Major-General Jozef
Schoups and Major-General William Hanset.

