We welcome your participation, Mr. Minister, in today's meeting. Allow me to begin by thanking Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Wafa Mustafa for their briefings today. South Africa welcomes the relative calm that has held across Syria, particularly in the north-west, amid isolated and sporadic incidents of hostilities in parts of the north-west and north-east of the country. However, South Africa is concerned about the resurgence of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), especially its operations into densely populated areas and its efforts to expand its geographical reach. It appears that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has widened the scope of the ISIS operations. Peace will not be achieved if there is continued foreign interference in Syria. We therefore call for the withdrawal of all foreign troops and armed groups in respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria. Syria cannot continue to be a proxy battlefield for the ambitions of terrorist groups and international rivalries. In that regard, we would also state that all States have the sovereign right to address the threat of terrorism in their own countries. However, such actions to counter terrorism must be in compliance with the responsibilities and obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law. As members of the Security Council, we all have the same goal with regard to Syria, namely, a permanent ceasefire that will pave the way for an enabling environment in which an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at achieving a lasting political solution reflective of the will of the Syrian people can take place. In that regard, we look forward to the reconvening of the small body of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva in late August. We call on all parties and participants to constructively engage in these discussions to find concrete steps towards the drafting of a new constitution as we work towards peace and stability for all Syrians. In working towards a credible peace process, South Africa encourages all parties to engage in trust and confidence-building measures. South Africa remains deeply troubled by the continued detention of individuals, including women and children, by parties in areas under their effective control. It is unacceptable that people are detained seemingly without cause. In that regard, South Africa wishes to call on all parties to the conflict to abide by their obligation to respect international human rights law and international humanitarian law concerning persons deprived of their liberty. We continue to call on the parties to release detained civilians, particularly women, children, the elderly and vulnerable groups, which during these times of COVID-19 include the sick and those with underlying medical conditions. In keeping with confidence-building measures and to promote progress in that regard, South Africa urges the international community to support the Secretary- General's call to ease the unilateral coercive economic measures placed on the Syrian Government. It is clear that the sanctions imposed have increased economic pressures in the country, exacerbated the current dire humanitarian situation and added further strain due to the impact of COVID-19. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, South Africa reiterates the need for the parties to adhere to the full implementation of the Idlib ceasefire agreement as well as the immediate cessation of hostilities across Syria. South Africa also reiterates its call for the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and assistance to all who require it, in line with the provisions of international humanitarian law. In conclusion, South Africa would like to reiterate that there can be no military solution to the situation in Syria. Only trust, dialogue and negotiation among the parties, through an inclusive Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process in line with resolution 2254 (2015), can bring about sustainable peace and stability.
