Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to thank the Spanish presidency
for organizing this open debate on a key issue,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly by non-State actors.

I would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for his presence today, his statement and
his commitment to the overarching challenge of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery. I also thank the other briefers,
and note that France associates itself with the statement
to delivered on behalf of the European Union.

France thanks Spain for introducing resolution
2325 (2016), which it co-sponsored, and welcomes its
unanimous adoption. It represents an important step
that we took today in our common fight against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I would
also like to pay tribute to Spain's commitment and
outstanding work as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), which successfully
conducted a comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004).

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery remains a major threat to
international peace and security and one of the primary
challenges of our times. Despite some progress, the
non-proliferation regime continues to face extremely
serious challenges. We are acutely concerned about the
relentless development of North Korea's nuclear and
ballistic programmes. The two nuclear tests and the
numerous ballistic missiles this year have confirmed
Pyongyang's determination to acquire a vectorized
nuclear weapon, which constitutes a violation of
Security Council resolutions. Such destabilizing
actions represent a grave and deliverate challenge to
the non-proliferation regime and international security.
France, like the Council, has strongly condemned them.

In Syria, we are now confident that the Syrian
Arab Army, like Da'esh, has not hesitated to use
chemical weapons against civilians on at least four
occasions. New and alarming allegations of the use of
chemical weapons continue to emerge. These, too, are
particularly serious and unacceptable violations of the
non-proliferation regime that cannot be tolerated. The
Security Council must draw the logical conclusions
and shoulder its responsibilities on the issue. The
uncertainties surrounding Syria's declaration to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) serve only to increase our concern. The
possibility that stocks and capacities may remain on
Syrian territory increases the risk that toxic chemicals
may spread and be used by terrorist groups. In that
context, it is vital to ensure the continuation of the
work of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM), which has been unanimously
endorsed by the Council. It sends a strong message to
those responsible for using chemical weapons in Syria.
The taboo on the use of these inhuman weapons must
be re-established.

In that context, strengthening the international
community's efforts is more crucial than ever and
should be a priority for us. The Council's adoption in
2004 of resolution 1540 (2004) was a decisive step.
Twelve years later, that resolution, and the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to ensure its implementation, are now essential
tools. As the rigorous review of the resolution that
was conducted this year showed, its implementation
is making progress. Many States have already adopted
measures to translate the resolution's provisions into
national law. The international community is working
to prevent proliferation-sensitive material from
falling into terrorists' hands. In addition, the main
international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to implement and promote the
resolution's provisions, and in that regard, the European
Union has established solid plans of action.

We must capitalize on those achievements and
continue to adapt to the evolving threats and new
challenges we face. To do that, we must begin by
strengthening the implementation of our existing tools
in order to better combat the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, and especially to prevent sensitive
materials from ending up in malicious hands. We can do
that not only by pursuing the Committee's awareness-
raising and assistance activities and strengthening the
existing international instruments, but also by fully
implementing our commitments under resolution 1540
(2004). In that regard, in 2011 France passed a law
modernizing its national legal framework for combating
proliferation, criminalizing proliferation activities and
punishing their financing.

Next, we must adapt our response to the changing
nature of the threat. In that regard, resolution 2325
(2016), which we have adopted today, is a significant
step. It strengthens the resources at our disposal and, in
particular, covers the risks of the growing exploitation
of technological, scientific and commercial advances
for the purposes of proliferation. It identifies how
important it is that we focus more on the financing of
proliferation and the safeguarding of sensitive materials,
and on instituting rigorous controls on the export of
such materials. It expands the Committee's crucial role
in assistance, improving the ways it interacts with the
United Nations committees that deal with terrorism and
affirming its interaction with the JIM. It improves the
basis for dialogue with States by establishing a better
balance between requests for and offers of assistance.

I recall that efforts to combat the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the risk of their
falling into terrorists' hands are also going on in other
forums. This year, at the latest Nuclear Security Summit
in Washington, DC, France made a determined
commitment to tackling the issue of security for
radioactive sources with its introduction of a joint
statement that is now open to all States wishing to be
associated with it. Together with Germany, we also
recently introduced a draft resolution in the General
Assembly on the subject, and the International Atomic
Energy Agency's second International Conference
on Nuclear Security, which has just ended, has also
enabled us to address this crucial issue. France also
supports the work of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism.

Given the gravity of the challenges we face, we
must do all we can to prevent the normalization of the
proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction.
When those are the stakes, the entire non-proliferation
regime is thrown into question. The Council's recent
adoption of resolution 2321 (2016) on North Korea
demonstrated that we will not tolerate that. Our
unanimous adoption of today's resolution affirms our
mobilization on the issue. I am therefore hopeful that
the Council can continue to display its unity every time
the problem of the proliferation and use of weapons
of mass destruction is at issue. When it comes to this
subject, weakness and divisiveness are not an option. It
is a question of our responsibility.

