Mr. Kronfol (Lebanon) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your
assumption of your high post at the helm of the
Security Council. We offer you our trust that your
guidance will lead to the success of the Council's work.
I take this opportunity also to thank the Permanent
Representative of China, who presided over the
Council last month in such an effective manner.

(spoke in Arabic)

The gravity of the situation that necessitated a
request for the convening of the Security Council today
lies in the outcries and unprecedented suffering caused
throughout the Arab world, the Islamic nation and
every corner of the globe by the heinous criminal
assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin and six other
Palestinians as they were leaving a mosque after early
morning prayers in Gaza City, which has been
languishing since 1967 under occupation and other
illegal Israeli measures.

The gravity of the situation lies in the fact that
the martyr was a spiritual leader - an old man,
disabled and wheelchair-bound, visually and hearing
impaired, and able to communicate only through
gestures and a weak voice.
The gravity of the situation lies in the fact that
this was a premeditated, deliberate crime undertaken
by various apparatuses of the occupying State
employing intelligence, fighter planes and missiles
pooled for the perpetration of yet another criminal act.
While some may wish to mask it under a mantle of
legitimacy and present it as a natural and permissible
act, it remains an extrajudicial killing.

The gravity of the situation lies in the fact that,
only hours after it was reported, the Palestinian people
rose up as one like someone whose very conscience,
beliefs and humanity had been assaulted. The gravity
of the situation also lies in the fact that, as of early
yesterday morning, the peoples and Governments of
the world denounced the crime, which contravenes the
law - international law in particular - and the Israeli
authorities who perpetrated it. Those who expressed
their anger over the crime included the European Union
and the States of Africa, Asia, America and the
Caribbean. Not a single State Member of the United
Nations failed to express in one way or another its
regret, concern and anger over the crime. The
Secretary-General personally denounced such
assassinations.

What is strange, however, is the fact that,
following such international denunciation of the crime,
the head of the Israeli Government, the occupying
Power, appeared on the world's television screens to
take open responsibility for ordering the criminal
assassination. Absurdly, his conscience has not been
affected by the gravity of the crime.

My Government expects the Security Council to
rise to the challenge posed by the situation to
international humanitarian law. The Council should
express its solidarity with the Palestinian people, which
for decades has struggled for its freedom,
independence and the withdrawal of the Israeli army
from its lands. We call for a condemnation of the
extrajudicial killing and acts of aggression against the
population of the occupied territories; for an expression
of support for the legitimate demands of the Palestinian
people, which aspires to establish its independent State
on its national territories, including East Jerusalem; for
a request to Israel to end all forms of violence to
suppress the desire of the entire Palestinian people for
freedom; for a demand that Israel respect international
humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949; and for respect for the efforts made towards
peace in various international forums, in particular
those stipulated in the road map developed by the
United Nations and other members of the Quartet.

The Council's assumption of all its
responsibilities would allow for the creation of an
atmosphere conducive to ending the violence and to
resuming the settlement process in a peaceful manner,
whereby Israel would withdraw from all the occupied
Arab territories in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Council and on the basis of the
decisions of the Madrid conference and the principle of
land for peace, referenced in the Arab peace initiative
adopted in Beirut in 2002.

Israel's policies are aimed at the assassination of
Palestinian leaders and at the destruction of its
symbols. But the assassination of Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin will give rise to a new generation of resistance
fighters struggling for freedom and independence.

