Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
this afternoon, and we welcome Ambassador Sergeyev's
participation in this meeting.

The situation in Ukraine clearly continues to
escalate. Tensions continue to rise, and the potential
for military confrontation is obvious. Since the Council
met on Saturday (see S/PV.7124), Russian military
activity in Crimea has seriously intensified, and there
are reports of more Russian troop deployments on
Ukraine's eastern and southern borders, violations
of Ukraine's airspace by Russian fighter planes, and
Russian naval vessels blocking the exits of Sevastopol
Bay in Crimea.

We are seriously concerned about the escalation of
Russian military activity. Those actions, along with the
decision by the Russian Parliament to authorize the use
of force in Ukraine, are wholly unacceptable. Russia's
actions are undermining the right of the Ukrainian
people to choose their own future, and are also contrary
to international law. They contravene the Charter of
the United Nations. They also contravene agreements
to which Russia itself is a party: the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum; the 1975 Helsinki Final Act; and the
1997 bilateral Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation
and Partnership between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine. Under those agreements, there is a specific
commitment to respecting the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, as well as to non-intervention and to refraining
from the use or threat of use of force.

The Australian Government, together with the
broader international community, which is speaking
loudly and with one voice, has urged Russia to
stand down, withdraw its armed forces, abide by its
international legal commitments and immediately take
steps to reduce tensions. Russia must engage in direct
dialogue with Ukraine in accordance with article 7 of its
own Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership
with Ukraine.

In the Council, Australia has already called for
Russia to respect Ukraine's unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity, and we reiterate that call here
today. We also reiterate our earlier call to not just avoid
provocation, but to take proactive steps to de-escalate
the crisis. We commend the continued restraint shown
by Ukraine itself in the face of continued and very
serious provocation. We support the efforts of the new
Government of Ukraine to deal with the crisis and
stabilize the situation in its country.

The international political engagement we have
seen to date on this issue has been essential and of
course must continue and increase. It is indicative of
the level of concern regarding Russia's actions and
the extent of the determination on the part of the
international community to de-escalate the crisis. The
international community and the Council must support
all efforts towards de-escalation. That means exploring
and promoting all opportunities for mediation and
dialogue.

Australia would also strongly support the
deployment of a full monitoring mission to Ukraine,
and we are grateful to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for looking carefully at
that possibility. That would be the best way to address
Russia's stated concerns about minority rights, and we
urge Russia to consider it. We welcome the news that
the OSCE will begin deploying some initial monitors
tonight.

We also welcome the engagement of the Secretary-
General and the visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson to Ukraine. We urge all parties to cooperate
with the Deputy Secretary-General as he seeks to
promote dialogue and cooperation and see for himself
the facts on the ground. It is imperative that he be given
access to all parts of Ukraine.

To conclude, the situation should obviously be
resolved by peaceful means. There is no other option. As
Australian Prime Minister Abbott said in the Australian
Parliament yesterday, unprovoked aggression should
have no place in our world. Russia should stand down
and withdraw its forces from Ukraine in accordance
with its obligations, and the people of Ukraine ought to
be able to determine their future themselves.

