Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): Estonia aligns itself
fully with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union.
We share the view that, despite all difficulties,
we have to strive towards a just and comprehensive
resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on
the two-State solution, with both States living side-by-
side in peace, security and mutual recognition. There
is no alternative to a negotiated two-State solution. The
regional context, including the ongoing radicalization
and spread of terrorism, makes it even more urgent to
end the conflict. The status quo is not an option, as the
viability of the two-State solution is constantly being
eroded by emerging new facts on the ground. We urge
both parties to demonstrate their stated commitment to
the two-State solution through concrete actions.

At the same time, actions by either side that
call into question their stated commitment must be
avoided. We reaffirm our position that the status of
Jerusalem has to be resolved through negotiations, in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions. The
international community should actively support the
parties in the restoration of confidence and creation of
an environment of trust, which is necessary to engage
in meaningful negotiations, as soon as possible.

Today, it is crucial to stabilize the situation and
reverse negative trends on the ground. We recall the 2016
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) recommendations,
which called upon both sides to de-escalate tensions
by exercising restraint and refraining from provocative
actions, as well as rhetoric. In order to restore trust,
the Palestinian side should act decisively to cease
incitement to violence and strengthen ongoing efforts to
combat and condemn terrorism. Israel should cease the
policy of illegal settlement construction and expansion,
designating land for exclusive Israeli use and denying
Palestinian development. Both sides should take all the
necessary steps to prevent violence and protect the lives
and property of all civilians.

Estonia is deeply concerned about the funding cuts
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which
has been an essential lifeline for many Palestinians
for decades, providing basic services, including food
and support to children's education and health care.
Humanitarian aid should not be politicized. Estonia
has annually supported the work of UNRWA and will
continue to do so. Estonia has also bilaterally supported
the capacity-building of the Palestine administration by
developing e-governance services.

