Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that the Council's
deliberations under your wise leadership will be
crowned with success. We thank you for the
opportunity to speak at this meeting. We express our
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation for calling for the convening of this
important meeting, for an open debate on the sanctions
imposed on Iraq.

As a matter of principle, Libya opposes sanctions
and supports the settlement of disputes by peaceful
means and constructive dialogue. We believe in the
need to respect the sovereignty, security, independence
and territorial integrity of other States in order to
achieve security and peace.

Sanctions must be the last resort for the Security
Council to consider after it has explored all other
peaceful means based on the Charter and on strong
legal foundations. Sanctions must be imposed only
when peace is threatened or breached and when there is
aggression, and within a set time frame.

Therefore, we believe that sanctions must be
immediately lifted without delay when the reasons for
their imposition are eliminated. We believe that
sanctions run counter to human rights. They are a
violation of the right to life, the right to freedom from
hunger and the right to education, health care and
development. Sanctions also affect the most vulnerable
in society, such as the aged, women and children. We
fully reject the use of sanctions or the use of the
Security Council's powers for promoting the interests
of a State or group of States, for intervening in the
internal affairs of States, for imposing a political
regime, for overthrowing or changing a Government or
for punishing a state.

The authority to impose sanctions and implement
them, in addition to the right of veto, has led to
disregard for the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, which says that the Security Council
acts on behalf of all Member States of the United
Nations. Therefore, the imposition of sanctions on a
State must be a collective decision that enjoys the
unanimous agreement of all Member States, with one
set of standards for the imposition and lifting of
sanctions.

We believe that other States have threatened
regional and international peace and security. They
have violated Security Council resolutions and
international law and possess weapons of mass
destruction. They have not been taken to task, however,
because of the double standards used by major States.

The Tel Aviv regime, under the very eyes of the
international community, continues to attempt to
eradicate and disperse the Palestinian people and to
gain control of its remaining territories, using new
apartheid-like means based on occupation, settlement,
siege and displacement. It is indeed strange that, due to
such double standards, the major State providing the
Tel Aviv regime with the most up-to-date weaponry, to
be used against children and women, is the same very
State that insists on maintaining the siege of Iraq and
that prevents the Security Council from compelling the
Tel Aviv regime to respect the resolutions of the United
Nations and to protect the Palestinian people.

The sanctions imposed by the Security Council
against Iraq have become a crime of genocide against
the Iraqi people. The States that object to the lifting of
those sanctions are guilty of that crime. These States
have opened the territory of Iraq to weapons experts
and foreign intelligence agencies for almost a decade.
No corner of Iraq has been spared inspection; even
Iraqi bedrooms have been inspected. The siege
nevertheless continues as strong as ever in an attempt
to destroy Iraq, its institutions and its infrastructure and
to tear Iraqi society apart.

Despite the aggression and almost daily military
attacks directed against Iraq, under the pretext of
breaches of no-fly zones that were imposed without a
mandate from the Security Council or the international
community, the Security Council has not even initiated
a debate of such aggression, which flagrantly violates
international law, the United Nations Charter and its
own resolutions under Chapter VII, which are binding
on all States. Calling on Iraq to cooperate with the
United Nations so that the sanctions may be lifted is an
empty pretext to maintain those sanctions. Although
Iraq has largely cooperated with the United Nations
and the Security Council, the sanctions have neither
been lifted, suspended nor lessened.

Iraq has the right not to trust that sanctions will
be lifted when it cooperates, because it is mindful of
the sanctions imposed against Libya and of the fact that
the Security Council refused to lift those sanctions
despite unanimous agreement among its members, with
one exception, and within the international community
that Libya had fully cooperated with the United
Nations and satisfied all its obligations. Before
demanding that Iraq cooperate further, the Security
Council must regain its credibility by abiding by its
own resolutions and cease exerting pressure on behalf
of one State and its special interests.

As for the Security Council's consultations and
the draft resolution being proposed in the guise of
lessening the suffering of the Iraqi people by
modifying the sanctions regime, they are merely
attempts to perpetuate those sanctions eternally.
Whether the sanctions imposed against Iraq are strong
or weak, smart or dumb, they are in fact aimed against
the present and future of an entire people. The object is
the further destruction of that country, whose people
has made a great contribution to human civilization.

In conclusion, we renew our call for an
immediate lifting of sanctions without further delay.
Their continuation in any form will ensure the ongoing
suffering of the Iraqi people and have a negative
impact on the situation in the region and throughout the
world.

