Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for convening
today's meeting. I would also like to express Poland's
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Maurer and
Mr. Borello for their comprehensive briefings, which
demonstrated how relevant today's open debate is and
show that violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law continue to have an
enormous negative impact on people's everyday lives.
From this perspective, we particularly welcome the
community-level-based approach highlighted in the
concept note circulated by the Indonesian presidency
(S/2019/385, annex).

Poland welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2019/373), particularly its well-founded
and accurate recommendations, which come as we are
celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and marking the twentieth anniversary of
the first-ever Security Council presidential statement
on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/1999/6). Since
then the Security Council has made huge progress in
strengthening the protection-of-civilians framework,
yet the reality on the ground remains as worrisome as
ever, which makes it imperative for the international
community and the Security Council to step up their
efforts in the field.

Almost a year ago, when Poland held the presidency
of the Security Council in May 2018, and convened a
similar open debate (see S/PV.8264), Poland's Minister
for Foreign Affairs said that we should focus on three
main areas to ensure effective protection in conflict
situations - prevention, protection and accountability.
Those words remain valid today. Prevention is the
only way to end the pain and suffering afflicting the
millions of women, children and men all over the world
who have been victims of deliberate or indiscriminate
attacks by parties to conflicts, including those who are
particularly vulnerable in such situations - women,
children, persons with disabilities, detainees and
missing persons. To that end, it is crucial for the parties
to conflicts to develop and promote good practices
that can prevent and mitigate harm to civilians. Risk
assessment, dialogue and inclusive processes that put
people at risk of a lack of protection at the centre of any
response are essential. That is also true because local
communities possess the best knowledge about the
threats to which they might be exposed. To secure better
protection, on the other hand, respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law must be enhanced. It is important that all States
and non-State parties to a conflict comply with their
legal obligations.

An ongoing analysis of the humanitarian domain
allows us to identify the most worrisome humanitarian
challenges to the protection of civilians around the
world, among which are the progressive urbanization
of conflicts; the human impact of improvised explosive
devices; unlawful denial ofhumanitarian access; attacks
on humanitarian and medical personnel, hospitals and
other facilities; the destruction ofcivilian infrastructure;
counter-terrorism measures that impede humanitarian
action; and sexual and gender-based violence. Attacks
on journalists are yet another example of a flagrant
Violation of the existing normative framework.

Finally, the widespread impact of armed conflict
on the situation of persons with disabilities raises the
highest-level of concern and should be addressed and
mitigated in an effective manner. To that end, I am
pleased to announce that Poland has decided to join
the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities
in Humanitarian Action. We encourage others to do the
same. Furthermore, Poland, together with the United
Kingdom, has proposed a draft resolution on persons
with disabilities. We believe that document will
significantly contribute to protection of that group and
ensure that persons with disabilities are recognized as
agents of change in peace processes.

As the Secretary-General's report states, 22,800
civilians were reported dead or injured in six countries:
Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and
Yemen. The figures are underestimated, and civilians
are suffering all over the world.

As far as European countries are concerned, Ukraine
has been witnessing continued military aggression and
the unlawful occupation of its territories by the Russian
Federation. Despite many efforts undertaken by the
international community, a ceasefire in Ukraine is far
from being achieved. Civilians continue to be killed and
injured by explosive remnants of war and landmines.
The number of internally displaced persons has
stabilized, reaching a peak of 1.5 million people. The
conflict continues to have a negative impact in other
domains, including the environment, which results in
further negative consequences for human health, as it
inflicts serious health problems and reduces access to
resources that are vital for survival.

As that example shows, the protection of civilians
is not an exclusively humanitarian task, but requires a
comprehensive approach with adequate actions to be
taken in peacekeeping, human rights, the rule of law and
the political, security, development and disarmament
spheres. As the challenge is global, we should promote
cooperation and partnership among States and
international and non-governmental organizations, as
well as other stakeholders. Those actions should be
supported by heightened diplomacy, awareness-raising
and the necessary training.

At the same time, activities carried out at the level
of the communities that are affected by armed conflict
cannot be considered a substitute for the protection
responsibilities of authorities. As Member States, we
must do our utmost to end impunity for any violation
of international humanitarian law. It is necessary to
ensure accountability, no matter who the perpetrator of
a given crime or abuse is. The International Criminal
Court should play the leading role in holding parties to
a conflict accountable and restoring a sense of justice
on the international stage. That would clearly improve
the protection of civilians and allow for visible progress
to be made.

