Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
informative briefing.

Let me also inform the Council that Poland
associates itself with the statement to be delivered later
today by the observer of the European Union.

Haiti is a land of great beauty and great suffering.
Despite obstacles, the progress made by Haitians
under the leadership of President Jovenel Moise is very
impressive. The spate of changes has had a positive
impact on the daily life of Haitians in various areas. It
is important for the Government to continue its efforts.
It is worth emphasizing that it has taken steps to reform
the criminal code and code of criminal procedure, fight
corruption in the civil service and strengthen thejustice
sector. The improvement in the capacity of the Haitian
National Police is also remarkable.

Such efforts should lead to major political
stabilization and further strengthen the principles of
the rule of law, which is an indispensable element of
preserving sustainable development. Poland thanks
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for its crucial role in assisting
the Haitian Government to strengthen rule-of-law
institutions, reinforce national police capacity and
engage in human rights monitoring.
The smooth transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti during the first
six months looks very promising. Nonetheless, Haitian
institutions still need the support of the international
community. We welcome the contribution of
MINUJUSTH to improve public security by building
the capacity of the Haitian National Police in a wide
range of police activities, providing equipment and
operational support. To continue that progress, the
vacancy rate within the Mission should be lowered. We
call on the Secretariat to remove all remaining obstacles
to filling the remaining vacancies.

I would like to laud the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy for Haiti, Ms. Josette
Sheeran, to mobilize the private sector in the areas of
finance, health and technology in an effort to support
the Haitian Government and its people, contribute
to Haiti's ambitious development goals and help
attract investment. Additional efforts to enhance
response capacity in investigating and preventing
sexual and gender-based violations and incidents are
necessary. Prison overcrowding raises serious human
rights concerns, as does the lack of progress on the
appointment of a senior governmental focal point
to chair the body responsible for the development of
national action plans on human rights. We call on the
Government to redouble its efforts in those areas.

Like other States Members of the United Nations,
Haiti has the undeniable right to create and maintain
its national armed forces. Given budgetary limitations
and the pressing need to further develop the capabilities
of its national police force, we expect the Haitian
authorities to be judicious in choosing their next steps
on the path to sustainable growth, taking into account
the considerably reduced presence of the international
community on the island.

Poland welcomes the proposal of 11 ambitious
benchmarks for an exit strategy and transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti.
MINUJUSTH will be a crucial actor in that process,
helping the Government to meet the benchmarks by
providing all necessary expertise and assistance.
Furthermore, we should not limit the presence of the
United Nations in Haiti or withdraw it too early, bearing
in mind the fragility of the situation and the great deal
of work to be conducted by elected Haitian authorities.
While some see gaps, we see opportunities. We would
like to see a prosperous Haiti without a constant
peacekeeping presence. As the Haitian proverb says, a
borrowed drum never makes for good dancing.

