Mr. Valero Briceflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
endorses the statement delivered by Mr. Mohammad
Khazaee, Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

Helping to build a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East is one of the main challenges
of the United Nations. The lack of respect for the
territorial integrity, sovereignty and self-determination
of the countries of the South have been recurrent
practices of colonialists and imperialists in times past.
Even today, those practices are still used to retain their
already questionable hegemony.

Now they are turning to new notions to disguise
their purposes while relying on the most advanced
technologies of the military, killing innocent civilians,
including women, children and the elderly. They
sponsor the fragmentation of national States, fueling
ethnic, religious and cultural differences while
seeking to impose political models that are alien to
the realities of countries that have their own historical
traditions. They foster mercenary activities and spread
terrorism in order to change the political and legal
structures of countries and steal their wealth. The
mass media organizations present these terrorists as
redeemers seeking independence and democracy. That
interventionist logic disrupts peace and stability in the
Middle East.

Venezuela is concerned about the warmongering
actions of Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people, which systematically violates the
human rights of that heroic people. The State of Israel
keeps some 5,000 political prisoners in deplorable
conditions. Arbitrary arrests, harassment and
intimidation are the order of the day. The construction
of illegal settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the criminal blockade against the
people of Gaza continue. UNICEF estimates that each
year, about 700 Palestinian children aged 12 to 17 are
arrested, interrogated and detained by Israel's army,
police and security agents.

Over the past decade, about 7,000 cases of cruel,
inhumane and degrading treatment in the Israeli prison
system have been corroborated. Since 1947, the State of
Israel has failed systematically to implement the relevant
resolutions of the United Nations advocating a two-
State solution, shirking its obligations under the Charter
of the United Nations. The principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, are
ignored by Israel. It is undeniable that those who, by act
or omission, support such policies bear their share of
responsibility for the situation.

Following the adoption in the General Assembly
of resolution 67/ 19, granting the status of non-member
observer State at the United Nations, the occupying
Power withheld legitimate Palestinian tax revenues and
defiantly asserted that it would continue to build its
illegal settlements in order to make a State of Palestine
unviable. The occupying Power is attempting to change
the cultural and historical identity of the Palestinian
people, thereby compromising its territorial integrity
and self-determination.

The Venezuelan people admire the endurance
of the Palestinian people and support the right of
Palestine to be a full Member of the United Nations, in
accordance with the provisions of its founding Charter.
We demand that Israel withdraw to its pre-1967 borders
in accordance with resolution 242 (1967). We endorse
the right of the Palestinians to have East Jerusalem as
their capital. We insist that the Palestinian refugees
enjoy their right to return to their homeland. We
demand the release of Palestinian prisoners, and an end
to the occupation of the Syrian Golan. Those who have
committed crimes covered by the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court must pay for their crimes.

Our delegation stresses the importance of the
special meeting of the United Nations Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, held on 17 and 18 April in Caracas. At that
meeting, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State
of Palestine, Mr. Riad Malki, denounced the apartheid
being practiced in the occupied Palestinian territories
through an inhumane and infamous separation with
zones, facilities, roads, transport and permits only
for Israelis. It is scandalous that Palestinians require
special permits to enter and move within their own
territory. Venezuela endorses these demands of the
Palestinian Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Bolivarian Government believes that Syria
must be respected. The only way to settle the conflict in
that country is through political dialogue between the
Syrian authorities and the opposition - an agreement
among the Syrians themselves. We support the efforts of
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to Syria, Ambassador
Lakhdar Brahimi, and we express our concern over
the effort to diminish or manipulate the importance of
mediation and dialogue as the ways par excellence to
achieve peace, while irresponsibly promoting war in
order to dismember a sovereign State.

Venezuela deplores the fact that arms are being
supplied from outside to groups involved in terrorist
activities that refuse to take part in any political dialogue.
Such interference by foreign Powers constitutes a clear
violation of the principles of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence, as they apply to
Syria. The countenancing of diplomatic recognition
by the United Nations of irregular groups acting
independently of the Syrian State and using violence and
terrorism to achieve their political aims is a undesirable
precedent for international law. A negotiated solution
among Syrians themselves is indispensable, urgent and
essential. We encourage peace and will support the
efforts of all those who genuinely seek it.

In Venezuela we cherish the ultimate goods a life
and peace - and we will defend the principles of
national sovereignty and self-determination.

