Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank the Special Coordinator,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his enlightening briefing,
which provided us with a clear and precise outline of
the situation and the issues at hand.

First of all, I would like to draw our collective
attention to the further deterioration of the situation in
Gaza and the need to address it. The recent increase
in tensions we are witnessing today must compel us
to closely follow developments in Gaza in the coming
weeks. We must do everything we can to avoid any new
escalation of the conflict, as we have been observing
since early May. In that context, we call on the parties
concerned to exercise full restraint. Further civilian
casualties must be avoided at all costs. I would also
reiterate France's strong condemnation of shooting
from Gaza towards inhabited areas in Israel.

These tensions are a reflection of the broader
crisis throughout Gaza, which is simultaneously
humanitarian, economic and political in nature. As we
know, lasting stability will be possible in Gaza only in
the context of a negotiated settlement. That requires
the full return of the Palestinian Authority, on the one
hand, and the lifting of the blockade, on the other hand,
accompanied by credible security guarantees for Israel.

Secondly, I would like to refer to the dangers that
today weigh heavily on the two-State solution and risk
irreversible damage to it. The ongoing settlement policy
in East Jerusalem and the West Bank continues to take
us further away from a two-State solution. France
condemned the recent decisions taken by the Israeli
authorities on 5 and 6 August to allow the construction
of 2,500 housing units in the West Bank, in addition to
the 4,500 new housing units that have been approved
since the beginning of the year. These decisions are
all the more disturbing given that this policy has been
accompanied by worrisome statements regarding the
annexation of all or part of the occupied territories.

The demolition of Palestinian homes in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem are also continuing
unabated. France, along with its European partners,
has condemned the demolition of several buildings by
the Israeli army in the area of Wadi Al-Hummus, East
Jerusalem. Those demolitions in zones A and B are
unprecedented, illegal under international law and serve
to further undermine the Oslo Accords. As reaffirmed
in resolution 2334 (2016), settlement is illegal under
international law. This policy aggravates tensions on
the ground and undermines the conditions for a just
and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians and
must be brought to an end.

Finally, France followed with concern the clashes
on the Esplanade of the Mosques that took place
on 11 August in the context of Muslim and Jewish
holidays. We call on all parties to refrain from any
act or statement that could exacerbate tensions and to
demonstrate a sense of responsibility with a view to
mitigating the situation. France recalls its commitment
to preserving the status quo of 1967 at the holy sites of
Jerusalem. To call the status quo into question would be
fraught with the risk of regional destabilization.

As the backdrop continues to worsen, France calls
for safeguarding the two-State solution. A solution to the
conflict must be, as we know, fundamentally political
and based on the long-standing parameters, defined in
particular by the relevant Council resolutions, and in
response to the legitimate aspirations of both parties,
namely, the establishment of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security,
within secure and recognized borders, with Jerusalem
as its capital. France, in conjunction with its European
partners, stands ready to support all efforts, including
economic initiatives, as long as they fall within the
framework that we have collectively defined.

With such a solution pending, we must urgently
focus on the immediate improvement of the
humanitarian situation, especially in Gaza, where basic
essentials - such as medicine in particular, but also
fuel - must be able to be delivered. We must also pay
special attention to what Mr. Mladenov has just told us
about the risk of a health crisis in Gaza.

Moreover, while the Palestinian Authority is
experiencing a worrisome fiscal situation, France
notes with satisfaction the agreement reached on tax
exemptions on oil imports by the Palestinian Authority.
This represents a first step towards a resolution of
the ongoing crisis over Israeli budgetary payments to
the Palestinian Authority. In that connection, France
encourages both parties to continue their discussions
in that direction.

Allow me to reiterate that, in the absence of a
political solution for a just and lasting peace, the
programmes of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East are
essential to provide vital assistance to more than
5 million Palestinian refugees, thereby contributing to
the stability of the entire region.

In conclusion, turning to recent developments in
Lebanon, as the Permanent Representative of Kuwait
mentioned, I would like to take the opportunity of this
briefing to express France's deep concern regarding the
situation. In the context of current regional tensions,
it is imperative that all parties avoid an escalation and
comply with the relevant Council resolutions, while
also refraining from any violation of the Blue Line.

