Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank the Under-Secretary-General for his introductory
remarks.

Tanzania continues to be deeply concerned by the
persisting cycle of violence in the Middle East, despite
repeated calls for the cessation of hostilities and a
return to dialogue. We are concerned that Israeli troops
have continued to target Palestinian militants, resulting
in a large number of civilian casualties, while militants
have increased rocket attacks against Israel, injuring
and killing civilians and damaging property.

We strongly believe that peace between Israel and
the Palestinians would usher in peace to the whole of
the Middle East region. We also believe that it is not
proper for the international community to remain
unconcerned in the face of the disastrous course of
events and the horror that is ravaging the region. We
are concerned that the recent cycle of violence has
reached a level at which, unless it is arrested, the cycle
may become irreversible.

It is encouraging, however, to note that there is
serious awareness of the gravity of the conflict and that
several moves are already being taken to initiate a
change in the situation in the region. Recent efforts by
Spain, Italy and France aimed at launching a new
Middle East peace initiative are welcome and deserve
solid support. Their plan to arrange a European Union
summit in December and to act jointly to initiate
political reforms in the Middle East should provide a
useful approach to the conflict. We hope that
preparations for that important meeting will proceed
well and that the outcome of the deliberations will
provide a new avenue for resolving the long-standing
problems confronting the region.

Progress can be achieved first and foremost if the
parties decide to cease hostilities immediately. In our
View, a ceasefire, if possible monitored by an
international observer force, should allow an
atmosphere conducive to tackling other outstanding
issues, such as the formation of a Palestinian
Government of national unity, the exchange of
prisoners and due recognition of the existence of Israel.
In parallel, it should then be possible to initiate talks
between Israel's Prime Minister and the President of

the Palestinian Authority. Similarly, regular
consultations between the two sides towards
developing a comprehensive approach that addresses a
wide range of issues beyond security, including
economic issues, should be pursued.

The formation of a Palestinian unity government
holds the key to ending the current stalemate and to
building a climate of trust in which the political
process can be rekindled. The Middle East has never
enjoyed peace for long, but the situation has never
been worse than it is, given the stepped-up attacks and
counterattacks and the economic paralysis on the
Palestinian side. We can only hope that deliberate
efforts will be taken to ensure that there is no further
destruction, deaths and injuries. The Israelis and the
Palestinians alike should now realize that the endless
violence is complicating the search for lasting peace in
the area and that stability is in the interest of
everybody.

Turning to Lebanon, we deeply regret and
condemn the reported assassination of the Lebanese
Minister of Industry this morning. That criminal act is
yet another demonstration of the urgent to conclude
investigations of previous assassinations and of
bringing those responsible for those criminal acts to
justice.

We have also received with dismay news of the
abrupt resignation of six Hizbollah-associated cabinet
ministers and threats of mass demonstration by
Hizbollah, seeking more political power. In our View,
Lebanon needs time to adjust and to adapt to a host of
issues, especially after the summer's war. We therefore
appeal for calm so as to facilitate that readjustment and
the reconstruction of its infrastructure, which suffered
so heavily during the recent hostilities.

