Mr. Biagini (Italy): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Japanese presidency for organizing
this meeting and all of today's briefers for their
comprehensive presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to focus on two key areas related
to the future of Afghanistan. The first is peace and
reconciliation and the second is the upcoming electoral
deadlines, especially the parliamentary elections
scheduled for 2018.

Today more than ever, reconciliation between the
Government and the Taliban insurgency represents the
way to put an end to the Afghan conflict and ensure
sustainable peace and stability in Afghanistan. It will
therefore be essential to make every effort to create
the conditions for peace, while remaining cognizant of
the complexities involved in achieving that objective.
We are all aware of the difficulties of the current
situation in Afghan, with high levels of violence and
mounting civilian casualties. It is also clear that until
now, insurgent groups have shown no willingness to
negotiate with the Government. However, we have also
noted positive trends over the past two years in terms
of increasing ambitions for peace and reconciliation.
Intensified diplomatic activity in that regard - first
and foremost through the launch of the Kabul process,
but also through the revitalization of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group - has shown that interest in
the subject has intensified, along with a common
understanding that achieving peace and reconciliation is
a realistic goal, despite the many obstacles that remain.

Greater ambitiousness can create the momentum
needed to pave the way for peace in Afghanistan,
especially when combined with the involvement of
a broader spectrum of international stakeholders,
particularly countries of the region. In our view, if we are
to advance the prospects for peace and reconciliation, it
will be essential to enable two elements to coalesce - the
intrinsically domestic nature of the process, which
must be Afghan-led and -owned, and genuine support
for the peace process from partner countries, especially
as reflected in the desire and interest of the countries
of the region and the broader region generally to
see Afghanistan stabilized. That will also requires
effective and tangible collaboration in the fight against
terrorist groups and their activities, which constitute
one of the main obstacles to peace. In that context, the
role played by the countries of the region is key, and we
hope that that partnership can live up to its potential.
The strategy outlined by the Afghan Government with
the launching of the Kabul process - which we fully
support - must be complemented on the domestic
front by a fully inclusive outreach to all components
of Afghan society, ensuring the active participation of
women and harnessing the full potential of institutions
such as the High Peace Council.

That will help to advance a peace process that
ensures respect for the Constitution and the rights of
all Afghan citizens without distinction, and that will
also help to protect the economic and social progress
made over the past 16 years. We therefore hope that the
upcoming second meeting of the Kabul process, due to
take place in February, will result in tangible progress
in the peace and reconciliation process, with the active
support of all its Afghan partners.

Turning to my second point, next year's
parliamentary elections are drawing closer. They
represent a major opportunity for strengthening the
legitimacy of Afghan institutions. The Afghan people
have very high expectations in that regard, and so does
the donor community. Ensuring transparent, inclusive
and credible elections is therefore crucial. To that end,
the relevant Afghan institutions must be able to urgently
resolve all outstanding issues in the area of electoral
reform, avoiding any further delays in promoting the
broadest possible consensus within Afghan political
parties and society as a whole. That also entails
ensuring the tangible implementation of the National
Unity Government's wider reform agenda, of which
electoral reform is a key component. The continued
fight against corruption and efforts to promote human
rights, especially the rights of women, need a particular
injection of a sense of urgency.

In conclusion, I would like to affirm Italy's full
support and friendship to the Afghan Government
and its people in the pursuit of peace, stability and
development. First and foremost in that effort is our
active participation in the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission, our development cooperation assistance
and our support for all diplomatic initiatives that can

make a positive contribution to the resumption of the
peace process.

Lastly, I would like to underline the key role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
the framework of the partnership between Afghanistan
and the international community, and to recognize the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan and his staff, who
operate in very challenging conditions.

