Mr. Pascoe: It is a great pleasure to be here
today. As members know, this is my first opportunity to
be here in this Chamber. I hope it is the first of many
opportunities, and we look forward to working very
closely with the Council in the months and years
ahead.

This will no doubt be the first of many briefings I
will give to the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East. I look forward to working closely with
the Council, reporting on major developments and on
the work of the Secretary-General and his
representatives, and facilitating the Council's
engagement in the search for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in accordance with its
resolutions.

I hardly need remind the members of the Council
just how often and how tragically the hopes for peace
in the Middle East have been frustrated in the past. We
have no choice, however, but to keep working
tirelessly towards that end to overcome the setbacks
that inevitably occur along the way and to build,
wherever possible, on steps in the right direction.
Despite continuing tensions, violence and mistrust, a
majority of Israelis and Palestinians still embrace a
2
common dream of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security.

The challenges to progress remain formidable
today, but following a year in which prospects for
peace seemed only to diminish, several developments
of the past month - among them the agreement
reached in Mecca on a Palestinian national unity
Government, and the renewal of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue - hold out the potential, if not the promise,
to begin turning that trend around.

Concerning Palestinian political developments,
thankfully, the ceasefire agreed in Mecca has already
calmed the internal Palestinian front, although isolated
clashes underscore the fragility of the situation. After
being commissioned to form the new Government by
President Abbas, Prime Minister-designate Haniyeh has
consulted with all factions and remained in close and
frequent contact with the President himself to finalize
the new Government and prepare its programme for
presentation to the Palestinian Legislative Council.
Under the Basic Law, the new Government must be
finalized by 21 March, and there are signs that it may
be presented imminently.

We must hope that the new Government will take
positions and actions that demonstrate, as was agreed
in Mecca, respect for the signed agreements of the
Palestine Liberation Organization that renounce
terrorism, recognize Israel's right to exist in peace and
security, and impose crucial obligations on the
Palestinian Authority. The United Nations Special
Coordinator, Alvaro de Soto, has been actively pressing
those issues during the crucial period of Government
formation.

As it affirmed when it met in Berlin on
21 February, the Quartet is taking a "wait-and-see"
approach. It reaffirmed its readiness to support a
Government committed to Quartet principles and
encouraged progress in that direction. As events
unfold, the United Nations will continue its
consultations with Quartet and regional partners.

In the meantime, as called for by the Quartet,
preliminary discussions are under way on new ideas
proposed by the European Commission for facilitating
aid financing and coordination to support Palestinian
social and economic development and to strengthen
public institutions and governance. That initiative will
benefit from consultation with all stakeholders, bearing
07-26922
in mind the results of national unity discussions and
existing aid coordination arrangements.

As to efforts to advance political dialogue, since
the last briefing, President Abbas and Prime Minister
Olmert met on two occasions - once with United
States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice on
19 February, and again last Sunday in a bilateral
meeting. Those meetings have provided a vital channel
of dialogue at a sensitive time. We call on the two
leaders to continue their dialogue and to focus on the
substantive final status issues that must be addressed in
order to provide a political horizon and to advance the
road map. We welcome Secretary Rice's plans to return
to the region later this month.

We continue to see welcome signs of increased
engagement by Arab countries. Preparatory meetings
held in advance of the summit of the League of Arab
States on 28 March in Riyadh have centred around
efforts to breathe new life into the Arab peace
initiative. That important initiative is a building block
of the road map and represents a strategic choice by
Arab countries for peace and coexistence with Israel,
based on a comprehensive regional approach. Prime
Minister Olmert has recently spoken of the positive
elements that Israel sees in the initiative.

There were no further moves, however, towards
dialogue between Israel and Syria in the past month.
European Union High Representative for Foreign and
Security Policy Javier Solana is in Damascus today,
having already visited Lebanon and Saudi Arabia.

With respect to challenges to progress,
developments on the ground underscore the need for
both sides to take concrete actions that demonstrate
their adherence to existing agreements and
international obligations.

One source of deep concern is continued tension
and violence, which took the lives this past month of
23 Palestinians - eight at the hands of the Israel
Defense Forces and 15 from internal fighting - and
one Israeli. Over the same period, Palestinian militants
in Gaza fired at least 55 rockets into Israel. We
commend Israel's continued restraint in the face of
those provocations, which are both unjustified and in
breach of the agreed ceasefire. Israeli security forces in
Tel Aviv, meanwhile, arrested a man from the northern
West Bank who, allegedly, had been preparing to
perpetrate a suicide bombing.
07-26922

Those incidents underscore how important it will
be for a new Palestinian Government to ensure that its
security forces work in harmony to prevent the
smuggling of weapons, to impose internal law and
order and to act firmly against those who perpetrate
attacks against Israel. That will be a difficult challenge,
and we hope that all players, including in the region,
will support such steps and take no actions that would
make them more difficult.

In late February, the IDF launched a large
military operation - code-named "Hot Winter" - in
Nablus. The IDF uncovered a number of sites used for
preparing explosives and arrested a number of
suspects. However, the operation placed tens of
thousands of Palestinians in the old city of Nablus
under curfew for several days, causing major
disruption to civilian life and humanitarian operations.
IDF operations also took place during the reporting
period in Jenin, Ramallah and Bethlehem. There have
also been incidents of IDF firing that have injured
fishermen in the coastal waters off the Gaza Strip.

We also continue to follow closely the situation
in the Old City of Jerusalem following reports of
Israeli excavation and construction activity on a ramp
leading to the Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount, bearing
in mind that real or perceived threats to change the
status quo at sensitive holy sites in Jerusalem have
been a trigger of conflict many times in the city's
history. A UNESCO delegation recently visited this
World Heritage listed site and transmitted its report to
the Secretary-General yesterday. The report
recommends that the Government of Israel be asked to
comply with its obligations regarding heritage
conservation in World Heritage Sites, such as the Old
City of Jerusalem, and to immediately stop the
archaeological excavations. The report does note,
however, that the works do not threaten the stability of
the Western Wall or the Al-Aqsa mosque. The
recommendations include a call on the Israeli
Government to clearly define the final design of the
access structure to the Mughrabi Gate; to engage in a
consultation process with all concerned parties,
including the authorities of the Awqaf and Jordan; and
to have the process supervised by an international team
of experts coordinated by UNESCO.

With regard to settlements and the barrier, we are
also concerned at the continued creation of facts on the
ground. Israeli construction of the barrier - parts of
which extend deep into the West Bank - is now
3
complete along more than half of its route and is
continuing, contrary to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Settlement activity also
continues. The Israeli Government has yet to freeze
that activity or to begin to dismantle the more than 100
settlement outposts in the West Bank, despite its clear
obligations to do so under the Road Map.

The Agreement on Movement and Access is still
not being implemented in full. There has been progress
at Karni, where truck crossings increased by 15 per
cent during the past month and have more than doubled
since November. However, further efforts are needed to
meet the Agreement's targets, and progress remains
slow or non-existent on other fronts.

Rafah was open for only 16 per cent of scheduled
hours during the reporting period, and the crossing has
become increasingly volatile and insecure. As the
European Union Border Assistance Mission has
repeatedly warned, the limited and unscheduled
openings at Rafah make it extremely difficult to
control the crossing. When some 5,000 Palestinians
tried to exit Gaza through Rafah during an unscheduled
opening on 8 March, the human crush left one person
dead and seven injured. The unsatisfactory situation at
Rafah raises the risk of violence, creates greater
incentives for smuggling through illegal entry points
and causes disillusionment among Gaza residents.

Despite commitments made at the December
2006 meeting between Prime Minister Olmert and
President Abbas, there has been no meaningful
reduction in the number of obstacles to movement in
the West Bank, which currently stands at 529. The lack
of action to improve movement and access in
accordance with existing commitments undermines
efforts to revive the Palestinian economy.

United Nations workers are also facing increasing
restrictions on their movement, which are jeopardizing
humanitarian operations in Gaza even as needs on the
ground continue to grow. That situation has recently
been drawn to the attention of the Government of Israel
at a senior level. We hope that that will lead to a lifting
of such restrictions, for, despite concerted efforts to
engage with Israeli authorities to improve access for
United Nations workers in the occupied Palestinian
territory, there has been no progress in addressing a
number of important concerns. For example, an
agreement negotiated with Israeli authorities in recent
weeks by the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, which
would allow a reasonable number of United Nations
international staff to cross Erez securely and without a
vehicle search, has not yet been implemented.

Turning our attention to Lebanon, we see that
there have been several important developments since
the last briefing to the Council. Opposition
demonstrations that began in Beirut in December have
continued to occur in a calm and orderly manner
without major incidents during the reporting period.
Regional efforts to broker a solution to the political
impasse are becoming more intense in the lead-up to
the Arab League summit, resulting in a general
atmosphere of cautious optimism. Nabih Berri, Speaker
of Parliament, and Saad Hariri, leader of the Future
Movement, have met three times in recent days to
bridge the gap between the Government and the
opposition.

In contrast, there has been a worrying increase in
the number of security threats and bomb scares
reported in Lebanon over the past four weeks.
Lebanese security services discovered several
explosive devices in Beirut, in populated areas outside
the capital and throughout the country. While a number
of those explosives were not primed to detonate, on
one occasion detonators linked to chemical substances
were discovered.

With regard to the situation in southern Lebanon,
the past month was relatively calm along the Blue
Line. Regrettably, Israeli air violations of the Blue Line
continued to occur. On 21 February, Israeli planes
violated Lebanese airspace, drawing a response of
anti-aircraft fire from the Lebanese army in southern
Lebanon. In addition, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon is conducting an investigation into a Blue
Line violation incident that took place on 3 March, in
which a Lebanese youth was forced by IDF soldiers to
cross the Blue Line and the technical fence into the
Israeli side. The findings of the investigation will be
communicated to both sides.

The Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the
situation in the Middle East, Michael Williams,
travelled in late February to Israel and Lebanon in
order to prepare for the Secretary-General's next
quarterly report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). The report will be
submitted to the Council on 16 March.
07-26922
I have noted today a number of positive
developments that contrast with a year of diminished
hopes and expectations in 2006. Much will now depend
on how recent agreements are implemented on the
ground. An international community engaged in the
period ahead with both firmness and flexibility can
help to ensure that encouraging steps forward turn into
longer strides for peace.

For his part, the Secretary-General has made it
abundantly clear that he will be deeply and personally
engaged in the continuing search for effective
implementation of the resolutions of the Security
Council and for a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. He has already
shown that commitment through his efforts to
re-energize the role of the Quartet, and he will soon be
07-26922
making his first trip to the region as Secretary-General.
As members know, he will attending the Arab League
summit in Riyadh on 28 March, and he also expects to
make visits to other countries, which will be
announced in the very near future.

