Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like first of all to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, for the complete and useful
information he has given us. I also want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this important
meeting. My delegation has always emphasized the
value of having as many open meetings of the Security
Council as possible, in which all the Members of the
Organization, and not just the members of the Council,
can participate and exchange views about a given issue.

More than eight months have gone by since the
Council established the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and it is
therefore timely to observe what has been achieved so
far and to assess the main challenges that the future
holds.

From the standpoint of what has already been
accomplished, the magnitude of UNTAET's task is
worthy of note. Humanitarian assistance initiatives
were able to prevent the deaths of hundreds of
thousands of people, which might have occurred as a
result of the wave of violence of 1999 or the natural
disasters that have taken place since then. Furthermore,
action in this field has also made it possible for more
than 164,000 people to return to the territory and to
their homes. Likewise, we must praise the initiatives of
the United Nations in establishing political and social
institutions that will serve as a basis for the future
independent state. It is particularly positive that the
East Timorese leaders represented in the National
Consultative Council have always been consulted and
that their views have been taken into account in the
establishment of those institutions.

From the standpoint of future challenges, the task
of the United Nations is equally daunting. First of all,
in the hope that we have already seen the worst of the
humanitarian crisis, we must adopt an approach that
focuses more on economic and social development than
on emergency assistance. Likewise, we must continue
with the task of consolidating the institutions that have
already been created and adapt them to the new
realities. Bearing this in mind, the donor conference
recently held in Lisbon demonstrated that the
commitment of the international community to East
Timor remains intact. We believe this will make it
possible to continue reconstruction efforts in such key
sectors as health, education, basic infrastructure,
community development and agriculture. The World
Bank projects in this connection are extremely useful.
In a different context, the initiative of East
Timorese leaders to provide a new structure and
functions for the National Consultative Council is of
vital importance, since that body will make it possible
for the local population to increasingly assume
responsibilities in preparation for independent life.

All of this does not mean that there are no longer
humanitarian questions that require attention. First and
perhaps most urgent among those questions is the need
to put an end to the suffering of the thousands of
refugees still in West Timor. Doing this will require the
cooperation of all the parties concerned. In this regard,
I wish to point out that my delegation is deeply
concerned at the gravity of the current situation,
particularly in the three camps where the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has
had to suspend its activities. On the other hand, I
would like to express the confidence of my delegation
that the Indonesian authorities will continue to display
a constructive approach that will make it possible to
overcome the current impasse.

Security conditions in the border areas and in the
interior of the territory have also proved to be
precarious. There is also a need for the cooperation of
all the parties in order to improve the situation in this
regard. In connection with these issues- while we
appreciate the readiness of the Indonesian authorities
and the efforts they have made thus far - we call for a
continued fulfilment of the commitments that have
been undertaken.

In conclusion, allow me to associate myself with
the remarks of speakers who preceded me regarding the
excellent work being done by Mr. Vieira de Mello and
the rest of the personnel of UNTAET. I wish to convey
the gratitude of the Government of Argentina to Mr.
Vieira de Mello and the UNTAET staff for their tireless
efforts, courage and dedication.

