The President (interpretation from Russian): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Austria, Germany, Italy and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tasovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) took a seat
at the Council table; Mr. Sucharipa (Austria),
Mr. Henze (Germany) and Mr. Fulci (Italy) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them two reports
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), documents S/1998/454
and corrigendum l, and 8/1998/644. Members of the
Council also have before them document S/1998/668, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, the Russian Federation,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/ 1998/40] and 5/1998/627,
which contain the text of the letters dated 15 May and 9
July 1998, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting letters of the same date
from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia addressed to the
Secretary-General.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, to whom I give the floor.


