Mr. Davide (Philippines): Let me begin by
expressing the Philippines' solidarity with Mexico, its
Government and its people as they face a new crisis
that could affect the world.

The Philippines is grateful for this opportunity to
address the Security Council following the issuance of
the annual report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2009/ 158). With the high priority
that it gives to the promotion and protection of the
rights of children, including in the context of armed
conflict, the Philippines has always considered this
issue to be of special importance and continues to view
with utmost seriousness any negative report in this
regard.

Owing to time constraints, I shall only read
salient portions of my statement, the full text of which
will be circulated to the Security Council.

The Philippines' commitment to the protection of
children affected by armed conflict was particularly
demonstrated when its Government facilitated the visit
to the Philippines from 7 to 13 December 2008 of
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. During that visit, she held dialogues with key
officials from the Office of the President and relevant
departments and offices of the Government. She also
met with local Government officials, civil society
actors and some women and children affected by armed
conflict. In the course of these meetings, she saw the
embodiment of our national comprehensive programme
on children involved in armed conflict. I would like to
highlight that, in order to drive the implementation of
the programme, the Government continues to mobilize
an inter-agency committee on children involved in
armed conflict to work closely with the Commission on
the Welfare of Children in overseeing actions to ensure
the effective and efficient implementation of our
national programme and to monitor the Philippines'
compliance with the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

Since Ms. Coomaraswamy's visit, our enhanced
action has, first, increased awareness and capacity-
training on children and armed conflict at the national
and provincial levels, including institutionalizing this
response in the training modules on national disaster
and emergency management; secondly, developed
rapid child-focused strategies within the various

concerned Government agencies to assess, formulate
and undertake action on the situation of children
affected by armed conflict; and thirdly, expedited the
submission of the report of the Philippines on the
Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children and armed
conflict. Furthermore, in September 2009, the
Philippines will be ready to report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child on its compliance with the
Convention.

As an extraordinary measure, Ms. Coomaraswamy
had an opportunity to meet with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front (MILF) to discuss concerns about the
presence of children within the ranks of that rebel
group. Allow me to reiterate the position of the
Philippines that engaging non-State armed groups,
including for the purpose of securing the protection of
children, should be approached in a most careful
manner. Since the situation of children in armed
conflict arises against a complex background, any
strategy to protect children in this case should be in
harmony with the larger peace processes that the
Government has launched with non-State groups in the
country and in full coordination with the Philippine
Government.

In fact, we already include specific provisions on
children's protection in all peace negotiations, peace
agreements and ceasefires. The protection of children
has been mainstreamed into the peace process with the
Communist Party of the Philippines-New Peoples'
Army-National Democratic Front through the signing
of the Comprehensive Agreement on Respect for
Human Rights and International Humanitarian Law.
The Tripoli Agreement of 2001 between the Philippine
Government and MILF provides a basis for expanding
the protection regime for children affected by conflict.

We wish to recall what we stated in our
intervention at the open debate of the Security Council
on this agenda item on 17 July 2008. The Philippine
Constitution enshrines the promotion and protection of
the rights of children. The Philippines also maintains a
vast arsenal of statutes on the promotion and protection
of the rights of children, the most relevant of which is
Republic Act No. 7610, providing for stronger
deterrence of and special protection against child
abuse, exploitation and discrimination. The Act
prohibits the use of children in armed combat, protects
them from armed conflicts, establishes children as
zones of peace, and provides for the evacuation of
children during armed conflict. The Philippines is a
State party to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children and armed conflict.

The Security Council may recall that its Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict has
commended the Philippines for the high standard of its
legal framework and policies for the welfare and
protection of children. I am pleased to report that the
Philippine Government has started the process of
amending the act I just mentioned for the purpose of,
inter alia, effectively operationalizing the concept of
children as zones of peace and ensuring provisions for
the non-criminal treatment and non-judicial
rehabilitation of affected children, as recommended by
Ms. Coomaraswamy. The Working Group has also
lauded the Philippines for its cooperation with the
United Nations regarding the appropriate establishment
of a monitoring and reporting mechanism in the
Philippines. Indeed, the collaborative work between
my Government and the United Nations has begun
positively, and I would like to assure the Council of my
Government's commitment to continuing this
cooperation.

I would like to briefly address some specific
matters addressed in the section of the Secretary-
General's report affecting the Philippines.

I cannot overemphasize the commitment of the
Government of the Philippines to ensuring that
children's rights are protected, including in the context
of armed conflict. Therefore, any allegation against our
armed forces is viewed with the highest degree of
concern and seriousness. My Government assures the
Security Council that all its mechanisms for
investigation and military justice are fully in place to
deal, as appropriate, with such cases.

With reference to paragraphs 122, 124 and 126,
the armed forces of the Philippines are conducting a
review of their procedures with a view to improving
and reporting on and the handling, treatment and
turnover of affected children; ensuring that directives
to field commanders concerning child protection
sensitivity and measures are carried out in their
operations; and strengthening their links with our
social development agencies to ensure the effective
rehabilitation of these children. Also, to enhance
accountability and facilitate coordination, both the
military and the police have human rights offices that
function as the focal points for dialogue with the
United Nations country team on these issues.

As regards paragraph 125, the military has just
re-emphasized in their directives the importance of
respecting schools and ensuring that they remain safe
for children. With reference to paragraph 127, it would
be helpful if clarification could be provided in regard
to the need to bring release and reintegration measures
in line with good practices. To briefly describe our
procedures in this area, as a matter of priority, our
social workers trace the affected children's parents and
relatives, who are given psychosocial and even
livelihood support for the effective reintegration of
their children. In cases where this is not possible,
suitable adoption measures, as appropriate, are
considered.

I believe that it is our common wish to eventually
clear the lists of offending parties. The Security
Council may wish to assess the level of commitment,
the extent of mechanisms, efforts and progress in
implementation, and the outcomes on the ground as
indicators for the de-listing of parties. As the
Philippines remains focused on these goals, the
Council may consider a stronger focus on the
encouragement and inspiration that de-listing can bring
to sustaining the efforts to protect children in armed
conflict.

Indeed, what the Philippines has accomplished so
far in the area of children and armed conflict, and its
excellent cooperation with the United Nations, now
justify dropping it from the countries that are listed in
annex II in accordance with Council resolution 1612
(2005). Justice demands, and due process supports,
such de-listing. Not to do that may perpetuate a double
standard of justice vis-a-vis other areas of more serious
concerns in many places in this suffering world.

