The President: I think that the representative of
Singapore raised some very interesting points.

Very quickly, because the Secretary-General has
to go to another appointment, let me mention two
things.

First, as Minister Lee pointed out, Ambassador
Wang Yingfan has already included, an open briefing
on Burundi in his draft programme, so that question
will be taken up. Bangladesh is also working on an
Arria-formula meeting to bring in other non-State
actors involved in Burundi to be heard by Council
members.

Secondly, on the Working Group on
Documentation, if the Council wants to have a second
meeting, it has to bring back Bangladesh as the
President again, because the last time such a meeting
took place was in March 2000, during our presidency,
and that was the second time in two years. As the
representative of Singapore said, it is inexplicable, but
we need to pull ourselves together and have that
Working Group meet.

I think that we can have the briefing suggested by
Ambassador Valdivieso tomorrow. I think that
tomorrow is an available day on Bangladesh's calendar.

In any case, before the Secretary-General leaves,
let me take this opportunity to say that today happens
to be the last working day for one of our dear
colleagues, Ambassador Anund Neewoor, Permanent
Representative of Mauritius, who will soon return to
Mauritius after completing his tour of duty in New
York as his country's Permanent Representative. It is
also with great pleasure that I recognize the gracious
presence of Mrs. Neewoor among us today, and we
convey to her our greetings.

I should like to recall Ambassador Neewoor's
excellent work and his contribution to the work of the
Security Council as the Permanent Representative of
Mauritius over the last six months. First, getting
elected to the Council was a difficult job, and then,
after getting elected, to settle down and to make a very
positive and substantive contribution is a tall order. He
has made his country, Mauritius, and all of us proud.

On behalf of the members of the Council and on
my own behalf, I wish him and his family all the best
in their future endeavours.

Perhaps Ambassador Neewoor would like to
make some comments?

