Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): First of all, allow me, on
behalf of the delegation of Ukraine, to welcome the
Minister for External Relations of Angola, Mr. Joao
Bernardo de Miranda, and the British Minister of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Mr. Peter Hain.

I would like to start my comments on the
outstanding presentation by Ambassador Fowler with one
recollection, which, in my view, will be very relevant in
the context of today's meeting. Approximately a year ago,
the Security Council received a report from the
Secretary-General, on the basis of which it decided to
terminate the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola.
Undoubtedly, the resumption of war in Angola and the
United Nations retreat from that country was an outright
failure - one of the biggest failures of this world body
in recent years.

Today the Security Council has received another
report, which provides undeniable evidence that the
United Nations is coming back to Angola willing to make
a tangible contribution towards restoring peace and
security in that part of the world. Ukraine is strongly
convinced that decreasing UNITA's ability to wage war
by strengthening the effectiveness of the measures
imposed by the Security Council against it is a
fundamental prerequisite to achieving the ultimate goal of
putting a stop to the long-lasting suffering of the Angolan
people.

I would like to express my delegation's appreciation
to all of the members of the Panel of Experts, whose
studious efforts have resulted in the very important
document just presented to the Council. The leadership of
Ambassador Fowler in that endeavour has been of
particular significance and should receive the Council's
distinct acknowledgement.
As to our reaction to the substance of the report's
findings and recommendations, for understandable reasons
my delegation's comments today will be only initial and
certainly not comprehensive.

First of all, I would like to focus special attention on
one particular point, which bears direct relation to my
country. It is known that during the last twelve months,
Ukraine has been the object of unsubstantiated allegations
in some media implicating her in the violation of

 

sanctions imposed by the Security Council against UNITA.
Very unfortunately, some of our friends, primarily in Africa
but also in some European countries, were about to believe
the truthfulness of those reports without their credible
corroboration.

As a staunch and proven supporter of the Charter of
the United Nations and decisions of the Security Council,
Ukraine was seriously concerned by the emergence of such
erroneous presumptions. My Government has not only
denied these allegations as absolutely groundless but has
also provided reliable evidence that Ukraine was fully in
compliance with international law and norms relating to the
enforcement of sanctions against UNITA.

Today these assurances of the Government of Ukraine
are impressively confirmed by the relevant findings of the
Panel of Experts. With your permission, Mr. President, I
would like to quote the most important pertinent
conclusions from the report:

"The Panel's investigation turned up no evidence that
the Government of Ukraine sold arms or otherwise
provided military assistance directly or indirectly to
UNITA." (para. 40)

Furthermore, as it is stated in another conclusion of
the report:

"The Panel found no evidence to suggest that Ukraine
was directly or indirectly involved in the training of
UNITA personnel." (para. 45)

It has always been inconceivable that Ukraine could
ever be involved in direct or indirect support of
antigovernmental forces or in violation of Security
Council's sanctions regimes. The Government of Ukraine
is very grateful to the Panel of Experts for dispelling any
doubt in that respect.

Ukraine will take active participation in further
consideration by the Council of the report's
recommendations. I would limit my present comments to
only one of them, recommendation 6, found in paragraph
57, which is based on the earlier proposal by Ukraine to
convene an international experts' meeting of major
arms-producing countries with a view to elaborating
effective measures to prevent the reselling of arms from the
end users to third parties.

We understand the reasons why the report advances
the idea of bringing together Eastern European arms
suppliers. However, we strongly believe that the task of
stemming the illicit flow of arms into Angola has to be
addressed by all major arms producers and suppliers
rather than be tackled only by a group of Eastern
European countries. Ukraine will strongly advocate
expeditious, but also well-considered, further action by
the Security Council in response to the recommendations
of the report. Unquestionably, these recommendations
have to be studied thoroughly. At the same time, we
believe it is important to start the relevant work without
delay, and we are looking forward to Canada's leadership
in that endeavour.

We also feel that it is absolutely important to hear
the views on the report of the wider membership of the
United Nations and to take them duly into account before
initiating the Council's drafting work on its further
decision. This is why, Mr. President, we would encourage
you to resume this discussion as soon as you deem
practicable in order to allow those not members of the
Council to air their opinions on the matter.

