The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of June, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Njuguna M. Mahugu, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Kenya to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security Council
for the month of May 1998. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mahugu for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite Mr. Dabor to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

It was so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations. Members of the Council have
before them document S/ 1998/466, which contains the
text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of the
Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:

Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1171 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.

