Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir
Tanin, for his briefing and his presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/911).

I also thank First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic',
and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements, and the
Italian presidency for convening this open meeting.

Uruguay advocates for the respect of the principle
of sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, as
well as for compliance with resolution 1244 (1999). In
the same vein, it advocates for political dialogue and
constructive approaches that can lead to solutions that
promote progress and stability in the region. As my
delegation has indicated on previous occasions, I would
like to point out that, as a country that has traditionally
championed diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of
disputes, Uruguay considers the European Union (EU)-
facilitated dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
essential. In that regard, we express our full support for
that process.

With regard to the events of the past several
months, we urge the political leaders to promptly
resume the Belgrade-Pristina political dialogue and
compliance with the agreements already reached.
The dialogue's hiatus and delays in implementing
international agreements are a source of tensions
and distrust between the neighbouring countries.
Moving forward the commitments already made will
contribute to achieving stability at the international
and national levels, and improving the living conditions
and development of individuals so that they can reach
their full potential. We firmly believe in the path that
leads to reconciliation, and we way we must continue
working in that direction. The renewal of the dialogue
would be laudable.

I would like to dwell on several aspects related to
human rights that we believe are essential to achieving
reconciliation among the various communities
living in Kosovar territory, namely, the protection of
cultural property, mutual respect for the communities'
differences and setting up conditions that will allow for
the return of internally displaced persons.

Respect for the culture and religious beliefs
of each community, as well as policies aimed at
protecting minorities, are fundamental for achieving
reconciliation and peaceful coexistence, and will
contribute to the return of internally displaced persons
who, according to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, numbered 16,418
as of September. Addressing the issue of internally
displaced persons will be necessary so as to achieve
post-conflict reconciliation. We appreciate the round
table held in Geneva in August as a follow-up to the
issue of missing persons. Progress must be made in that
area as time and the age of those involved are working
against achieving an outcome. The families of missing
persons have the right to the truth and justice. It is an
urgent and basic matter of humanitarian law.

Respect for each community, its culture and
religious beliefs, as well as policies aimed at protecting
minorities, are essential to consolidating peace. Truth,
justice, reconciliation, security, equal rights, guarantees
and inclusive processes constitute the foundation for
sustainable peace. We appreciate the work that UNMIK
is carrying out on the ground, the European Union as
a facilitator of the dialogue, and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe as a cooperating
partner, and acknowledge the work of all the relevant
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

