The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Japan.

I should like to begin my statement by commending
the report of the Secretary-General on Africa for the
comprehensiveness of its coverage, for the incisiveness of
its analysis and for the opportuneness of many of its
recommendations. Against the background of many
challenges that Africa faces today, it is incumbent upon
us in the United Nations to analyse the conceptual
framework of cooperative actions that are needed by the
international community in addressing these challenges,
cutting across the political and economic vista of Africa,
and to identify the role of the United Nations in our joint
endeavour to translate this conceptual framework into
concrete action.

In saying this, I wish to make clear that, for today,
I shall confine myself to those aspects of the Secretary-

 
General's report which fall properly within the purview of
the Security Council and leave the detailed treatment of
other equally important aspects of the report that would
more appropriately be considered within the framework of
other organs of the United Nations, while confirming my
conviction that, in executing our strategy for Africa, which
is afflicted with a complex of problems that are organically
linked, a holistic approach is absolutely essential.

In the brave new world of the post-cold-war era,
where we are witnessing challenges to peace and security
emerging at the intra-State level as much as at the
international level, and where military means cannot be the
only or even the predominant tool for maintaining peace
and security, we are bound to approach the issue of how to
maintain international peace and security in a much wider
context that would encompass political, economic, social
and even cultural factors. The proper execution of the role
of the Security Council, with its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security, can be fulfilled only
on this conceptual recognition. It was based on precisely
this line of thought that the presidential statement issued at
the ministerial-level meeting of the Security Council last
September called upon the Secretary-General to take a
comprehensive approach when preparing the report that is
now before us.

There is no question whatsoever that one of the most
urgent tasks that the international community faces on the
eve of its entry into the twenty-first century has to be the
problem of how best to respond to the situation in Africa,
where numerous conflicts have been afflicting the people of
that vast continent in an environment fraught with the
problems of economic and social development as well as
the issue of governance. I say this for the following
reasons.

First, the basic instability in much of the political
fabric of Africa, due largely to intra-State and regional
conflicts, can have a direct and serious bearing on
international peace and security.

Secondly, stagnation in the economic development of
Africa, if left unattended, will not only produce a crippling
effect upon the world economic system, but lead to a
situation in which social grievances and discontent on a
global level, emanating from the marginalization and further
alienation of this continent, could bring about serious social
instability on a global scale. By contrast, the full integration
of the African continent into the world economic system
through the participation of the peoples of Africa in the
expansion of global prosperity could have an enormously
beneficial effect on the world as a whole.
Thirdly, the value-based community of nations of
today simply should not and cannot close its eyes to the
political, economic and humanitarian realities of Africa,
where fellow human beings are suffering from the
miseries emanating from armed conflict, extreme poverty,
social injustice and lack of good governance. The
Secretary-General makes this point when he candidly
states in his report that

"by not averting these colossal human tragedies,
African leaders have failed the peoples of Africa; the
international community has failed them; the United
Nations has failed them". [5/1998/318, para. 5]

The strategic framework approach encompassing the
political, development and humanitarian fields, which the
Secretary-General proposes in his report, has Japan's full
support. In fact, that is exactly what Japan has been
consistently advocating as a centrepiece for a new
strategy for Africa ever since it embarked upon the first
Tokyo International Conference on African Development
(TICAD I) in 1993. For the last several years, since a
new opportunity surfaced for Africa as a result of the
demise of the East-West confrontation, Japan has been
emphasizing that, in coping with the African problem, the
political and military aspects of conflict prevention, socio-
economic development and the realization of a society in
which diversity in political values should be tolerated
must be pursued in an organically integrated manner. It is
incumbent upon the international community to promote
cooperation towards that end, based on this new and
common strategy.

In undertaking these efforts, Japan hopes to serve as
a catalyst for international cooperation on Africa, in
accordance with a unified strategy, with the United
Nations playing a central coordinating role. In so doing,
it wishes to emphasize the following three points.

First, in order to respond effectively to the situation
in Africa, the activities of the various bodies of the
United Nations, as well as the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and other regional and subregional
organizations in Africa engaged in pursuing the goals of
the prevention and early resolution of conflicts and of
post-conflict peace-building - together with the activities
of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) and the international community at large pursuing

 

development goals - should be integrally coordinated in a
mutually reinforcing and complementary manner and should
be closely interrelated on the basis of a unified
comprehensive strategy. The metaphor of a chamber
orchestra comes to mind, where each instrument has its
own very specific but essential part to play in order to
produce a single harmonious symphonic work.

Secondly, this comprehensive strategy should be based
upon the principle of responsibility-sharing among all
countries, in accordance with the concept of global
partnership. In this context, the most appropriate centre for
creating momentum for summoning the necessary political
will of the international community, including African
countries, on the basis of the concept of ownership, so that
the numerous actors might play their respective roles under
this common strategy, should be the United Nations.

Thirdly, for the implementation of this strategy, it will
be necessary to take an individualized pragmatic approach,
devising the most appropriate ways of dealing with the
particular circumstances of each conflict and responding to
each country's specific needs.

It is with those three aspects in mind that Japan has
been addressing the problem of conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa through such initiatives as the Tokyo
Conference on Preventive Strategy in January this year, on
the political front, and the problem of development through
such undertakings as the Second Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD II) in October
of this year, on the economic front.

Against this background, Japan believes that the
Secretary-General's report is most opportune in the context
of the serious and gigantic challenges that the international
community as a whole faces in relation to Africa. The fact
that the report has generated so much interest inside and
outside the United Nations is eloquent testimony to the
degree of awareness within the international community
about the urgent need for intensified international
cooperation on Africa at this moment. The issue now is
how to put this momentum into concrete action through
implementing these wise words of counsel contained in the
recommendations.

At this juncture, let me now touch only upon some of
the more salient recommendations contained in the report.

First, the problem of trade in arms has to be squarely
tackled by the international community if we are serious
about what we are saying in defence of peace and stability
in Africa. Indeed, the increasing inflow of arms into the
African continent is one of the main factors responsible
for the tragic situations in the region. Those who export
arms to Africa should feel a major responsibility for this
situation. Japan believes that we in the Security Council
should take this situation in all seriousness and seek
effective ways of monitoring the activities involved in the
export of small arms. Japan, as a country which strictly
maintains its Three Principles of Non-Export of Arms,
which effectively prohibit the export of arms anywhere,
is convinced that it is high time the international
community addressed this fundamental root cause of the
many tragedies affecting Africa or anywhere else in the
world torn by conflicts.

Second, in the same context, the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms, created at the initiative of
Japan in collaboration with the European Community in
1991, can more profitably be utilized in containing
potential as well as actual conflicts in Africa. Enhancing
transparency in the respective defence capabilities of
nations can be an important means of building confidence
among neighbouring countries and can be instrumental in
preventing undue diversion of precious resources for
excessive defence capabilities at the expense of socio-
economic development efforts. In View of this, I should
like to request that the Register be more fully
implemented throughout the world but more particularly
in relation to Africa. The idea of establishing
supplementary regional and subregional registers of
conventional arms, as the Secretary-General suggests, is
worthy of early implementation.

Third, in today's world where the use of force as an
enforcement measure is becoming increasingly difficult,
Japan considers that non-military sanctions can prove
useful provided that they are applied judiciously and in a
targeted manner. In applying a sanction, three major
factors will have to be kept closely in mind: its
appropriateness in relation to the desired objective, its
effectiveness in implementation on the part of
participating parties, and its impact upon the humanitarian
situation in the targeted country. Thus, it is the considered
View of Japan that the international community should
conduct a thorough study of these different aspects of the
sanction, so that the sanction can be a truly useful and
effective instrument for enforcing peace with justice upon
the party in breach of its sacred obligations under the
Charter. The recommendation of the Secretary-General on
this score contains interesting suggestions which merit our
serious consideration.

 

Fourth, on the humanitarian front, I should like to
emphasize that in considering humanitarian assistance to the
civilian population who are the victims of conflicts, it is
essential to take into account, from the very beginning and
in a long-term perspective, the requirement of post-conflict
peace-building efforts. Through all the stages of conflict
management, from the stage of conflict prevention to those
of peacemaking, peacekeeping, and post-conflict peace-
building, the whole process has to be looked at as a process
in continuum, and to be treated in an integral manner in our
consideration of conflict management in Africa.

Fifth, in the same vein, it is important to realize that
we have recently been witnessing an unfortunate trend in
which humanitarian activities are faced with serious
problems of security which critically hamper their activities.
In fact, they are often in need of support and protection by
military components of peacekeeping operations.
Increasingly, protection by the military components is
becoming necessary in order, for example, to ensure the
distribution of humanitarian relief supplies or to separate
the innocent civilian refugees from ex-combatants and
criminals in refugee camps. It is Japan's strong belief that
we in the Security Council must urgently focus much more
attention on this issue.

I have so far tried to pick out only a few of what my
delegation regards as the more important aspects of the
report of the Secretary-General. However, the report is so
rich in its contents, as well as in its implications, that to
draw concrete conclusions by way of policy
recommendations of the Security Council through an open
debate of a day or two will simply not suffice. In View of
this and in the light of the importance of this report, I
should like to suggest that a working group be established
in the Security Council to study in depth each and every
recommendation contained in the report and to devise a
plan of concrete action that might be taken by the Council.
The Council could oversee this process, reviewing the
progress made by the working group on a regular basis.
The outcome of this exercise could then be submitted to the
Security Council for consideration at a meeting convened
possibly at the ministerial level in September.

In concluding my statement today, I should like to
underscore the importance of mobilizing the political will
of all the participants in the process, whether in Africa or
on other continents, to address resolutely the myriads of
problems that the continent of Africa faces today. In fact,
it is almost trite to emphasize the critical importance of
political will. However, it is important to bear in mind that
it is so easy to speak of the importance of political will,
especially that of others but not of one's own. What is
needed now is a commitment on the part of each one of
us to mobilizing our own political will. As I have stated
earlier, Japan has been offering its share of contribution
to conflict prevention and development in Africa through
various means available to it. In fact, in the last five
years, we in Japan have been offering our sweat and toil
amounting to 5.4 billion dollars.

I wish to conclude my statement by offering the
pledge that the people of Japan will continue to work
with the people in Africa for the peace and development
of Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Zimbabwe. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.

