Ms. Shalev (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your stewardship
of the Council during the month of August.

Israel welcomes the adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1884 (2009) and the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) for another year. That peacekeeping
mission plays an important role in the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006). Israel commends UNIFIL on
the fulfilment of its mandate in a challenging and
difficult environment.

The situation in southern Lebanon remains
complex. The events of the past July shed light upon a
dangerous phenomenon about which Israel has been
warning. A terrorist organization, Hizbullah, continues
to deploy its assets and operates actively both north
and south of the Litani River in clear Violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The region has recently witnessed serious
incidents, in which multiple explosions occurred in
Khirbat Salim, in southern Lebanon, on 14 July. The
Secretary-General, in his letter of 6 August to the
President of the Security Council, duly noted that the
explosions were caused by "a large quantity of
09-49586
weapons and ammunition" in an arms cache that was
"actively maintained" (5/2009/407, pp. 1-2). As I
understand it, the same was reported by officials of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in
their briefings to the Council.

The Secretary-General further noted the presence
of individuals belonging to Hizbullah in the Vicinity of
Khirbat Salim. In his own words, the Secretary-
General wrote unequivocally that "This presence of
unauthorized assets or weapons between the Blue Line
and the Litani River constitutes a clear violation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006)" (Ibid., p. 2).
The following days witnessed further Violations of
resolution 1701 (2006), with the obstruction of the
freedom of movement of UNIFIL and breaches of the
Blue Line by Hizbullah and its supporters.

Those additional incidents are clear evidence of
the active presence of Hizbullah, a terrorist
organization, in southern Lebanon. This, along with the
ongoing supply of arms across the penetrable Syrian-
Lebanese border, constitutes an increasing threat to
peace and stability in the region.

In the light of the July incidents, the renewal of
the mandate of UNIFIL is an excellent opportunity for
the Security Council and DPKO to further encourage
UNIFIL to strengthen its good work. Such increased
efforts should help ensure that the area between the
Blue Line and the Litani River is "an area free of any
armed personnel, assets and weapons other than those
of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL"
(resolution 1701 (2006), para. 8).

In conclusion, I wish to extend Israel's
appreciation to the countries contributing troops to
UNIFIL; to the Force Commander, General Graziano;
to his officers and staff; and to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. They all play an important
role in an increasingly challenging and difficult
environment, and Israel commends their dedication.

Israel remains committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and looks
forward to cooperating with the Security Council, with
the Secretary-General, with DPKO and with UNIFIL in
that regard.

