Monsignor Kassas (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Venezuelan
presidency for bringing this issue to the attention of the
Security Council in an open debate.

As extremist ideologies grow within political
regimes, giving rise to terrorist groups and various
non-State actors, it is important that we look closely at
the thoughts and ideas of the founding members of the
United Nations as they were reeling from the devastation
of two world wars in less than half a century. Their
desire to save future generations from the scourge of
war speaks to a moral and ethical value to be highly
esteemed as one integral to human development.

When Pope Francis addressed the General
Assembly, on 25 September 2015, he spoke of the
means by which the hopes enshrined by the founding
Members in the Charter would be realized or frustrated.
He stated,

"When the Charter ofthe United Nations is respected
and implemented with transparency and sincerity
and without ulterior motives, as an obligatory
point of reference for justice and not as a tool for
concealing false intentions, peace can result. On
the other hand, when a standard is seen simply as
an instrument to be used when it produces the right
results and to be avoided when it does not, we open
a real Pandora's box of uncontrollable forces that
do serious harm to defenceless populations and to
our cultural and biological environments." (A/70/ PV.3, p. 5)

In his address to the General Assembly on 2 October
2015 (see A/70/PV.27), His Excellency Archbishop
Paul Gallagher, Secretary of Relations with States
of the Holy See, suggested four areas of reflection,
two of which are especially relevant to the work of
the Council, namely, the responsibility to protect
and respect for international law. What is needed, as
Archbishop Gallagher highlighted, is a genuine and
transparent application of Article 2 of the Charter of
the United Nations, which established the principle of
non-intervention, excluding all unilateral force against
another Member of the United Nations and demanding
full respect for lawfully constituted and recognized
Governments. Pacta sunt servanda was what he
said in that connection, and Article 2 of the Charter
has definitively banned concepts such as preventive
war under the pretext of a principle of security or
interventions on the part of third-party States in favour
of one side in a situation of civil conflict. Nevertheless,
he added that Article 2 cannot be used as a pretext
to excuse grave violations of human rights. Where
such violations persist, and if further intervention is
considered necessary, there is no other recourse than
to implement the measures set forth in Chapters VI and
VII of the Charter.

Hidden beneath the rhetoric against impunity for
war crimes against civilians and the difficulties of
providing humanitarian aid to those suffering is the
harsh reality that the industrial complexes of the world
are providing weapons and munitions, either for money
or, perhaps, as gifts to their clientele. The arms trade
must be suppressed. The proliferation of weapons has
resulted in an increase in deaths and injuries, leading
to waves of fleeing refugees, rather than to peace and
stability. The indiscriminate killing of civilians is a
heinous crime. As technological advances are applied
to weaponry, we may, in the view of my delegation,
know more about killing than we do about providing for
the living. Have the words of the Charter to save future
generations from the scourge of war been fulfilled?
Each one of us in the Chamber knows, at the bottom of
his or her heart, the answer to that question.

