The President (spoke in English): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom remains greatly concerned
by the ongoing violence and bloodshed in the Gaza
Strip and urges both sides to take the necessary steps to
put an end to this cycle of violence. The United
Kingdom condemns all acts of terrorism, including the
firing of Qassam rockets into Israel, which kill
innocent civilians.

The United Kingdom recognizes Israel's right to
defend itself against terrorism. Its response must,
however, be proportionate and conform to international
law. But the current action undertaken by the Israeli
defense forces is causing large numbers of civilian
deaths and injuries in Gaza. Moreover, this action is
not proportional to the threat Israel faces from rocket
attacks. Yesterday, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw called
on Israel to act with restraint, and on the Palestinian
Authority to fulfil its road map commitments on
security.

But the text on which we were called to vote
wrongly gave the impression that fault lies only on the
Israeli side. It is our View that the responsibility for
taking steps to end this violence lies with both sides. It
is for this reason that the United Kingdom abstained
today. The Security Council resolution should
acknowledge Israel's right to defend herself against
terrorism and make clear, too, that Israel is obliged
under international law to ensure that its actions are
proportionate to the threat. The resolution should also
have included a call on the Palestinian Authority to
take firm action against acts of terrorism and their
perpetrators.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
the United Kingdom's View that the solution to this
conflict lies in the Quartet's road map. We urge both
sides to take the steps necessary to return to the road
map, which constitutes the best way forward.

I resume my function as President of the Council.
The Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked for the
floor.

