Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Let me join you, Sir, in
welcoming the distinguished Member of the Liberian
Council of State to New York. We have no doubt that the
statement he has just made will enrich our appreciation of
the current situation in Liberia.

The delegation of Botswana had the opportunity to
express its views concerning the situation in Liberia on 25
January 1996, when the Security Council considered the
fifteenth progress report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) in
a formal meeting. The Security Council benefited
immensely from the views of the African delegations that
participated in that meeting, whose statements reflected
their deep concern and frustration at the slow pace in the
implementation of the Abuja peace Agreement. The
presence of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Liberian
National Transitional Government (LNTG) at that meeting
was very welcome.

We were encouraged to learn that the LNTG is
determined to pursue the cause of peace, and that it will not
allow the unfortunate events of 28 December 1995 to derail
the peace process. This position was reinforced by the
statements of the representatives of member States of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
that the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) will stay
the course in Liberia until durable peace is attained in that
country. This iron determination to succeed, even in the
face of adverse conditions, should encourage the
international community to assist ECOMOG in the
implementation of the peace Agreement, especially in the
areas of demobilization and reintegration of former
fighters into civilian life.

My delegation is grateful to Ambassador Albright of
the United States of America for the information she
shared with the Council, following her recent visit to
Liberia and other countries. We appreciate the frank and
direct manner in which she represented the concerns of
the United States to the LNTG and the people of Liberia
regarding the delays in the disengagement, disarmament
and demobilization of combatants. Botswana shares most
of these concerns, and it is our hope that the Liberian
political leaders and parties will make concerted efforts to
expedite the implementation of the peace Agreement. The
Security Council has repeatedly stated that the people of
Liberia, especially their leaders, bear the ultimate
responsibility for achieving peace and national
reconciliation. This means, inter alia, that the Liberian
factions should desist from reoccupying positions and
checkpoints which they had earlier abandoned in the
course of the implementation of the peace Agreement.
These unacceptable activities can only create distrust and
mutual suspicions among the Liberian leaders and parties,
which could have undesirable consequences for the peace
process. Furthermore, it is a matter of paramount
importance that the Liberian factions should urgently give
ECOMOG security guarantees to enable it to carry out
further deployments. We fully support ECOMOG's
decision not to continue with the deployments until the
security of their troops is guaranteed.

The peace process in Liberia is at the crossroads.
Liberian political leaders and parties must recognize that
free and fair elections can only be held in an atmosphere
in which peace and stability prevail and in which the
safety and security of one and all is assured, and that it is
up to them to create such conditions well in advance of
the elections. Operative paragraph 3 of the draft
resolution calls upon them to do so expeditiously. The
legislative and presidential elections must not be held in
an atmosphere in which the people of Liberia can be
threatened with dire consequences if they vote for a
particular party of their choice, nor should those who lose
at the ballot box have the infrastructure to resort to the
bullet box.

Botswana strongly believes that the people of
Liberia, like other peoples around the world, deserve to
live in peace. They have the right to bring up their
children in conditions of peace, to pass on to future
generations the values of being good citizens and

 

productive members of society. We share their hopes and
aspirations to be afforded a chance to concentrate their
efforts on the rehabilitation and reconstruction of their war-
torn country and economy. As we extend the mandate of
UNOMIL to 31 May 1996, it is our hope that considerable
progress will be made in the implementation of the peace
Agreement, and that the political leaders and parties in
Liberia will not squander this opportunity. There might not
be another one.

