Mr. Wright (United Kingdom): At the outset, I want
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I pay tribute to Spain and to your ambassador here in
New York for their excellent leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) over the last two years. Preventing nuclear,
chemical and biological materials falling into the hands
of non-State actors, especially terrorists, has never been
more relevant for international peace and security and
for this Council. Therefore, I welcome wholeheartedly
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2325 (2016)
signalling the strong support within this Chamber in
tackling that scourge.

Sadly, the nightmare scenario of terrorists using
these horrific weapons is no longer hypothetical. We
need only to look to the village of Marea in northern
Syria. As the sun set on 21 August last year, the
people of Marea thought they had survived a near
miss by artillery. By the morning, they were covered
in burns and blisters, bewildered and terrified. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism would
later determine that they had been shelled with sulphur
mustard gas.

As the people of Marea learned so tragically that
day, whether in Syria, Iraq or anywhere else, terrorists
like Da'esh will use such weapons to horrific effect,
given the opportunity. Sadly, their use is not restricted to
terrorists; the Al-Assad regime has also used chemical
weapons to horrific effect, in violation of so many
international norms and conventions, and must be held
accountable. So worldwide, it is vital that we prevent
non-State actors from ever acquiring such materials in
the first place. That is what resolution 2325 (2016) is all
about. The resolution we have adopted today completes
a comprehensive review of the tools we have at our
disposal to fulfil this important duty.

It is more than 12 years since the Security Council
acted unanimously under a Chapter VII mandate
to tackle these proliferation threats. That mandate
remains as strong and vital as ever, but by stepping
back and examining in detail global implementation
by States, we have been able to properly take stock of
progress. We can certainly celebrate the significant
advances that have been made. States have enacted
new laws, introduced stronger export controls and
improved the security of dangerous materials. More
States than ever have reported on the steps they have
taken under resolution 1540 (2004). However, we must
also recognize that there is still a long way to go to
secure the full implementation of that resolution. States
have taken less than half of all possible measures. The
gaps are much wider in some areas than others, and we
welcome the statement in the report that calls on States
to take urgent action to adopt measures to account for
and secure materials related to biological weapons.

It is imperative that the resolution be implemented
in full, but we should target our efforts where they
are most needed and will have greatest impact. The
resolution in front of us responds to that evidence and
offers a set of well-informed, strategic and targeted
new recommendations for States. This is the most
substantive review of 1540 undertaken by this Council
since 2004. It offers a guideline that will serve us well
until the next review in 2021. I would like to highlight
four key areas in particular.

First, the resolution calls upon States to take
into account the evolving nature of proliferation
risks and advances in science and technology. We
need to future-proof this resolution by staying aware
of the real-world developments that could create
vulnerabilities in a State. That means making sure that
advances such as cyber, 3-D printing and drones are not
exploited for malicious purposes.

Secondly, this text also offers meaningful guidance
on challenges to implementation. For the first time, it
highlights specific implementation areas in need of
work, such as enforcement, prohibitions, proliferation
finance and intangible technology transfers. We have
also broken new ground for the Council by calling
on States to adopt effective national control lists for
sensitive materials, which is a vital step in an effective
non-proliferation regime.

Thirdly, the resolution also strengthens cooperation
and information-sharing between the wide range of
international organizations that are working to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. I
would commend in particular the open-door offer
to civil society, including academia and industry to
share their insights with the United Nations experts
responsible for monitoring this regime.

Finally, the resolution requests the 1540 Committee
to review the efficiency and effectiveness of the special
political mission that supports its work. We should take
this opportunity to ensure that the support structures at
the United Nations have the expertise and capabilities
they need to support States in their implementation
efforts. We look forward to a report on that in 2017.

I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom's
strong support for the full and universal implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). We owe it to the people of
Marea and to so many other victims of such terrible
weapons that we succeed in our efforts. The review
process in 2016 and the resolution that we have just
adopted take us closer to achieving that Vital goal.
The United Kingdom looks forward to working with
the whole United Nations membership, international
organizations, civil society and industry to make that
a reality.

