Mrs. May (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate.
There is no greater threat to international peace and
security than the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. These issues matter to every man, woman
and child around the globe, and United Kingdom, like
the other permanent members of the Security Council,
has a special responsibility to protect the significant
gains that we have made in the past 70 years - because
the international community has invested a huge
amount of energy into containing the horrific forces
that emerged in the twentieth century. The multilateral
framework of treaties to counter the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is one of the greatest
achievements of the international community, thereby
demonstrating the value of global cooperation. It has
improved all of our security. It has brought about a
measure ofpredictability and stability. And it has paved
the way to arms control agreements and disarmament.

When many of us around this table were born, it
was feared that dozens of nuclear-weapon States might
emerge. Instead, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons has seen a remarkable near-
30 States abandon their pursuit of nuclear weapons.
Global stockpiles have been reduced by almost 80 per
cent since their Cold war peak. That is true success on
a truly global scale. Similar if not greater success has
been achieved with regard to chemical and biological
weapons. More than 96 per cent of declared stockpiles
of chemical weapons have been destroyed under
international verification, and no country professes
publicly to possess biological weapons. But the past 18
months have seen those hard-won gains challenged. We
have seen chemical weapons used in Syria, Malaysia
and the United Kingdom. The conventions governing
our nuclear compact are being picked at. Predictability
and stability are declining. If we do not increase our
collective efforts to preserve and build on what we have,
there is a very real risk that those gains will subside or
fall away.

The 1970 Non-Proliferation Treaty is rightly
perceived as the flagship of the international community's
determination against nuclear proliferation. Supporting
it requires leadership, which your Administration
and you personally, Mr. President, are demonstrating
with regard to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea - the world's most pressing nuclear threat.
In meeting Kim Jong Un, you have created a historic
opportunity for complete, verifiable and irreversible
denuclearization. Consensus from the Council to
impose sanctions on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea played no small part, but we will not continue
meaningful progress towards peace on the Korean
peninsula without sustained pressure. Sanctions must
be strictly enforced by all, including the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's neighbours. We must
remain vigilant.

Ensuring non-proliferation also requires collective
leadership of the type that led to the 2015 agreement of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) - the
Iran nuclear deal. For many years, the scale and nature
of Iran's nuclear programme raised serious international
concerns. The JCPOA was an important step forward
in addressing them. It remains the best means of
preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon, and
we are committed to preserving the JCPOA, as long as
Iran continues to abide by its obligations in full. Iran
must ensure that it implements its obligations fully,
and, in order to monitor Iran's compliance, we strongly
support the International Atomic Energy Agency using
inspections and other monitoring provisions of the
JCPOA to their full extent.

Other aspects of Iran's policies, in particular its
destabilizing regional behaviour and sustained efforts
to enhance its ballistic-missile capability, continue to
cause serious concerns. The international community
and, where appropriate, the Security Council need to be
ready to address that. Iran's proliferation and transfer of
missile and sophisticated military technology to groups
like Hizbullah in Lebanon or - as the United Nations
Panel of Experts concluded - to the Houthis Yemen
are also not in compliance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. It risks a dangerous escalation.
We therefore need to see further decisive action in
the Council to tackle both the transit and proliferation
of those technologies and increase the costs for
those responsible. It is regrettable that Russia continues
to prevent the Council from upholding its responsibility
to stop that destabilizing activity.

Nowhere are the grim consequences of the erosion
of global norms on weapons of mass destruction more
apparent than in Syria, where the United Nations has
concluded that Al-Assad's regime has repeatedly use
chemical weapons, a direct assault on a near century-
old ban vital to our collective peace and security. Yet
Russia has repeatedly wielded its veto to prevent the
Security Council from holding the Al-Assad regime
to account even shutting down the international body
established to investigate the use of chemical weapons
in Syria.

I therefore welcome the decision of 150 countries in
June, the largest gathering in its history, to empower the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to attribute responsibility for chemical-weapon attacks
in Syria and to put in place arrangements for attribution
for any country that requests it. I would like to thank
President Trump and President Macron for their shared
determination, with the United Kingdom, to deter the
use of chemical weapons in Syria through the joint
military action in April by the United States, United
Kingdom and France. Those actions sent a clear message
to the Al-Assad regime, that is, that perpetrators of the
use of chemical weapons cannot escape identification
or act with impunity. The regime's backers must use
their influence to ensure chemical weapons are not
used again - for there must be no doubt that we will
respond swiftly and appropriately if they are.

The United Kingdom saw the consequences of
those norms being eroded in Salisbury this year when
Russia recklessly deployed a nerve agent on the streets.
The United Kingdom has presented detailed evidence,
clearly laid out in charges of attempted murder and the
use and possession of a chemical weapon against two
agents of the Russian State. We have taken appropriate
action with our allies, and we will continue to take
the necessary steps to ensure our collective security.
Russia has sought only to obfuscate through desperate
fabrication. Permanent Members of the Security
Council must not attack and undermine the international
non-proliferation regimes and the institutions that
underpin them. All members of the council must fulfil
their responsibilities to safeguard them in support of
international peace and security. It is my sincere hope
that Russia will rejoin the international consensus
against the use of chemical weapons and the collective
efforts to uphold it. If so, the Council will again be able
to work together to rid the world of chemical weapons,
but if not, we should leave no one in any doubt of the
international community's determination to uphold
international non-proliferation regimes.

Not all the challenges faced by the counter-
proliferation framework come before the Council, but
they are no less urgent. We need to strengthen the rules
to keep pace with new technologies and more complex
global supply chains. We must hold every United Nations
Member to develop its capabilities and regulations and
ensure they are able to make their contribution to that
global effort. The quiet, but essential, role the United
Nations plays must be at the heart of those efforts. As
United Nations Members, therefore, we should invest
the expertise and necessary diplomatic resources in
the conventions.

It was collective engagement by States across
the globe that produced the counter-proliferation
framework. Even the most powerful recognized that
investing in collective rules-based restraint was the
only effective way of addressing national security
interests and avoiding unilateral recourse to force. We
cannot let that framework be undermined today by
those who reject the values and disregard the rules that
have kept us safe. It will take collective engagement to
reinforce it in the face of today's challenges. And in
that, as always been the case, the United Kingdom will
play a leading role.

