Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): We welcome Prime
Minister Aleksandar Vueic' of Serbia and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo to the Security
Council and we thank them for their statements. We
also thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for his briefing.

Every three months over the past two years, Council
members invariably note the positive developments in
the region and the irreversible changes taking place
on the ground. We commend the Kosovo authorities
on the agreement on the coalition Government, which
we hope will be formed swiftly. We believe that a
new Government will continue building a democratic,
peaceful, economically successful and multi-ethnic
Kosovo. We look forward to the new Government
continuing along the path of reforms and the process
of normalization of relations with Belgrade. The
Government will have to focus on the rule of law, the
fight against corruption and organized crime as well
as on the comprehensive reforms required for further
progress along the State's Euro-Atlantic path. Regional
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations are an
essential part of Kosovo's process of moving towards
the European Union (EU). We gladly note the inclusion
of Kosovo in various forms of regional cooperation,
and we look forward to the next informal regional
conference ofMinisters for Foreign Affairs and Finance
to be organized in Pristina.

Serbia and Kosovo need to move ahead with the
implementation of the 19 April 2013 Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations,
while building trust among the communities. We
note the progress achieved on integrated border
management, telecommunications and energy through
the EU-facilitated dialogue. We encourage the
resumption of high-level talks as soon as possible. We
also welcome the Mitrovica-Pristina cooperation in the
preparations for municipal elections. We encourage
resolving differences through dialogue, including over
construction in the ethnically mixed areas of Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani, North Mitrovica.

Ensuring justice is essential for reconciliation.
In that regard, we welcome the meeting of the
inter-ministerial working group on dealing with the
past and on reconciliation, the first one in almost
10 months, as well as steps taken towards the adoption
of a comprehensive strategy on transitional justice.

We commend Serbian, European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and Kosovar experts
on the professional completion of the repatriation of
remains recovered in the mass grave in Rudnica. We
call on the parties to expedite the process of enabling
the specialist court to look into cases stemming from
the work of the EU Special Investigative Task Force in
2015.

We commend the efforts of Kosovo police and
security institutions in fighting terrorism through a
series of anti-terrorist operations, as well as legislative
measures against foreign terrorist fighters.

The situation in Kosovo remains calm, and we
commend the cooperation among the Kosovo police,
EULEX and the Kosovo Force, including in managing
incidents and launching measures to counter illegal
logging. However, my delegation would like to recall
that a year ago a Lithuanian officer serving in EULEX
was killed while on duty in northern Kosovo. We call
on the respective authorities to find the perpetrators
and bring them to justice.

We continue to support the successful implementation
of the EULEX mandate and the mission's impartial
assistance to Kosovo in the consolidation of a
sustainable and accountable rule-of-law sector. The
recent allegations of corruption against EULEX staff
members must be looked into immediately. We welcome
the decision by EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini to appoint an independent legal expert in
that regard.

Finally, having noted the progress on the
implementation of the Belgrade-Pristina Agreement
and on resolution 1244 (1999), Lithuania once again
calls on the Council to review the current reporting
and debating cycles of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) with a
View towards reducing their frequency in 2015, as well
as to consider a drawdown of UNMIK that reflects
developments on the ground.

