Canada welcomes the opportunity to contribute to this open debate on youth, peace and security. We strongly support the inclusion of this issue as a standing item on the Security Council's agenda. We welcome the Secretary-General's first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167), his leadership in engaging young people in global governance and the call to action that he issued at today's meeting. All of us were once young people and, hopefully, we can remember the challenges we experienced in terms of access, agency, inclusion and accountability. The evidence is irrefutable. As noted in the 2018 reports entitled "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86) and the Pathways for Peace: inclusive approaches to preventing violent conflict, including the young and addressing their aspirations is critical to conflict prevention. Excluding young people from social, political and economic life deprives them of their human rights. Moreover, a lack of youth engagement leads to bad decisions and policies. The coronavirus disease pandemic is not just a health crisis; it is a human crisis that has cast into sharp relief the inequalities that existed in all our societies. It has disproportionately affected women, girls, young people and those already vulnerable. Heeding the Secretary-General's call to build back better from this crisis will require investment in the capacities and resilience of young people, strengthening their human rights and protecting the civic space that makes their participation possible. The inclusion of young people in decision-making is an issue Canada takes seriously. Last year, Canada launched a National Youth Policy after a broad set of consultations with thousands of young Canadians. The Policy commits the Government of Canada, starting in 2020 and every four years thereafter, to release a report highlighting the state of youth in Canada, covering six priorities, ranging from leadership, skills, health and employment to truth and reconciliation, and climate action. The Youth Policy is grounded in three principles directly relevant to the implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda. First, young people have the right to be heard and respected and to influence decisions that affect them now and will affect them in the future. Secondly, young people have the right to equal access to opportunities and support. Canada will apply principles of equality, including Gender-based Analysis Plus, when creating engagement opportunities and support for young people. Gender-based Analysis Plus assesses how diverse groups of people experience Government initiatives and considers many identity factors, such as sexual orientation, gender identity, race, ethnicity, religion, disability, education, income, culture, geography and age. We know that there are different outcomes depending on where in Canada you were born and we need to improve data so we can learn how to target such forms of exclusion through our policies. When young reach their full potential, it benefits all Canadians. Supporting young people and amplifying their voices will help build a stronger and more inclusive Canada. Treating young people as equal members of society helps strengthen social cohesion and build stronger communities. Building on these principles, we would like to make the following recommendations to strengthen our collective implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda. First, implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda should be grounded in a developmental and rights-based approach that treats youth as an investment in our collective future and not a threat to be managed. We should prioritize the creation of opportunities for political, economic and social inclusion of the young in all aspects of public life. That means understanding drivers of exclusion and targeting them through policies that promote equality and equity. Failure to invest in the capacities and resilience of young people can undermine trust in institutions and leave young people susceptible to recruitment by armed groups, violent extremists and gangs, and organized criminal groups. Moreover, societies where young people cannot reach their full potential will fall short of realizing the Sustainable Development Goals. This point is particularly critical in areas such as Africa, where the number of young people joining the working-age population will exceed that of the rest of the world combined by 2035. In order to harness this demographic dividend, the region will need to create 20 million jobs per year and ensure that African young people are given the education, skills and training needed to join the workforce. Secondly, we must hold ourselves accountable for encouraging, promoting and institutionalizing youth participation in conflict-prevention and sustaining peace. We encourage the Security Council to include youth and peace and security as a standing agenda item and support the preparation of an annual report by the Secretary-General on its implementation. We encourage the Council to regularly consult young people and include their perspectives and advice in Security Council decisions to promote the creation of safer environments for young peacebuilders around the world, ensure that Council mandates encourage greater inclusion of youth representatives in coalitions and partnerships that aim to support peacebuilding initiatives and processes, and focus on ways of empowering local peacebuilders. We encourage all Member States to adopt national action plans on youth and peace and security and to link implementation with action plans on women and peace and security. Thirdly, we must find concrete ways to support youth-led peacebuilding organizations and initiatives, both politically and financially. Lack of adequate funding for youth-led organizations and the challenge that such organizations face in meeting fiduciary requirements and accessing existing funding streams are major obstacles limiting opportunities for young people to contribute to building and sustaining peace. We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding Fund to support young people's contributions to peacebuilding, but more work is needed by all of us to find creative mechanisms to support youth-led organizations at the national and local levels. Finally, we believe that the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has an important role to play in supporting the implementation of this agenda. As Chair of the PBC for 2020, Canada is committed to ensuring that the PBC consistently and systematically consults young people on their peacebuilding priorities as part of our ongoing country-specific, regional and thematic work. In its advice to the Security Council and other United Nations bodies, as well as its engagement with regional and subregional organizations and international financial institutions, we will ensure that the PBC consistently advocates for the inclusion of youth perspectives and the creation of opportunities for youth participation in decision-making and peacebuilding processes. We look forward to working with PBC members as we develop an action plan to strengthen the PBC's implementation of the youth and peace and security agenda. It is fitting that today's debate is taking place on the anniversary of the adoption of the 2016 resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Engaging and empowering the participation of young people in peacebuilding is crucial to our overall success in preventing conflict and building and sustaining peace. Canada looks forward to working with all Member States to ensure that we collectively deliver on this important agenda.
