Archbishop Migliore (Holy See) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for inviting my delegation to
take part in this important debate.

(spoke in English)

My delegation expresses its appreciation for the
convening of this open debate with the goal of
addressing the necessity of general regulation and
reduction of armaments and armed forces with a view
towards strengthening international peace and security.

The dramatic consequences of the illicit global
arms trade call the international community to redouble
its commitment to create new control mechanisms.

With the recent adoption of a draft resolution entitled
"Towards an arms trade treaty" in the First Committee
of the General Assembly, which lays down the first
important step towards a legally binding instrument on
arms trade and transfers, this debate is not only timely
but vital to reinvigorating efforts in global arms
reduction. The Holy See fully supports and encourages
such an undertaking in this body and by the entire
international community, and stands ready to make its
contribution.

The initiative of the Security Council to address
the issue of the regulation and reduction of armaments
is interlinked with the continued worldwide problems
of security and is gaining momentum around the world.
Recently, during the general debate within the First
Committee of the General Assembly, we heard a
delegate from Africa say that for every African, there
are seven illicit bullets and three guns targeted at him
or her. This is scandalous, especially at a time when an
unacceptably high ratio of the world's population still
lives below the poverty line.

That is but one example among many. My
delegation shares the grave concern of conflict-ridden
countries, whose experience tells us that the illicit trade
in arms and their accumulation and illicit production
are a hindrance to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
turn tensions into armed conflicts and are a key factor
in prolonging them, thus heavily compromising peace
and development.

The lack of regulation and commitment to
reducing global arms supplies has created a world in
which weapons are more easily obtainable than food,
shelter and education. Clearly, by dedicating even a
portion of the $1.3 trillion spent on arms to
programmes designed to promote the full social,
economic and spiritual growth of people, we will not
only be creating a better and safer world, but also
promoting new respect for life and one another.

In that context, my delegation wishes to echo the
voices of hundreds of thousands in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo crying out for justice, peace,
security and the ability to simply live in dignity on
their own soil. The Holy See strongly condemns the
massacres being committed under the eyes of the
international community in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and calls for all efforts to stop that human
tragedy.

The entry into force on 5 May 2006 of the
Nairobi Protocol for the Prevention, Control and
Reduction of Small Arms and Light Weapons in the
Great Lakes Region and the Horn of Africa marked an
important step towards establishing universal standards
for protecting civilian populations in the Great Lakes
region, the Horn of Africa and bordering States. We
realize that the very States where massacres take place
these days have signed and ratified the Nairobi
Protocol. The Holy See urges all of them to expedite its
implementation.

In conclusion, my delegation fully agrees that
there is a need to develop a new security consensus
that will assist in achieving the internationally agreed
development goals, security and respect for human
rights. Greater efforts, political will, transparency,
flexibility and openness are needed. My delegation
shares the view that, in launching such a process, the
first and most important step is to ensure that States
abide by the treaties they have signed and ratified and
maintain collectively agreed levels of military
spending.

