Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the participation of Foreign Minister Trujillo
Garcia and thanks Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.

The peace process in Colombia is key to achieving
comprehensive peace and stability in the country. It
also affects regional security and development. The
Colombian Government is committed to promoting
the peace process and has made enormous efforts in
many areas, such as strengthening national institutions,
advancing comprehensive reforms and reintegrating
former combatants. China commends the significant
progress that has been made.

The full implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace is also facing multiple challenges. In his report
(S/2019/780), the Secretary-General indicates that the
security situation in certain parts of the country remains
precarious, with former combatants and social leaders
exposed to security threats. The full implementation of
the peace agreement is a long-term, systematic project,
involving many political, security, development and
social integration aspects. It faces complex challenges.

We hope that the Colombian Government and
the parties concerned will resolutely stay the course,
cherish the hard-won peace process, prioritize the
full implementation of the peace agreement, conduct
inclusive political dialogue, speed up socioeconomic
reconstruction, enhance mutual trust through dialogue
and promote peace through development.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia have significantly contributed
to promoting the peace process in the country, which
China commends. We hope that the Mission will work
on the basis of respect for Columbia's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, further
enhance communication among all the parties in the
country to create synergies and push for more results
from the peace process in Colombia. China stands ready
to work with other Council members and contribute
to promoting the peace process and achieving
comprehensive peace, stability and development in
Columbia as soon as possible.

