Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of this
meeting. We thank Mr. Lowcock, Major General Bakin
and Mr. Lillie for their valuable briefings.

Once again, we commend all humanitarian actors
who continue to provide essential and urgent assistance
in conditions of insecurity, including in areas highly
contaminated by explosive remnants and landmines.

The degree of vulnerability in the Syrian Arab
Republic is worrisome. Most of Syria's population is
already living in extreme poverty, with limited capacity
to endure further attacks and with acute humanitarian
needs. But the statistics, reports and figures do not
manage to reflect one iota of the suffering that these
people must feel as they leave everything behind in
order to save their lives and those of their loved ones.

We have already directly explained on several
occasions my country's position on the appalling
humanitarian situation in Syria. The solution to this
long-standing conflict is not military, but political.
Humanitarian action cannot replace the primary
responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
entire international community to protect the civilian
population from indiscriminate attacks, in accordance
with international humanitarian law. It is precisely now,
when for the first time in a long time there seems to be a
window of opportunity to advance the political process,
that the Council must assume its role and seize this
opportunity to redouble efforts to support this process
and defend it tooth and nail.

Understanding that the situation in Idlib directly
influences the stability of the political process, we
reiterate the need for the full implementation of the
Russian-Turkish memorandum of September 2018
and for all parties to the conflict to comply with
international humanitarian law and the obligation to
protection of civilians. We insist that attacks on civilian
infrastructure such as hospitals and schools, as well as
other civilian spaces, cease immediately. Such attacks
fundamentally disrupt the provision of basic services
such as education and health care, especially for
women, children, the elderly, people with disabilities
and young people.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight a few
points that, from our perspective, could contribute
to alleviating the suffering of so many millions of
people through flexible, comprehensive and needs-
based humanitarian assistance. In order to be able to
assess and respond to the growing needs of the affected
population, all parties exercising control on the ground
must facilitate safe, sustained and unhindered access
to the United Nations and its partners to all of Syria.
The parties must adhere to the rules of international
humanitarian law and refrain from attacks on the
civilian population and infrastructure. That includes
counter-terrorist offensives.

The lives of the 72,000 people living in Al-Hol
camp, the vast majority of whom are women and
children, remain at risk. Uncertainty with respect to
the future and lack of information about their relatives
have triggered rising tensions. It is therefore vital that
sustained humanitarian access be maintained and that
solutions be considered with respect to the thousands of
foreign citizens who are living in the annex to the camp.

The situation of those people remaining in Rukban
camp and awaiting humanitarian assistance continues
to be a source of concern for us, especially since we
heard that permission for the entry of a new convoy
had been denied. We therefore urge the authorities
to continue to work with the United Nations and its
partners in the quest forjoint solutions in order to help
those persons wishing to leave the camp and deliver
humanitarian assistance to those who remain.

