Mr. Brammertz: Thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to address the Council on our progress
towards the completion of our mandate.

A major goal was met in the past reporting period
with the commencement in October of the last trial in
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) , the Hadeie case. Goran HadZic' is accused
of some of the first crimes committed in 1991 in the
conflict in the former Yugoslavia. Extensive pre-trial
preparation and timely disclosures to the defence have
contributed to the expeditious conduct of the trial to
date. The Prosecution currently expects to conclude its
case in early summer 2013.

Important progress was also made in our three
other remaining trials. The trial against Ratko Mladic'
has progressed steadily since commencement of the
Prosecutor's evidence in chief in July. The Prosecution
has implemented strategies to present its evidence
efficiently so that, at its current rate, the prosecution
case will also conclude in July 2013.

The Karadeic' trial transitioned from the prosecution
case to the defence case during the reporting period.
At the conclusion of the prosecution case, the accused
asked the Trial Chamber to find he had no case to
answer. The Trial Chamber dismissed his motion on
all counts, with the exception of the count related to
genocide in municipalities throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 1992. Both parties' appeals against the
decision have now been fully briefed and are pending
adjudication by the Appeals Chamber.

The Stanisic' and Simatovic' trial will conclude by
the end of the year with the presentation of the parties'
closing arguments.

As all other trials concluded during the reporting
period, the Appeals Division is preparing for an
influx of appellate work. By the end of this year one
trial judgement will be issued, and a further three
judgements involving multiple accused are scheduled
for early 2013. During the reporting period, in addition
to its appellate work, the Appeals Division provided
substantial assistance to the Trial Division, which is
reducing in size as posts are progressively abolished.

Day-to-day cooperation provided by the States of
the former Yugoslavia to the Office of the Prosecutor
is still crucial for the successful completion of our
remaining trials and appeals. Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina continue to respond to our requests
for assistance in a timely manner, and they fully met
our expectations during the reporting period. During
my last trip to Serbia in October, the new Government
assured me that it will maintain the previous positive
level of cooperation.

Since our last report (S/2011/473), Serbia has also
intensified its efforts to investigate support networks
responsible for helping ICTY fugitives, including
Mladie and Hadzie, evade justice for so many years.

Cooperation between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will also soon take a positive step forward.
The legal barriers to the protocol on cooperation
between their Prosecutors' Offices on the exchange
of evidence and information in war crimes cases have
been removed, and Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
will sign the protocol in the near future. If effectively
implemented, it will offer practical solutions for
improving investigative capacity and strengthening
the professional interaction between the Prosecutors'
Offices. We welcome that recent development and
encourage the parties to sign the protocol without
further delay.

The success of the Tribunal will ultimately be
measured by the success of the transition from our
work to national war crimes prosecutions. Regrettably,
national authorities continue to face difficulties in
prosecuting war crimes cases, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In addition to the investigative materials
transferred by my Office, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a
backlog ofhundreds ofcases and no prospect ofmeeting
its 2015 and 2017 war crimes strategy deadlines. One of
the contributing problems is the limited capacity not
only of the State-level courts but also of the entity-level
courts that are increasingly taking over responsibility
for those cases. Comprehensive measures must be taken
to remedy the situation.

To assist in finding solutions, we have turned
greater attention to building capacity in the region to
prosecute war crimes cases. We continue to pursue our
long-standing strategies for channeling expertise to the
national authorities, including through our transition
team and the integration of liaison prosecutors in our
Office. We also continue to support the work of our
international partners, including the European Union,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme, to
train prosecutors in the region.
The commencement of the ICTY branch of the
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals on 1 July
2013 rapidly draws near. My Office increasingly turns
its attention to promoting a smooth transition to the
Mechanism, and with regard to human resources issues,
we very much support our colleague Prosecutor Jallow.

I do not want to conclude without mentioning
the recent judgements in the cases of Gotovina and
Markae, and Haradinaj, Balaj and Brahimaj, which
resulted in a number of reactions about the Tribunal's
capacity to promote justice in the former Yugoslavia.
While the underlying reasons for the acquittals in those
two cases are very different, there can be no doubt that
serious crimes were documented in the course of the
proceedings. The victims of those crimes have the right
to justice. Therefore, I encourage the national authorities
in the region to continue the fight against impunity
within their jurisdictions, including through increasing
regional cooperation. I assure those authorities that my
Office will provide support to achieve those goals.

