The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should
like to take the opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Richard Ryan, Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of October 2001. I am sure that I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Ryan for the great
diplomatic skills with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Liberia

Letter dated 26 October 2001 from the
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2001/1015)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Let me, on behalf of the Council, welcome
Mr. Monie R. Captan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Captan
(Liberia) took a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Ruyt

(Belgium), Mr. Fall (Guinea) and Mr. Matturi

(Sierra Leone) took the seats reservedfor them at

the side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Kishore Mahbubani, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1343 (2001), concerning Liberia.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahbubani to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edward Tsui,
Director, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Tsui to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on the agenda. Members of
the Council have before them document 8/2001/965,
which contains a report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 13 (b) of Security Council
resolution 1343 (2001) concerning Liberia.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2001/1015, which contains a letter dated
26 October 2001 from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1343 (2001) concerning Liberia, addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the
report of the Panel of Experts.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to the following documents:
S/2001/1035, containing a letter dated 31 October 2001
from Liberia, and S/2001/1043, containing a letter
dated 2 November 2001 from Singapore.

I give the floor to Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1343 (2001)
concerning Liberia.


