Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his comprehensive briefing. We
thank him for his great personal contribution to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as well as for his contribution to the
settlement of a number of acute crisis situations in the
Great Lakes region.
We believe that the Framework continues to serve
as a the cornerstone of regional stability. We note
progress in the implementation of that document,
in particular the launching of the Joint Follow-up
Mechanism for the repatriation of former combatants.
We call on all signatories to unconditionally uphold
all their obligations, including respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of others and the
strengthening of confidence-building measures. We are
convinced that the full implementation of the provisions
of the Framework will have a positive impact on the
overall situation in the region, which remains tense. In
that context, we supported the appointment of Mr. Huang
Xia, of the People's Republic of China, as the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, and hope that he will be able to continue
his productive cooperation with the leaders of the
countries of the region, accelerate the implementation
of the Framework and make a significant contribution
to normalizing the situation.

One of the major factors in ensuring security
in the Great Lakes region is the stabilization of
the situation in its largest country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Unfortunately, the successful
holding of elections has so far not resulted in any
perceptible strengthening of the country's stability or
improvement in its socioeconomic situation. Militants
from neighbouring countries, particularly from the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the
Lord's Resistance Army, have been taking advantage
of the overstretched army and police, which have
been busy at polling stations, to become more active
in the eastern regions of the country. The Congolese
army's operation, supported by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, against the Allied Democratic
Forces, which has been going on for several months
now, has had no tangible results either. Opposition from
illegal armed groups is complicating the ongoing fight
against the Ebola epidemic in two of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's eastern provinces. We hope
to see effective cooperation between the countries
of the region in preventing the virus from spreading
across their borders, and we are working on the issue of
supplying the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with a Russian-made vaccine against the disease.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region. However, we can point to some positive
developments in addressing the refugee problem, in
particular the gradual repatriation of Burundian refugees
from neighbouring countries that has begun thanks to
the stabilizing situation in their homeland. The first
reports of citizens of the Central African Republic and
South Sudan who had previously fled to the Great Lakes
region returning home are also grounds for optimism.
We welcome the measures being implemented within
the framework of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to harmonize national
strategies for repatriating and reintegrating refugees
and eradicating the underlying reasons for the problem.
These efforts are being implemented in the spirit of the
Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced
Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa proclaimed by the African
Union, and reflect the commitment of the countries of
the Great Lakes region to finding collective responses
to the challenges facing it.

We hope that the continuing differences between
the leaders of some countries of the Great Lakes region
will not affect their commitments to the principles
outlined in the Framework. We call on the States of
the region to set aside their differences and continue
to cooperate on the key issues that affect the stability
and security ofthe entire region. We believe that lasting
solutions to all these problems can be found only
independently, with support from the ICGLR and other
regional mechanisms, in accordance with the principle
of African solutions to African problems.

