Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
representative of the Republic of Korea often says that
I am wont to mention elements of philosophy, and, yes,
that is what I studied. I think that when we think about
Bosnia and Herzegovina it cannot be, as has sometimes
been done, a conditioned response - we set up a model
and automatically the machinery should work. We are
dealing with the human, with societies, with peace. I
say that with great respect because, in 1995, we saw
once again in various places that, when humankind
faces the horror of cruelty and death, hope also appears.

As the philosopher said, "hope is found in those
who cannot find comfort". Why do I bring that up? I
do so because sometimes it is very tedious to have to
listen to comments that consist of nothing more than
"six of one, half dozen of the other; this is good, that
is bad; that was signed; elections were held" - while
we forget how complicated it is to build societies, to be
willing to find peace and to resist the compulsion to set
up protectorates as we did in other periods in human
history. We must instead be amenable to contributing
so that each nation can create its own destiny.

Many colleagues have noted that steps have to
be taken in order to achieve full European Union
integration. Yes, undeniably, those steps must be taken
to achieve full inclusion in the international community,

based on trust. However, even that must be done
without imposition, but in accordance with the rhythm
of the various cultures and peoples involved. We know
that, as in other cases, we are dealing with inter-ethnic
and intercultural communities that are not the result of
nature, but of a freely made decision to agree to come
together. As Mr. Inzko stated, that requires unwavering
attention, patience and a long-term perspective.

I thank Mr. Inzko for his report (S/2013/263, annex). It is not always worthwhile dwelling on certain
considerations, but it is always worth recalling that
change cannot be imposed, but that it must be built,
particularly in the context of peace and integration.
In that regard, we view as encouraging news, as set
out in the report, that the new Council of Ministers
has held regular meetings since it was restructured in
November, and that a budget has been adopted for 2013.
We welcome those accomplishments, but they should be
routine. We welcome them as something extraordinary,
but they should be the norm if we are to have a State
with working institutions. Therefore, since that first
step has been taken, we hope that what is extraordinary
will become the norm.

We welcome the establishment of the Working
Group for Resolving State and Defence Property
Issues. Like others, we note that rather than regret that
the progress that began in 2011 is now slowing down,
according to what we read in the reports, and returning
to its negative tendencies of past years, we must seek to
understand the deep-rooted causes of that stalemate and
those difficulties. Rather than issuing new mandates,
we should contribute and make ourselves available to
ensure compliance with the Agreements that were so
freely signed in Dayton.

We welcome the smooth functioning of the
institutions of Republika Srpska, but we also reiterate
our willingness to understand and contribute to ensuring
that the open challenges launched by some leaders of
Republika to the bases of the Peace Agreement and the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
their verbal attacks on key State institutions, are not
repeated. How can we contribute to that objective?

Undeniably, rhetoric denying the Srebrenica
genocide, despite the rulings of the International Court
of Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, is particularly worrisome. Those of
us from countries that have experienced such situations
realize that the path of denial is that of impunity.
Therefore, we call on the leadership of Republika
Srpska to renew its commitment to the constitutional
order, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to international law and human
rights.

The political crisis that broke out in the
Federation - starting with the vote of no confidence
of the Social Democratic Party to rid the coalition
Government of the Party for Democratic Action and
the invocation of vital national interest - is now being
analysed by the Supreme Court. The Court must decide
whether or not a Vital national interest was affected.
We have all read the report, and I believe that this is a
clear example of Mr. Inzko's assertion that party and
personal interests seem to be placed above those of the
common good and society. When institutions work as
corporations on behalf of the vested interests of the
few, they cannot in any way help to build confidence or
lay the foundations for democracy and peace.

The results of the local elections in October 2012,
in particular the case of Srebrenica, represent good
news, even as the courts will deal with the challenges.
We know elections remain to be held, for example in
the city of Mostar, to elect local authorities. We hope
that those elections will be held. Free elections never
hurt; failure to hold elections hinders efforts to build
genuine respect for the Constitution, signed agreements
and social peace.

Finally, with regard to the implementation of the
decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the
Seja'ie-Finci case, we regret that the deadline of 11 April
established by the European Union for achieving an
agreement on the necessary constitutional amendments
was not observed. We call on the political leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to redouble its efforts to reach
such an agreement.

Argentina acknowledges the work done by the
Office of the High Representative in implementing
the civil aspects of the Dayton Agreement, as well as
its action to ensure that Government institutions can
fulfil the terms of the Peace Agreement and the State
Constitution. We believe that the presence of the Office
is necessary to contribute to a dialogue, which cannot
be ensured forever, but which we believe is always
necessary.

