Mr. Nikolov (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Mr. President, let me first congratulate
Guinea on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, at a time when very
important decisions are to be made.

As we review the recent developments regarding
the situation in Iraq, the international community is
faced with very complex decisions that relate not only
to the objective of disarming the Iraqi regime but also,
more importantly, to the future of the collective
security system of the United Nations, which is
founded on the unity of the Security Council. That is
why we appeal once again, as we already stated in the
Security Council open debate on this issue three weeks
ago, that Council members should seek the broadest
possible consensus for achieving the objective of the
immediate, full and unconditional disarmament of Iraq,
in accordance with Security Council resolution 1441
(2002).

From what we heard in the most recent reports
from Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, while there may have
been some important steps, the Iraqi regime is
continuing its delays and obstructions on substance in
the inspections of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
It is clear that Iraqi cooperation has been unwilling
with respect to the demands of the international
community. We have supported the international
community in exploring all options and opportunities
to resolve this issue in a peaceful manner. However, it
has now become clear that the threat remains and that
Iraq is in continuing material breach of Security
Council resolutions, including United Nations
resolution 1441 (2002), adopted unanimously in
November 2002.

That is why the Republic of Macedonia considers
that the Security Council must act in an even firmer
manner this time. The inspection process in Iraq cannot
go on indefinitely. Political pressure and the real threat
of the use of force have proven to be the right
mechanisms and have yielded results in the intensity of
cooperation of Saddam's regime and its respect for the
decisions of the Security Council. However, the
international community should not tolerate any more
deceit from the Iraqi regime. Although Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) represented the final
opportunity for disarmament and peace, Iraq has done
everything to prevent or avoid its implementation.

Therefore, my country considers that the draft
resolution submitted for the consideration of the
Security Council is an effective means to increase
pressure on Iraq to comply with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We support the
proposals contained therein for setting clear deadlines
and concrete disarmament demands that Iraq must
implement immediately, actively, fully and
unconditionally, or face serious consequences,
including the use of force, as a last resort, if it
continues to violate its obligations.

In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
to once again take the necessary and appropriate action
in response to Iraq's continuing threat to international
peace and security. In that context, my country would
like to reiterate its support for the actions of the
international community against this common danger.

