Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General and
the briefers for participating in today's meeting.

The issue of the protection of civilians has longbeen
inscribed in the Security Council's agenda. We believe
that it is justified for that issue to remain the focus
of the Council's attention. As the nature of conflict
changes, the issue of the provision of health care for
and protection of the sick and wounded is of particular
importance. In many hotspots today, hostilities occur in
densely populated areas whose inhabitants are heavily
dependent on the smooth functioning of the medical
infrastructure. The parties to the conflict, wherever it
is taking place, should take all necessary measures to
ensure the safety of civilians. That includes providing
humanitarian and medical assistance.

The work of the international community in should
seek to carry out humanitarian tasks, such as alleviating
the suffering of civilians. However, we do not believe
that it is right to disconnect the matter of medical
assistance from the general context of the protection
of civilians and efforts to settle conflicts. We highly
value the efforts of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) in lending assistance to civilians,
including through the provision of medication, the
training of staff, the provision of medical assistance and
the sharing of knowledge on the norms of international
humanitarian law. We believe that the proposals made
by the ICRC to review the best practices in that area
warrant additional study.

The need civilians have for medical assistance is
often used, contrary to the provisions of international
law, to achieve military and other advantages. Once
again, we must draw attention to the disastrous
situation regarding access to medical assistance in
eastern Ukraine. Indiscriminate attacks by the armed
forces of Ukraine have destroyed much civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals. For example, in
January, artillery fire hit hospitals and middle schools
in Makiivka. Over the past three years, as a result of
the blockade from Kyiv, civilians have been unable to
receive the necessary care and medication. The report
of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2017/414) highlights Kyiv's ban on
trade with the south-east of Ukraine, affecting, inter
alia, the provision of medical supplies to the area.

Our country, unlike the Ukrainian authorities, has
provided and continues to provide full-scale assistance,
including health care, to the citizens of the south-east,
whose lives and health are threatened daily by the
targeted action of the Ukrainian Government. Appeals
from international humanitarian workers and human
rights advocates, who often note that it is the most
vulnerable who suffer from the blockade, including
children, the elderly and persons with disabilities, have
not led to any results. We would like to address our
appeal to the delegation of Ukraine and call for Ukraine
to lift the inhumane restrictive measures that it has
imposed on its own people.

Elsewhere, humanitarian workers, including
medical personnel, have increasingly been the victims
of terrorist armed groups. We do not have to look very
far for examples, such as the attack by Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant fighters on the military hospital in
Afghanistan in February and on ICRC staff in March.
We should also recall tactics such as disguising fighters'
sheltmedical centres, the use of the wounded and the
sick as human shields, and the creation of obstacles
to the provision of humanitarian assistance, as well
as the forcible seizure of medications from civilians.
In eastern Aleppo, the issue of medical evacuation
was brazenly used as a bargaining chip by terrorists.
There has been grim information regarding attacks
by terrorists on medical workers, which underscores
the need for additional efforts by States, the United
Nations and humanitarian organizations to strengthen
mechanisms to ensure the safety of humanitarian staff.

At this stage, we believe that the legal frameworks
we have for dealing with the issues at hand are quite
sufficient. The focus should be on practical measures to
uphold the relevant principles and standards. Resolution
2286 (2016) provides States and parties to a conflict
with the necessary guidelines on the issue. Regarding
the set of health-care recommendations proposed by
the Secretary-General in 2016, we have already shared
our assessment on that matter. We believe that those
recommendations could provide a basis for future work,
but we should not, in our opinion, forget that they also
contain a number of contentious issues that go beyond
resolution 2286 (2016) and the norms of international
humanitarian law.

We have studied the recent report of the Secretary-
General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We support the intention to ensure the pooling of efforts
to prevent conflict and protect civilians. In our view,
such an approach should be based on international law
and should not impose any artificial hierarchies; it could
then lead to positive results. However, we would like to
warn against any arbitrary interpretation of the norms
of international humanitarian law and other documents.
We do not challenge the need for measures to ensure
that those responsible for the killing of civilians,
including medical staff, should be held to account. But
we do not share the rosy assessment of the activities
of the International Criminal Court with regard to the
so-called mechanism for conducting investigations in
Syria. As we have noted, the establishment of that
mechanism was a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The current skyrocketing level of confrontation
and politicization in international affairs has also had
an adverse impact on the matter of the protection of
humanitarian and medical personnel. Against the
backdrop of uncorroborated allegations against Russia,
the lack of response in 2016 to the strike on a Russian
mobile hospital that was lending assistance to Syrians
was a blatant example of double standards. As a result
of the strike, two nurses were killed and one doctor
seriously wounded. Those who only want to raise
anti-Russian hype were not interested in the information
on the overfilled stockpiles of medicines in eastern
Aleppo, which militants kept from the population
suffering from a lack of medications. Double standards
are visible in the information available on the military
campaigns in Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and other
countries and on the actions of the so-called coalition
in Syria. There is a so-called coalition in Syria. Civilian
infrastructure, including health facilities, have been
subject to strikes with frightening regularity, including
international armed forces. The umber of casualties
caused by such attacks amounts to hundreds, if not
thousands of killed.

For exampn February, as a result of a rocket strike on
Idlib, the ICRC mission, including medical equipment,
was damaged and personnel were injured. As a result
of strikes carried out by the international coalition on
17 and 30 April on a field hospital in Al-Tabka,Syria
in April, 14 civilians were killed. However, for many
years, those incidents have been ignored or have been
presented as unavoidable collateral damage. Given the
unprecedented abuse in the information sphere, the
reliability and credibility of data on the protection of
civilians, including attacks on medical staff, and the
weighing of all the factors and circumstances, are of
particular importance. A11 factors and circumstances
should be taken into account. We believe that the
relevant bodies of the United Nations should be guided
by the imperatives of thorough verification and unbiased
analysis of the information that comes to them. That
also pertains to the report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

In conclusion, we would like once again to express
our gratitude to all those who, even in harsh conditions,
provide medical care to civilian populations in zones
of armed conflicts, often at the cost of their own lives.

