Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, and we are
pleased to have you in the Chamber today. We are
grateful to Mr. Ghassan Salame for his briefing. We
very much hope that he can execute his difficult task of
helping to unify Libya and we sincerely wish him every
success. There is no alternative to that path if the aim
is to end the crisis as soon as possible and put a stop
the threats emanating from Libya, including terrorism.
The country's complicated situation is still
extremely worrying. The political fragmentation
continues, the authorities disagree with one another
and armed groups, some of them radicalized, control
large areas. Terrorists are hiding out in remote corners
and remain dangerous despite having suffered losses.
Various forms of criminal activity are flourishing, set
up by the criminal networks that have enmeshed the
entire Mediterranean region, and there is evidence that
the contraband activity may be reaching Europe. The
Libyan economy is clearly in dire straits and the social
sector is in bad shape. The situation of permanent chaos
is having a detrimental effect on the Libyan people,
who are sick ofliving with the protracted consequences
of the adventurist military undertaking of 2011.

However, there have been some encouraging
moments suggesting there may be hope for a certain
amount of progress in the political process. It appears
that those Libyan leaders with common sense realize
that the crisis can be resolved only by political means.
The obligation to refrain from the use of force is crucial,
as is their demonstrated willingness to act based on
the Libyan Political Agreement in order to implement
the arrangements previously agreed to on establishing
national institutions and law enforcement bodies.
We should not omit to note the Libyans' intention to
hold elections under United Nations supervision in
accordance with Mr. Salame's action plan. We would
like to be sure that in both Tripoli and Tobruk they
have understood that the only way to deal with this
crisis is through joint efforts at the negotiating table.
If not, the country will be plunged into even greater
chaos, fraught with irreversible consequences for the
Libyan regime.

We support the efforts that have been undertaken
under the auspices of the United Nations and welcome
the signs we are seeing of momentum in finding

solutions. As a long-time friend of Libya, Russia
will continue to assist it in that regard. We have been
working systematically with the Libyan parties since
the signing of the Agreement in Skhirat, guided by
the imperative of preserving Libya's sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We encourage the Libyans to
overcome their internal differences and seek mutually
acceptable solutions on all disputed issues. We stress
the importance of promoting a constructive dialogue
and ensuring that it is broadly representative. Much
remains to be done on that front, since various political
forces in Libya are still sitting on the sidelines of the
political process. However, our principled position is
that the Libyan people themselves must decide their
country's fate and that attempts to impose ready-made
schemes on them would be counterproductive.

There is still significant work to be done in order
to arrive at lasting agreements on the parameters for
national reconciliation, and in that connection it will
still be vital to ensure dynamic international support to
the political process in Libya so as to promote stability
during its transitional period. We should consolidate
that support and ensure that no needless competition
is involved, thereby avoiding the creation of any new
dividing lines. That also applies to the various forms
of practical assistance provided by Libya's foreign
partners, including the various so-called training
programmes. The efforts of the United Nations will
be successful only if we all play by the same rules.
We appreciate the importance of the steps taken by
international and regional sponsors of the political
process in Libya, including its neighbours, but the
United Nations should continue to take the main
coordinating role.

Our colleague Mr. Olof Skoog, in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning
Libya, has briefed us on the subsidiary body's recent
activities. For our part, we note that the problem of the
uncontrolled circulation of weapons in Libya is still
acute, especially in the absence of a unified army and
other law-enforcement bodies. It affects security both
in the country and the Sahel-Saharan region, which is
why it is crucial to ensure that the arms embargo is
strictly observed. In the circumstances, it would be
premature to start talking about relaxing the current
sanctions regime. As far as illicit exports from Libya
of oil and oil derivatives are concerned, that represents
a serious problem for the national economy. However,
Sanctions Committee measures should be strictly
applied based on real, verified data and in line with
the parameters established in the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, with no free interpretations of
the rules.

