Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. I would also
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, and the President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States for their insightful briefings. The global
security landscape has changed significantly since the
end of the Cold War. Terrorism, transnational organized
crime, natural disasters, public health emergencies and
cybercrime demonstrate how threats to international
security have become highly complex. To tackle today's
challenges, multi-layered cooperation has become ever
more indispensable.

Twenty-five years ago, the difficulties that Africa
faced in the new international political climate were
profound. Japan saw that Africa wanted to change
its own narrative and we wished to be a part of that
endeavour. By looking at how Southeast Asian
countries have grown steadily with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, we recognized the value of
regional and sub-regional organizations. We wanted
to work together with multilateral partners with
expertise and relevant knowledge of local dynamics to
join together to promote Africa's peace, stability and
development in an open and inclusive process. That is
how the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development began in 1993, trusting in the power of
multi-layered cooperation with States, regional and
subregional organizations, and the United Nations. The
seventh such conference will be held in Yokohama in
August 2019.

As we approach the end of 2018, both the United
Nations and the AU have made progress in their
institutional reform. We especially commend the AU
for its efforts to revitalize the AU Peace Fund in recent
years. In 1993, Salim Ahmed Salim, Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), said on
the occasion of the OAU's thirtieth anniversary, "Africa
must cultivate the virtues of self-reliance, for there is no
alternative". Japan respects that spirit of ownership. It
is no coincidence that the AU Peace Fund and the Tokyo
International Conference on Africa's Development
were born in the same year - 1993.

As means of both conflict resolution and conflict
prevention, the United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the AU peace-support operations are
complementary in responding to today's evolving
peace and security challenges. With that perspective in
mind, Japan is encouraged that the Security Council
is considering practical steps to establish a mechanism
through which AU-led peace-support operations could
be partly financed through United Nations assessed
contributions, as stated in resolution 2378 (2017).
In order to maximize the effect of that mechanism,
Japan believes the Council's discussions should seek
operational improvements and accountability for
both the United Nations peacekeeping operations and
the AU peace-support operations, including through
streamlining their mandates so as to allow each to focus
on the tasks that it is best equipped to perform. Given
the increased responsibilities and heightened security
threats that many missions face, it is in our best interest
to ensure that peace operations are optimized for
operational efficiency.

Of course, the best and most efficient way to
resolve conflicts is to prevent conflicts, and Japan
hopes to see conflict prevention become paramount in
the work of the United Nations, as well as in the work of
regional and subregional organizations. In that respect,
subregional organizations - in particular the Economic
Community of West African States - have proven
to be highly effective at prevention. By utilizing the
capacities that various organizations bring to the table,
we can maximize the effectiveness of our endeavours
in both peace operations and development.

