Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing.
We continue to believe that the Office of the High
Representative has an important role to play in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Mr. Inzko's briefing today has
reminded us of the utility of the various strands of his
important work, and we thank him for his efforts.

Australia reaffirms its support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We remain convinced that that is necessary to ensure
peace and stability in the country and the broader
Western Balkans region. We renew our calls on all
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially
in Republika Srpska, not to undermine the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The lead-up to the twentieth anniversary of the
Dayton Peace Agreement next year is an opportunity
to reflect on how far Bosnia and Herzegovina has come
since the end ofthe tragic civil war. Over the past 19 years
ofpeace, Bosnia and Herzegovina has transitioned from
a post-conflict society to one that is looking towards
European Union accession. Its governance institutions
are now meeting regularly. Consequently, the Office of
the High Representative has been able to take a lesser
role in the domestic affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Nevertheless, significant challenges remain.
We share Mr. Inzko's assessment that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not progressed as far and as fast as it
could have, due to the inability of its leaders to agree
on important political and economic reforms. Over the
past six months, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not moved
forward on its declared path of Euro-Atlantic integration.
Yet, in our view, that will be vital to the country's long-
term prosperity and stability. The lack of agreement on
a coordinating mechanism with the European Union is
obstructing Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress towards
European Union integration. The country's political
leaders must resolve that impasse. The implementation
of the Sejdic-Finci ruling remains essential to ensuring
equality for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and that they are able to take part in shaping their
country's future. The lack of progress on the status of
military property blocks the activation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's NATO membership action plan.

In December, the Peace Implementation Council
Steering Board noted again the failure of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to address the remaining objectives and
conditions for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative. We call on all political actors in the
country to work productively to reach the compromises
necessary to advance that process.

The emergence of direct-democracy forms of
civic engagement, as embodied in recent plenums, was
a positive development. We were concerned by the
brief outbreak of violence in February, which marred
otherwise peaceful demonstrations. However, Australia
is supportive of the right of the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to peacefully express their frustration with
the socioeconomic situation, the levels of corruption
and the high unemployment rates. That type of civic
engagement has the potential to be a powerful tool to
focus the political debate on the necessary governance
and socioeconomic reforms.

Australia also welcomes the fact that the situation
in the country remains generally calm, and we renew
our appreciation for the role played by the European
Union military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
supporting a safe and secure environment. We would
also like to note the continuing importance of the work
done by the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to control and manage
the country's ammunition and weapons, including
aging and surplus material. With the support of the
international community, including NATO and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the disposal of that material contributes directly to
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina can continue on a path
towards integration with Europe, as its neighbours
have done, or it can fall further behind. While the
international community has an important role to play,
it is up to the leaders ofBosnia and Herzegovina to enact
the reforms necessary to achieve a stable, peaceful and
prosperous future for its citizens.

