Mr. Djani (Indonesia): 1 thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting. I too
join my fellow speakers in expressing our appreciation
to Special Representative David Shearer for his briefing
and tireless efforts to ensure the effective contribution
of the United Nations to peace and stability in
South Sudan.

Like other speakers, we also thank our sister,
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, for her briefing on
the activities of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015). Indonesia has always been
grateful for her excellent work and leadership of
that Committee.

Under United States and South African leadership
of the Council we have discussed developments in
Juba, and we have continuously sent a message for
peace and reconciliation. I think that is an important
message and I hope that the transitional Government
can be established as soon as possible. In that regard,
my statement will focus on three key issues.

First, on the political situation, Indonesia maintains
its conviction that the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan provides an unparalleled opportunity for peace
and stability in South Sudan. We take note of the
extension of the pretransitional period by 100 days.
The clock is ticking fast, and some people have already
noted that we have fewer than 65 days to go. Parties
to the agreement must utilize that extension to make
substantive progress in resolving the outstanding
issues. Like others have done, we urge all parties to
embrace goodwill and compromise, prioritizing the
interests of the South Sudanese people. We welcome
the joint statement made a few hours ago in Juba by
President Salva Kiir Mayardit and Mr. Rick Machar on
the formation of a Government. Face-to-face meetings
will certainly provide greater results and we welcome
such efforts.

My delegation also echoes the call for the
expeditious and transparent disbursement of funds
for the agreement, noting that it could contribute
to enhancing international confidence and support.
The proactive and continued engagement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union (AU) and guarantors of the agreement is
crucial, including efforts to facilitate dialogue between
senior leaders and supervise progress on critical tasks.
We support the role of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) in providing advice and
technical assistance to support the implementation of
the agreement.

Secondly, on the security situation, the ceasefire
across the country mustbe preserved. We concur with the
Secretary- General that it is "a fundamental achievement
of the peace process" (S/2019/936, para. 102). We have
already witnessed an overall reduction in political
violence, except in the greater Equatoria region.
My delegation also draws encouragement from - to
borrow the Special Representative's language from his
address to the AU Peace and Security Council - "a
real and palpable desire for peace, particularly at the
grassroots level", manifested in confidence and trust-
building activities. Ensuring peace at the grassroots
level is very important.

Nevertheless, recent tribal clashes and other
internal fighting in areas that have been relatively calm
over the past few months demonstrate that the security
situation remains fragile, and of course the Council
must continue to monitor that. Indonesia stresses the
need for full protection of civilians and observance
of international humanitarian law. We are concerned
by multiple incidents that have affected human rights
and protection situations, especially those directed at
civilians. Impunity will prolong the conflict cycle and
jeopardize the credibility of the peace process. That is
not what we want at this crucial stage. In that regard,
UNMISS plays an important role in strengthening
the judicial presence in the country, including by
coordinating support for mobile courts. We regret
that UNMISS remains subjected to access restrictions
and other impediments, in violation of the status-
of-forces agreement, which potentially impedes the
Mission's ability to implement its mandates, including
to protect civilians.

Thirdly, on the humanitarian situation, we must
not forget that efforts to bring about peace and stability
in South Sudan are taking place against the backdrop
of a troubling humanitarian situation. There are
7.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance,
among whom are those impacted by recent flooding. It
is expected that 4.54 million people are severely food
insecure. A durable solution is desperately needed
for the 1.5 million internally displaced persons and
2.2 million refugees. The operational environment
for humanitarian actors in South Sudan continues to
be challenging and dangerous. Humanitarian actors
must be provided with the space necessary to deliver
humanitarian assistance.
I conclude by reaffirming Indonesia's support for
peace and stability in South Sudan, including through
its contribution to UNMISS.

