Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2228
(2015). The adoption has taken place at a particularly
crucial moment in Darfur, where, despite the huge
progress that has been achieved in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the region
continues to confront a huge number of security and
humanitarian challenges, to the detriment of innocent
civilians.

My delegation hopes that the resolution just
adopted will serve as a starting point for the fostering
of exemplary cooperation and mutual trust between the
Government of the Sudan and African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Such
trust and cooperation are indispensable if we are to help
the Sudanese parties achieve future peace and stability
in the region. My delegation also welcomes the fact that
the Security Council, together with the African Union,
has reiterated its support for the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur as being the only feasible framework
for the promotion of peace and reconciliation in
Darfur. In that regard, we call upon the Council to do
everything possible to encourage the armed movements
that are non-signatories to sign the Document without
preconditions.

We reiterate our full support to the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, for its work aimed at promoting
a resumption of talks and bringing about an end to
hostilities between the Government of the Sudan and
armed groups.

We also take note of the national dialogue initiative,
which was again highlighted by President Omer
Al-Bashir at his inauguration in April 2015 and which
includes a promise of amnesty for the rebel groups that
decide to participate in it. Chad invites all Sudanese
stakeholders to take advantage of that opportunity to
make progress on peace. There is no military solution
to the Darfur crisis.

Finally, Chad welcomes the fact that the resolution
just adopted underlines the major role played by the
joint working group between the United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government on the
disengagement of UNAMID and hopes that the mission
will present to the Council, when appropriate, relevant
recommendations through the Secretary-General.

