Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Putting
prevention up front is one of the main priorities of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, because in sustaining
peace, conflict prevention is key, and with regard to
conflict prevention, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) is playing a crucial
role in the region.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his most recent
report on UNOWAS (S/2018/649), in which the
activities were described and recommendations were
presented. We would also like to warmly thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas for
briefing the Security Council today.

UNOWAS is contributing to conflict prevention
in many ways. Please allow me to highlight three
aspects that the Kingdom of the Netherlands considers
particularly critical: regional cooperation; early
warning and early action; and the good offices role
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas.

First, with regard to regional cooperation, security
risks transcend borders and so should cooperation
to curb them. We applaud the work of UNOWAS in
ensuring that conflicts are approached from a regional
perspective. We also welcome the positive steps taken
to strengthen security cooperation in the region, and
we join the Secretary-General in commending in
particular the Multinational Joint Task Force and the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in that regard.

Regional and national efforts are essential to peace
and security, yet they should not be limited to a military
approach. To sustain security, properly addressing
governance deficits and justice is equally important. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for putting an emphasis on the rule
of law in his briefing earlier today. Accountability,
participation and inclusive dialogue are also imperative
in paving the way to sustainable peace.

The efficiency and legitimacy of the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force depends not only on its swift ability
to respond, but also on the implementation of its
compliance framework. Moreover, as the European
Union recently highlighted, there is great need to step
up support to the national justice sector, as well as for
regional judicial cooperation. That alone will allow
for the transfer of suspects and evidence between
jurisdictions and ensure due process.

In addition to enhanced regional cooperation, we
applaud the efforts of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and UNOWAS to strengthen
collaboration beyond their mandates, connecting
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States. We look forward to a successful summit
at the end of this month.

Secondly, with regard to early warning and early
action, we congratulate Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Chambas on the handbook
on conflict analysis and welcome the cross-sectoral
conflict analyses of UNOWAS. Those are important
tools in signalling threats to stability and security. The
attention UNOWAS is paying to conflicts between
pastoralists and farmers is particularly valuable,
especially against the backdrop of terrorist groups
and criminal networks increasing their cooperation
in the region. As the Secretary-General states, those
are becoming multidimensional threats affecting the
entire subregion. We support his call on ECOWAS
and its member States to find sustainable solutions to
that challenge.
As a threat multiplier, climate change intensifies
tensions between farmers and herders. It should be
taken into account as a root cause, as Ms. Hindou
Ibrahim of the International Indigenous People Forum
on Climate Change so passionately argued last week
in the Council (see S/PV.8307). We encourage the
United Nations to develop the necessary risk analysis
and assessment capacity on climate-related security
risks at Headquarters and on the ground in order to
provide to timely warnings to the Security Council
and adapt stabilization, humanitarian and development
programmes if necessary.

Thirdly and lastly, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Chambas plays a crucial role in
using the good offices of the Secretary-General in the
region. We commend his efforts and those ofUNOWAS
as a whole, often in cooperation with ECOWAS.

In January, we discussed the importance of
peaceful and inclusive elections in Liberia and Sierra
Leone (see S/PV.8156). Six months later, we have
witnessed positive developments in terms of peaceful
democratic elections and transitions in both countries.
We commend Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas for his crucial role in facilitating
political dialogue and ensuring peaceful transitions of
power. We welcome the continued use ofthe good offices
of the regional Office in view of the sustaining peace
agenda, in particular following the exit of country-
specific United Nations missions. Furthermore, we
support the Secretary-General's recommendations
to enhance political dialogue between communities
through national peace architectures. Facilitating
political dialogue is particularly important given the
several upcoming elections in the region.

In conclusion, whether it is regional cooperation Chambas for his leadership and efforts and to his staff
and the rule of law, early warning and early action, or for the" outstanding work.

using the good offices of the Secretary-General, they The President: There are no more names inscribed
all contribute to peace and stability. UNOWAS deserves 0" the "St "f speakers.
the full support of the Council in its activities. The I now invite Council members to informal

Kingdom of the Netherlands expresses its gratitude consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

to Special Representative of the Seei'ctarnyeneral The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.
