Mr. Jeremie (Serbia): I would just like to direct
the attention of the Council to one or two points that
came up in the debate. I think that one thing that we
really must address is that there may be different
political points of view on how we see the issue of
Kosovo from the legal perspective, the perspective of
the rule of law and so on and so forth, but we need to
acknowledge that the situation in Kosovo is very far
from the rosy picture that some participants in today's
debate have actually tried to present to the Council.

I will quote new reports from institutions such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
for example. During the reporting period, the UNDP
released its 2012 democratization index. It registered a
lower score for the province than that of last year. So
we are not really talking about improvements. It
concluded that "democratic processes in Kosovo do not
fulfil the standards". That is consistent with the results
of the 2012 Map of Freedom put out by Freedom
House, which again failed to classify Kosovo as an
electoral democracy.

The January 2012 report of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe on the judiciary in
Kosovo, which was actually hailed by at least one
participant in today's discussion, concludes that the
political influence in trials and verdicts remained
unacceptably strong, threats against judges and their
families were ever present and witness protection was
dangerously weak.

The Human Rights Watch World Report 2012
states that the Kosovo human rights situation has
improved little in 2012, citing the poor justice system
and systematic discrimination against non-Albanian
communities as two main problems. Transparency
International's 2012 Corruption Perceptions Index
classifies Kosovo as a highly corrupt society. It obtains
the worst score of any territory on the old continent.
Meanwhile, that non-governmental organization's local
Pristina branch issued a 250-page Assessment of
Institutional Integrity, concluding that "corruption is
tremendously spread throughout Kosovo" and that "its
level is only increasing".

A slightly older report of the European
Commission of October 2011 indicated that public
administration, the judiciary and efforts to tackle
corruption and organized crime remain ineffectual, and
so on and so forth.

So, I think that we need to look at things the way
they are and to try and address them in the best
possible faith. Serbia is ready - and we have
demonstrated time and again that we are ready - to
talk and to engage to discourage any provocative
action, and we will adhere to that attitude. But let us
not try to delude ourselves as to what the situation is
really like over there.

I would like to use this opportunity to invite the
Security Council to visit Serbia, including Kosovo, to
see for itself what the situation is like. Representatives
would see barbed wire and ghetto-like situations in
certain parts of the province and that, today, Serbs are
the most endangered society in the whole of Europe, at
least in some parts of the province. So I urge the
Council to consider Serbia's invitation to come and
visit.

I appreciate the fact that one member of the
Council, despite not exactly sharing Serbia's point of
view, called for the two parties to put the past behind
them and to work together to achieve a European
future. We appreciate that stance. What was, of course,
far more disappointing was today's appeal by the
representative of Pristina for the European Union not
to give Serbia candidate status at the next meeting.
That does not go very well with the attitude of trying to
work together to achieve a common European future,
to which we in Belgrade remain committed.
Last but not least, there are not 85 countries of
the United Nations system have recognized Kosovo.
There are actually 81. I just wanted to make that clear
for the record.

