Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank you,
Mr. President, for allowing us to participate in this
important debate today on peace and security in Africa.
My delegation joins others in welcoming the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Romano Prodi at this important
debate. We also welcome the participation of Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra, and we
thank them for introducing the report of the Secretary-
General on support to African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the United Nations
(S/2009/470). We also wish to thank the Permanent
Observer of the African Union (AU) for his statement.
Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-General for
his report and for his assessment of the important
recommendations contained in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel (S/2008/813) chaired by
Mr. Prodi.

The United Nations Charter, as emphasized at the
2005 World Summit, recognizes the importance of
forging predictable partnerships and cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in order to confront current and future peace and
security challenges. This recognition is articulated in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

Our efforts towards a strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union
(AU) in the maintenance of peace and security on our
continent are informed by the reality that regional
organizations have a comparative advantage in
confronting such challenges within their regions, as
recognized by the Secretary-General in his report. The
comparative advantage is increasingly allowing the AU
to respond to conflicts in a proactive and rapid manner,
limiting the escalation of conflict and human suffering
in cases where the United Nations processes take a
long time to decide and deploy while the situation on
the ground is deteriorating. The comparative
advantages of such an approach are clearly evident in
the recent interventions by the African Union in the
Sudan and Somalia, as well as through its mediation
efforts and peace support operations, thus clearly
demonstrating its political will and commitment to
confronting peace and security challenges.

The African Union continues its efforts to
implement the African Peace and Security Architecture
to deal with conflict prevention in a sustainable
manner. Recalling resolution 1809 (2008), we are
cognizant that despite the demonstrated political will to
resolve conflicts, the availability of predictable
resources remains the most important constraint on
Africa's capacity to give effect to those commitments
and help resolve its own conflicts. The increase in
peacekeeping operations in the past few years and the
increasingly important role regions play in preventing,
resolving and managing necessitate the continuation of
dialogue between the United Nations and the AU to
address that challenge.

We expect the Security Council, in
acknowledgement ofAfrica's efforts, to play its role as
the primary body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, as provided for in its
Charter. That support cannot be rationalized by
advancing bureaucratic arguments to prevent us from
doing what is morally and politically correct. A clear
commitment and unambiguous message by this
Council will dispel the perception of many Africans
confronted by conflict that the international community
is apathetic and indifferent and, at worst, places
financial considerations above the interests of people's
lives.

It is in this context that the current report of the
Secretary-General is to be welcomed. In acting on the
mandate of the Security Council as articulated in its
presidential statement of 18 March 2009
(S/PRST/2009/3), the Secretary-General reported on
practical ways to provide effective support for the
African Union when it undertakes peacekeeping
operations. The report provides useful proposals and a
detailed assessment of the recommendations contained
in the report of the African Union-United Nations
panel.

The report of the Secretary-General characterizes
the role of the African Union and its regional
organizations in supporting the Security Council under
Chapter VIII of the Charter as a welcome development
and makes important recommendations on how the
United Nations and the international community could
further ensure the sustainability and predictability of
Africa's peacekeeping efforts that are mandated by the
United Nations. The report provides clear guidelines
and recommendations for ensuring a structured and
strategic relationship between the United Nations and
the African Union, which are worthy of serious
consideration and immediate implementation.

The proposed recommendation on financial
mechanisms also warrants particular attention and
further exploration. Whereas those developments are to
be welcomed and could form the basis for continued
support and engagement, they should not result in
complacency. Rather, in working with the African
Union, the United Nations should continue to review
and seek ways of ensuring predictable, flexible and
sustainable financing for peacekeeping operations
undertaken by the African Union.

It is my delegation's view that the General
Assembly also could demonstrate its willingness to
strengthen Africa's peacekeeping capacity and
capability by considering the recommendations of the
Secretary-General on financing options, just as the
Council is doing here today.

In conclusion, South Africa supports the
presidential statement to be adopted today by the
Security Council. We eagerly await the establishment
of the African Union-United Nations task team and its
subsequent report on the implementation of the
Secretary-General's recommendations.

