Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): All-round cooperation
with neighbours is among the most important foreign
policy priorities of Serbia. As a key function ofregional
stability and prosperity, such cooperation plays a pivotal
role in Serbia's relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its efforts to bring about regional reconciliation.

The Dayton Peace Agreement, which put an end
to the tragic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina, is an
important building block in that regard. Signed almost
a quarter of a century ago, it is just as important today
as a basis for peace and security. As a guarantor of the
agreement, Serbia will continue to work on its consistent
implementation, aimed at bringing about reconciliation
and prosperity in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
entire region.

The region has faced numerous challenges for
centuries, including the suffering of the recent past.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States is therefore of paramount importance, and my
country considers it to be an overarching international
standard and principle that is binding on all. Proceeding
from that, as well as from the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Serbia has been firmly and continually committed to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as the cornerstone of regional stability.

However, political tensions and messages that we
thought belonged to the past have been evident in the
region of late. It has not always been blessed with a
constructive approach, positive agendas and mutual
respect. That is also true of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the relations among its constituent
peoples and entities. Regrettably, they have sometimes
been burdened by unproductive rhetoric.

Serbia's approach and measures have been aimed
at stabilizing the situation and helping to calm political
passions and to create the conditions for overcoming
differences through dialogue. It is the obligation ofus all
to invest our best efforts in promoting peace, progress
and a better life for our citizens. After all, dialogue
and agreement have been the best way to address all
outstanding issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina and find
acceptable and implementable solutions. That is what
the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina expect from
their political representatives and what my country
wholeheartedly supports. We are motivated by the
vision of a better future for the region and the drive
to develop ever better relations and cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Western Balkans is changing. Reconciliation,
stabilization and European Union (EU) integration are
the order of the day. To continue along that path, we
need to strengthen regional confidence, just as the two
entities and three constituent peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is also home to a large number
of Serbs, need to do. To help achieve those goals,
Serbia continues to develop and deepen its relations
with Republika Srpska in a transparent way and in
accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement. It also
actively promotes relations with the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Last October, general elections were held in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than six months later,
Government institutions, including the Council of
Ministers, have not yet been formed. Serbia hopes that
the institutions will be formed soon and that they will
take up their full responsibilities, to the benefit of all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Once formed, the
Council of Ministers will partner with the Government
of Serbia, as it has in the past.

As a token of extensive communication and
political dialogue and an important instrument for the
promotion of a positive agenda of relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic'
visited Mostar on 9 April and attended the opening of
the twenty-second International Economy Fair, in which
many Serbian companies took part. In his statement,
President Vucie emphasized that it is important that
Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to build
a common future in peace and stability, irrespective of
the potholes in our historical legacy and differences of
views in that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is among Serbia's most
important foreign-trade partners and mutual trade has
been increasing year after year. Such cooperation is in
line with the Central European Free Trade Agreement.
However, Pristina recently increased tariffs on goods
originating from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina,
contrary to that agreement's provisions. It is my hope
and belief that the international community will step up
its pressure on Pristina to bring those harmful practices
to a speedy end.

Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
our other neighbours, have resolved to work together
to link peoples, regions and economies. We have made
commitments in different formats to carrying out
needed reforms and promoting regional cooperation
in the area of joint infrastructure projects and in the
transportation and energy sectors, for instance.
As partners in promoting mutual links, the two
countries are part and parcel of the process of EU
enlargement and integration. Every step made by our
neighbour in that direction is a step forward on that
important road and, therefore, highly appreciated.
As a candidate country, Serbia strongly supports
its neighbour's EU membership aspirations and the
relevant reforms it is carrying out in order to achieve
that goal. It considers the submission of the reply to the
additional questions from the European Commission
questionnaire by Bosnia and Herzegovina last March to
be an important step forward on the country's road to
EU integration and stands ready to intensify cooperation
and transmit its own experiences in the process.

Serbia believes, and I hope that I can also say
this on behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina, that the
European Union will continue to support the process of
Western Balkan EU integration which, once achieved,
will bring lasting stability and prosperity to the region
and help consolidate and develop Europe in its entirety.
That happens to be the strategic goal of my country's
Government. Peace, stability and good-neighbourliness
have no alternatives and are lodestars on our region's
road to the European Union. They are achievable only
through dialogue, mutual respect and civility.

