Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): We wish
to thank you, Madam President, for having convened
today's meeting. We appreciate in particular Argentina's
success in presiding over the Council during the month
of October. We welcome the five countries recently
elected to serve on the Council for the 2015-2016 term,
namely, Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain and
Venezuela. China is ready to cooperate closely with the
new members in jointly contributing to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Iwish to focus on three ofthe issues that the Council
took up during the month of October, beginning with the
situation in the Middle East. The Palestinian question
was the focus ofthe Security Council's work in October.
The Council held several public debates and emergency
meetings on this issue. China attaches great importance
to the Middle East peace process and is deeply concerned
about the tension caused by the Palestinian-Israeli
situation. China urges Israel to immediately cease
its settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, so as to create
conditions conducive to confidence-building and the
resumption of negotiations. We earnestly hope that the
Palestinian and Israeli sides will show restraint and
avoid any further escalation of the tensions or a relapse
into outright conflict. Dialogue and negotiations are
the only path to peace. Both sides must demonstrate
political will and resume negotiations as soon as
possible.

The international community should consider
carefully how to create synergies, mobilize resources
and promote the speedy resumption of peace talks
with a view to making progress on the Palestinian
question and resolving the matter promptly and in
a just and reasonable way. The Council's inaction on
this question should not be allowed to continue. We
welcome the draft resolution circulated by Jordan on
this subject. China supports the Council in discharging
its due responsibilities and playing its rightful role by
responding to the legitimate demands of Palestine and
other Arab States as soon as possible.

Second is the situation in Somalia. In October, the
Security Council considered the work of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the humanitarian
situation and piracy. It also adopted resolution 2182
(2014), extending the AMISOM. mandate. China
hopes that that resolution will be implemented fully
and faithfully so as to help the African Union and
the Federal Government of Somalia in the fight
against Al-Shabaab and maintain peace and stability
in Somalia and the Horn of Africa. China officially
reopened its embassy on 12 October, which was a
significant step taken by the Chinese Government in
support of peace and reconstruction in Somalia. China
will take this opportunity to pursue comprehensive and
practical cooperation in various areas with the Somali
Government and assist the country in achieving peace,
stability and development.

Third is the situation in South Sudan. The
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the international community recently stepped up
their mediation efforts and good offices regarding the
conflict in South Sudan. China has urged the two sides
to the conflict to cooperate with IGAD in mediation
efforts to bring an end to the violence and hostilities
and to make progress in the inclusive dialogue, with a
View to achieving a solution acceptable to all sides and
giving hope to the Sudanese people. We support IGAD
in continuing to play a leading role in mediation. We
also welcome the fact that the countries of the region,
such as Ethiopia, Kenya and the United Republic of
Tanzania, are playing a positive role and working in
harmony with IGAD. The international community
should, as soon as possible, implement its commitments
and scale up its humanitarian assistance in South
Sudan. China will continue to play a constructive
role in promoting the speedy restoration of peace and
stability in South Sudan.

In conclusion, I express in advance my best wishes
to Australia for a smooth presidency of the Council
during the month of November.

