Mr. Wittig (Germany): On behalf of the members
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I am pleased
to present the report of the Commission on its fourth
session (S/201l/41).

Strengthening the peacebuilding agenda,
enhancing its impact in the field and providing
continued support to the peacebuilding efforts in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau
and Sierra Leone were at the core of the Commission's
work in 2010. In September 2010, the Commission
made Liberia the fifth country on the agenda in
response to a request from the Security Council on
behalf of the Government of Liberia. Most recently, the
Commission responded to a request for advice and
accompaniment from the Republic of Guinea. This was
the first time that such a request was directly submitted
to the Commission.

In 2010, peacebuilding and the future role of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture were very
prominently discussed Within and outside the United
Nations. The review, which was ably guided by the
2

Permanent Representatives of Ireland, Mexico and
South Africa, offered an opportunity to appreciate the
potentials of and the challenges facing the
Commission. The momentum generated by the 2010
review must be maintained especially as the
Commission further expands its agenda.

The report of the Peacebuilding Commission
reflects a collective effort on the part of the members of
its Organizational Committee. Progress has been made
in addressing emerging recommendations from the 2010
review, in particular in connection with the creation of a
new PBC country-specific configuration on Liberia. The
report also reflects the Commission's plans to take
forward the recommendations from the review in a way
that would facilitate its annual reporting to the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

The Commission is proceeding in this direction
on the basis of a road map of actions in 2011. It
focuses on meeting practical objectives and making
concrete progress in enhancing the Commission's
impact on national capacity-development, resource
mobilization and aligning key actors behind common
peacebuilding objectives.

Allow me to highlight a few elements from the
report. First, the report underscores the thematic focus
of the Commission during its fourth session around the
theme "Partnership for peacebuilding". In view of the
complexity of peacebuilding challenges and the
multiplicity of actors, the need for coherence and
partnerships cannot be overemphasized. Building and
strengthening partnerships has been identified as a key
area of potential value added for the Commission. In
this regard, the Organizational Committee devoted the
majority of its efforts and time to engaging the
international financial institutions, especially the World
Bank, and regional organizations, especially the
African Union. Generally, the Chairperson and Vice-
Chairpersons focused on joining up with a range of
potential partners from civil society and academia.

Secondly, the Commission has particularly
prioritized the need to strengthen the interaction with
the principal organs of the United Nations. It worked to
generate interest in its work across the membership of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. During the reporting
period, the Commission witnessed a growing openness
and encouraging signs of interest on the part of the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.
11-27495

The important thematic debates convened by the
Security Council between February 2010 and February
2011 offered recurring opportunities for the PBC, the
United Nations membership and senior leadership to
engage with the Council around critical peacebuilding-
related policies. The participation of the World Bank in
a number of these debates also confirmed the evolving
partnership with the Bank at a time when it is further
developing its approach to assisting countries emerging
from conflict. Briefings by the Chairs of the country
configurations contributed to the discussions of the
Council at its periodic considerations of the situations
and mandates involving the countries on the
Commission's agenda.

Most recently, the Council has engaged the
Chairs in informal dialogues on certain country
situations. The outcome of the thematic debates and the
deepening of the engagement of the Chairs of the PBC
country configurations marked an important step
towards more serious consideration by the Council of
the Commission's advisory role. I would like to
advocate for enhanced interaction between the
Commission and the Council.

The 2010 review highlighted in particular the
potential for developing a dynamic linkage between the
Commission and the Council. Eleven of the 15 members
of the Security Council are currently members of the
PBC. That joint membership provides a natural interface
that could facilitate the Council's drawing more actively
and regularly on the Commission's advice.

The Commission could provide early
peacebuilding perspectives in the design and review of,
or transition from, peacekeeping mandates. It could
identify and promote country-specific sustainability
factors. It could catalyse early partnerships with the
international financial institutions. And it could
benchmark and monitor the progression from
stabilization to transition and consolidation.

The reporting period also witnessed the
continuing development of the Commission's
relationship with the Economic and Social Council
through the established briefing made by the PBC
Chairperson to the 2010 substantive session. In
addition, the Council and the PBC jointly organized a
special event on the Millennium Development Goals in
countries emerging from conflict. That event testified
to the Commission's growing advocacy role for an
integrated approach to peacebuilding, including
11-27495
through well-deserved focus on the socio-economic
dimension of peacebuilding.

Going forward, the Commission looks forward to
further deepening its linkages with the General
Assembly. There is a clear need to bring to bear the
Assembly's perspective on key thematic issues.

Thirdly, the Commission continues to receive
direct and substantive support from the Peacebuilding
Support Office. Notwithstanding its stretched capacity,
the Office has also been an essential linkage between
the Commission and the operational entities within and
outside the United Nations system. The Office has also
continued to provide regular briefings on the activities
and operations of the Peacebuilding Fund. Those
briefings have contributed to deepening the
understanding of the synergy between the Commission
and the Fund in the countries on the Commission's
agenda. The recently introduced interaction with the
Fund's Advisory Group has provided the Commission
with an opportunity to address a number of broad
policy issues for the Fund.

The Fund's resources, combined with the efforts
of the Commission, helped to ensure that the countries
on the Commission's agenda benefited from the
sustained attention and support of the international
community, with 64 per cent of the Fund's total
contributions being allocated to those countries.

By linking up the Peacebuilding Commission's
work to that of peacekeeping, development and
political actors in the field, the Commission has added
considerable value. The challenge facing the
Commission in demonstrating its full potential,
however, is to ensure that its work is backed by a
higher level of political commitment from the Member
States and the senior leadership of the United Nations.
As noted by the co-facilitators of the 2010 review
report, "the review should be a wake-up call to
strengthen the collective resolve to deal with
peacebuilding in a more comprehensive and
determined way". (S/2011/41, para. 107)

I hope that today's debate, like the debate that the
General Assembly convened earlier in the week, will
take us a step further towards realizing the full
potential of the Commission as an advisory body that is
uniquely positioned to help the United Nations meet
the challenges facing our collective capacity to deliver
on the promises to respond to the needs of millions of
people in countries emerging from conflict.
3
