Mr. Jagne (Gambia): Our meeting today is taking
place when the continent of Africa and the Arab world
are mourning the sad and irretrievable loss of an
illustrious son, a statesman of exceptional stature, a great
and generous leader, a freedom fighter and a peacemaker:
King Hassan II of Morocco. We offer our heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of
Morocco. May his soul rest in perfect peace.

My delegation would like to express its gratitude to
you, Sir, for organizing this open briefing, the importance
of which cannot be overemphasized. We are also
honoured to have Mrs. Ogata with us again, and we thank
her for her informative and very useful briefing.

Listening to Mrs. Ogata we understand better the
magnitude of the problem, particularly in West and
Central Africa. With the recent political developments,
there appears to be a ray of hope, as embodied in the
Lorne and Lusaka peace agreements. In both cases, we all
agree that the peace is fragile. This is why it is absolutely
necessary to heed the appeal made by Mrs. Ogata this
morning for the necessary resources to be provided to
shore up those agreements.

The consolidation of the peace process cannot be
done in a vacuum. Post-conflict peace-building requires
resources, yet at times assistance is hard to come by.
Fresh from Algiers, where she attended the Organization
of African Unity summit, Mrs. Ogata has eloquently
interpreted the new spirit that prevailed in Algiers, as
amply demonstrated by African leaders in their renewed
commitment to try to resolve conflicts peacefully.

Nobody should be left in doubt now that African
leaders are doing everything in their power to find
peaceful solutions to the various conflicts plaguing the
continent. We must also recognize that these efforts
cannot be sustained unless we have the support of our
partners in development. We are, therefore, duty-bound to
echo Mrs. Ogata's appeal for assistance to the various
peace processes in Africa.

In Central Africa, the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the main focus of attention.
Peace is within reach, and therefore we should not relent
in our endeavour to obtain a ceasefire agreement signed
by all the parties to the conflict. It would have a positive
impact throughout the region.

 

Similarly, in West Africa the Lorne agreement raises
our hopes for a lasting peace in war-torn Sierra Leone.
Again, our leaders have done their best; it now remains for
the rest of the international community to make a major
effort to help consolidate what has been achieved so far.
In providing assistance to refugees, let us also not
forget the host countries that share their meagre resources,
sometimes to such an extent that they create other problems
for themselves at home. My own country, the Gambia, has
for a long time been hosting refugees from all over our
subregion. Although we do not make a lot of noise about
it, we do need assistance to cater to all our brethren from
neighbouring countries. Many have been integrated into
Gambian society, but that does not mean that our problems
are over.

Each time we discuss Africa, the Secretary-General's
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(S/1998/318) comes to mind. Very often, though, we pay
less attention to that other aspect of the report: sustainable
development. We cannot agree more with Mrs. Ogata that
there is a close link among poverty, conflict and forced
displacement. Unless and until the question of the
eradication of poverty is properly addressed, there will
always be conflicts and consequently forced displacements.

The evil must be attacked at its roots. Poverty
constitutes one of the main root causes, if not the main root
cause of all these problems that we are facing today in
Africa. We can only hope that the same attention being
given to other parts of the world will be given to Africa as
well. Suffering is the same everywhere, and therefore
people should be treated equally, irrespective of where they
are located, be it in Africa, Asia, Latin America or Europe.

All the same, we are thankful for the amount of
assistance provided to Africa. But it is inadequate compared
to what others elsewhere are receiving. We need the
continued support and understanding of the rest of the
international community in the spirit of true partnership and
solidarity, especially at this time when African leaders have
demonstrated renewed commitment to resolving the
problems bedeviling the continent, not by recourse to the
barrel of a gun but through negotiations.

