Mr. Hamidon: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Viet
Nam and my own country, Malaysia.

ASEAN joins others in congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month.
ASEAN is pleased to note that cooperation with
the United Nations has been pursued in many areas of
common interest and concern. ASEAN fully supports
multilateralism and the central role of the United
Nations in maintaining international peace and
security. In that connection, and with a view to
promoting peace and stability in the region, the eighth
ASEAN summit, held at Bangkok in 1995, agreed that
ASEAN should explore ways and means of enhancing
cooperation with the United Nations.

With regard to pursuing that commitment, we
recall the successful and fruitful meeting held between
ASEAN leaders and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations at the first ASEAN-United Nations
summit, held on 12 February 2000 in Bangkok. The
summit called for closer cooperation between ASEAN
and the United Nations in activities such as exchanging
information and organizing conferences and seminars
on issues relating to regional security, with financial
support from the United Nations. Since that summit,
ASEAN member countries and the ASEAN secretariat
have worked closely with the relevant United Nations
entities, in particular the Department of Political
Affairs and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), in organizing a series of annual
regional seminars. The fourth United Nations-ASEAN
Conference on Conflict Prevention, Conflict
Resolution and Peacebuilding in South-East Asia, with
the theme of "The ASEAN Security Community and
the United Nations", held in Jakarta on 24 and
25 February 2004, was a product of such cooperation.
The fifth such United Nations-ASEAN conference is
scheduled to be held in the first half of 2006.

To further strengthen the foundations of ASEAN-
United Nations cooperation, the second ASEAN-
United Nations summit was held on 13 September
2005 at the periphery of the recent High-level Plenary
Meeting of the General Assembly. In addition to
ASEAN leaders, the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the ASEAN Secretary-General, the World
Health Organization, UNDP, the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS were invited
to participate in the summit. ASEAN leaders and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations took the
opportunity to review and discuss broad areas of
cooperation, including energy security, debt relief,
health, disaster management, trade and investment and
peace and security. The summit also discussed the
High-level Plenary Meeting and United Nations
reform.
On peace and security, ASEAN leaders and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations recognized the
linkages between development, security and human
rights and committed themselves to enhance
cooperative efforts to combat international terrorism at
the national, regional and international levels. The
United Nations also welcomed the possibility of
ASEAN seeking observer status in the United Nations.
The ASEAN-United Nations summit affirmed its
support for multilateralism, with the United Nations at
its core. The summit also expressed support for the
efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
to enhance the effectiveness of the Organization and
the multilateral system it represents to meet the
challenges of the millennium. ASEAN looks forward
to future summit meetings with the United Nations to
maintain and promote closer cooperation between the
two organizations.

Moreover, the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 57/35 in 2002 generated additional impetus
in our cooperation, as it encouraged both ASEAN and
the United Nations to increase contacts and to further
identify areas of cooperation, as appropriate. In that
regard, ASEAN and the United Nations, as well as the
specialized agencies, must explore ways and means of
promoting further ASEAN-United Nations cooperation.

We wish to emphasize that for the past 38 years
ASEAN has succeeded in fostering an atmosphere of
peace and cooperation in South-East Asia, as ASEAN
moves towards the establishment of the ASEAN
Community, with the ASEAN Security Community as
one of its three pillars, along with the ASEAN
Economic Community and the ASEAN Social-Cultural
Community. We are contributing to global peace,
stability and comprehensive security. We will also give
particular attention to the efforts of the United Nations
in peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
preventive diplomacy as well as to the strengthening of
the work of the United Nations in the social and
economic fields.

In coping with non-traditional threats and the
challenges of globalization, ASEAN wishes to reiterate
the urgent need to further strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations in the areas of disaster management
and dealing with emerging and resurgent infectious
diseases such as avian influenza and severe acute
respiratory syndrome.

ASEAN, as a driving force for the ASEAN
Regional Forum, has maintained contacts with various
international and regional organizations, including the
United Nations and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, with the aim of exchanging
experiences and best practices in promoting peace and
security. As an established multilateral regional
security forum, the ASEAN Regional Forum embodies
the principal regional process, initiated by ASEAN to
engage its dialogue partners and other interested
countries in the Asia-Pacific region to come together
for confidence-building dialogue and cooperation
activities.

ASEAN Foreign Ministers also hold regular
consultations with their counterparts from other
regional organizations on the margins of the annual
General Assembly sessions in New York. Under this
arrangement, ASEAN Foreign Ministers have met their
counterparts from the Rio Group, the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the Economic Cooperation Organization and
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
These meetings serve a very useful purpose by
promoting mutual understanding and cooperation on a
myriad of issues of common interest.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting, which has enabled ASEAN to interface with
the Security Council and hence to expand further the
scope of cooperation between our regional organization
and the United Nations system.

Last but not least, we wish Romania's presidency
a great success.

