Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by expressing my delegation's gratitude to
Ambassador Heraldo Mufioz for his leadership and

distinguished work at the head of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We would also like to commend the
extremely valuable and devoted work of the Chairs of
the country-specific configurations and of the Working
Group on Lessons Learned.

The valuable experience acquired by the
Commission in implementing the Strategic
Frameworks for Peacebuilding in Sierra Leone,
Burundi, Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic in the areas of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, rule of law assistance, security sector
reform and the promotion of development must be
viewed as a point of departure for defining the future
work of the Commission, improving its advisory role
and mobilization of resources, and underpinning
peacebuilding processes in the countries on its agenda.

Three years after its establishment, the
Commission has evolved continuously as it has faced
challenges arising from the particular situations in the
countries on its agenda. We therefore believe that its
mechanisms must be adapted still further in order to
enhance its contribution to peacebuilding initiatives
and prepare a more rapid and effective response in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Our final objective
must be to ensure that the dividends of peace become a
reality for the societies involved and are relevant to
their socio-economic development needs.

Given the fact that the Commission is a new body
that has not yet reached its full potential, it is important
to support, as noted in the Commission's report on its
third session (S/2009/444), the strengthening of its
working methods and its ability to improve the quality
and efficiency of its mandate, promoting action in such
areas as tailoring its response to situations in the field,
harmonizing the work of the various country-specific
configurations, strengthening and diversifying the
mobilization of resources, and extending in-country
visits in order to raise public awareness of the
processes under way.

There is still much potential for the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Secretariat to avail themselves
more proactively of the advice provided by the
Peacebuilding Commission and, in the interest of
coherence, to seek coordination with other bodies
outside the United Nations system, including local and
regional actors, in order to promote and implement
peacebuilding strategies that contribute to the
revitalization of State institutions and their ability to
respond effectively to the needs of the people.

My delegation firmly believes that the
Commission, as a pillar of the peacebuilding
architecture, can play an even more decisive role in
post-conflict prevention and reconstruction processes.
We therefore reaffirm our commitment to the
presidential statements adopted recently by the
Security Council on this matter (S/PRST/2009/23 and S/PRST/2009/24), which reflect the importance of
coherence and integration among peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development
activities.

We also believe it vital for the Commission to
strive still further, together with the other protagonists
involved, to implement the strategy proposed by the
Secretary-General in his report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304) to guide
peacebuilding activities in five fundamental spheres:
security, support for the political process, the provision
of basic services, the re-establishment of institutions
and economic revitalization.

Since its establishment, my delegation has
recognized in the Commission and its noble mandate a
tool that should be developed with the aim of
identifying a consistent and comprehensive focus on
the promotion of and support for reconstruction efforts
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. Since its
creation, we have been aware of its potential to
enhance the United Nations peacebuilding response, as
we have stated in the Security Council and the General
Assembly when we have addressed this matter.

To conclude, Mexico trusts that the review of the
founding resolutions of the Commission, scheduled for
2010, will be seized as a window of opportunity to
analyse the way in which the United Nations and the
international community can improve our action and
interaction to strengthen national capacities in
post-conflict reconstruction.

