Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
delegation of Egypt would like, at the outset, to thank and
congratulate the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique, Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, for his very
thorough statement, during which he referred to the political
developments in his country as well as his Government's
efforts to initiate a new stage in the reconstruction of the
country's civilian infrastructure and to restore its public
utilities.

Egypt has followed with interest the evolution of the
situation in Mozambique since the beginning of the crisis.
It is very happy that the operation culminated successfully
in the peace settlement and that the free and honest
elections, successfully held and observed by the
international community, resulted in the Government that is
now in power.

The success of the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ) is a further episode to the credit
of the United Nations in the field of peace-keeping. This
success was not the result of chance; on the contrary, it was
the natural outcome of a series of factors, the most
important of which was the presence of a genuine political
will on the part of both parties to the conflict and total
respect for their commitments, including the efforts made
by the United Nations, represented by the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Aldo Ajello, who
was assisted by the positive efforts of influential States,
which encouraged the parties involved to respect the
principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
national reconciliation and the wishes of the Mozambican
people.

We should like to refer in particular to the very
constructive role played by Italy in the achievement of
this objective. The Security Council, which is now
examining the future of peace-keeping operations
undertaken by this Organization, should focus on an
analysis of the factors that made for the success of the
operation in Mozambique, with a view to drawing on
them in the future.

Despite the important positive outcome of the
Mozambican situation, there are still large security,
economic, social and humanitarian problems. The new
Government cannot deal with these problems on its own;
it needs the support and assistance of the United Nations
agencies and bodies to overcome the negative aftermath
of the conflict. I refer in particular to the massive flow of
refugees who are returning and need to be repatriated -
about 1 million of them, in addition to about 3 million
displaced persons within or outside the national frontiers.

In addition, it will be necessary to create a new
national army, following completion of the task of
disarming both the parties, in order to stabilize the
situation. It will also be necessary to carry out de-mining
operations and to reinitiate the process of strengthening
confidence between the political parties in Mozambique.
For its part, Egypt, having participated in the United
Nations Operation in Mozambique and having been an
observer of the elections, commits itself to providing the
Government and people of Mozambique with all possible
support and assistance in their efforts to rebuild the State
and its infrastructures.

The Egyptian delegation would also like to reiterate
the importance of the new role that it is incumbent on the
United Nations to play in Mozambique - a role that is
no less important than the one played by the Organization
at the previous stage - particularly with respect to efforts
to rehabilitate approximately 90,000 combatants of the
former Government Army and the RENAMO forces, on
an equal footing, and to integrate them into civilian life
to take part in the process of national reconstruction and
the development of Mozambique, as well as the training

 

of approximately 450 troops in de-mining. Here, I should
like to say that Egypt awaits with some interest the report
to be submitted by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council. That will contain his recommendations with regard
to the future role that the international Organization might
play at the political, humanitarian and economic levels in
Mozambique.

In conclusion, I should like once again to address my
thanks and congratulations to the Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Mozambique. I wish him every success in his
arduous task. We congratulate the friendly and fraternal
people of Mozambique from the bottom of our hearts.

