Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow me
to begin, Mr. President, by congratulating your
delegation on assuming the Council presidency, as well
as your predecessor for her able stewardship of the
Council last month. I also wish to thank you for
convening this open meeting on an issue that is truly
threatening international peace and security.

The international community is witnessing with
horror and indignation the daily exacerbation of two
cases of blatant and premeditated aggression and
multiple war crimes perpetrated by the Israeli regime
against the people of Palestine and Lebanon under
absurd and all too familiar pretexts. Meanwhile this
Council, entrusted with the responsibility of preserving
international peace and security and suppressing acts of
aggression, is forced into inaction and appeasement by
the patrons of the aggressor.

Ten long days of blanket and indiscriminate air,
missile and artillery strikes against civilians and
civilian infrastructure across Lebanon have gone by
while this Council has been prevented from even
calling for a ceasefire. Meanwhile, more than 350
innocent civilians have been murdered, over a thousand
maimed and hundreds of thousands rendered homeless
in a proclaimed response to the capture of two soldiers.

Terrorism in the truest sense of the word is on
display, as the aggressor gives short notice before
beginning to bomb entire neighbourhoods and regions.
With bridges, roads, tunnels, seaports and airports
already hit and a complete blockade imposed,
terrorized civilians are left to wonder how to flee and
where to seek refuge. Still more daunting, with the
increasing lack of food and medicine, attacks on
humanitarian convoys and disrupted water and
electricity supplies, a serious humanitarian crisis is in
the making.
No stretching of international law or of the
principles of the Charter - even by the most highly
paid lawyers, pundits or politicians - can logically
sell such unbridled, disproportionate and
indiscriminate barbarism and collective punishment
against civilians as self-defence.

The aggression against Lebanon followed similar
aggression against the Gaza Strip. The Palestinian
people were and continue to be subjected to the same
collective punishment by the same perpetrators. In
Gaza too, the civilian infrastructure is devastated and
the civilian population terrorized. The latest United
States veto in the Council further emboldened the
aggressors to continue and widen their crimes with
apparent impunity.

Yet if history is any guide, while the war machine
of the aggressor may be able to lay waste to buildings
and infrastructures, kill and maim civilians and take
their elected representatives hostage, it is impossible to
intimidate the people of Palestine and Lebanon into
submission, quash their desire to live free from
occupation and terror and crush the hope of refugees to
one day return home. In fact, experience indicates that
such onslaughts strengthen, not weaken, the resolve of
the people to resist aggression, occupation,
intimidation and terror.

And while the massive propaganda machine may
try to reverse the truth and spread smokescreens to hide
the ugly face of aggression, millions of the peoples of
the United Nations who have turned out in the streets
across the globe know exactly where the blame should
lie and which regimes rightly belong in the axis of evil
and terror. They know who are the culprits and their
supporters who have destabilized the region, frustrated
the aspirations for peace and justice, punished entire
populations for their democratic choice and plunged
the Middle East into chaos and who are actively
provoking a wider conflict.
The brutal collective punishment that the
Lebanese and Palestinian people are now enduring is
the Israeli signature brand of aggression, which the
peoples in the region have experienced time and again
in the past several decades. The new round is more
alarming as it occurs at a sensitive time when various
Lebanese communities and parties are engaged in a
national endeavour to reach a comprehensive
understanding through an all-inclusive national
dialogue, an effort that the aggressors aim to defeat as
well.

It is important to note that this Israeli onslaught is
part of their designs on Lebanon, exemplified in their
repeated violations of Lebanese borders and airspace,
holding on to the Shaba'a farms and keeping Lebanese
detainees. Those designs have continued in the years
since their retreat from that country. In fact, the blanket
air strikes and artillery and missile attacks against
targets across Lebanon immediately after the border
incident on 12 July are indicative of a pre-existing
plan. Wide-ranging operations aiming at, among other
things, imposing sea, air and land blockades on a
whole country in a sensitive region could not have
been carried out without prior planning and prior
coordination with the supporting Power and the receipt
of the necessary green light. The joint rejection of all
calls for ceasefire is further proof.

The current position of the United States
Government is not only the culmination but pushing to
the extremes of decades of unswerving support for
Israeli aggressions against the Muslim and Arab people
in the region, leading, inter alia, to 31 vetoes and
supporting the flouting of those resolutions that, under
special circumstances, escaped the United States veto.

More importantly, it is regrettable that the
Security Council, long after such grave breaches of
international peace and security and the threat of their
spillover into adjacent areas, has been rendered
incapable of addressing the crisis, utterly failing to live
up to its responsibility under the United Nations
Charter. That failure has been taken as a licence by the
aggressors to kill and wreak havoc across Gaza and
Lebanon.

It would be a travesty of justice and grossly
against the interest of peace and stability in the region
if the Council, after 10 days of inaction, was forced to
simply relay the Israeli conditions and help to impose
them on the Lebanese and Palestinian people. An
immediate and unconditional ceasefire and an end to
the siege of Lebanon is what the peoples of the United
Nations demand and what the Security Council should
try to achieve. While many lives are being shattered,
families broken apart, civilian infrastructure devastated
and the stability of the wider region threatened, it is
cynical to place the plans and interests of the
occupying regime ahead of those of others and refrain
from even calling for an immediate ceasefire.

We support a comprehensive solution to the crisis
that takes the legitimate demands of the aggrieved
people into account, including the release of the
Lebanese and Palestinian detainees, and holds the
aggressors accountable for the lives lost and the
infrastructure devastated.

Let me just state for the record, in response to
what has become a patented and, indeed, tired
smokescreen for the Israeli representative and his
supporters in their attempts to evade responsibility for
the crimes that are being perpetrated, that my
Government categorically rejects the baseless
allegations against Iran that were repeated today in the
Council. Those allegations are merely part and parcel
of an elaborate Zionist scheme to break resistance to
aggression and invasion in the region and to deflect
attention from the root cause of all tensions in the
Middle East, that is, the continued occupation of
Palestinian, Lebanese and Syrian territories and its
fallout, including the illegal detention of thousands of
Arabs and the violation of their rights. Those
allegations emanate from the occupying regime and are
relayed by Zionist quarters across the globe to
overshadow its crimes.

Iran supports the people and the Governments of
Palestine and Lebanon and is prepared to provide them
with political and humanitarian assistance in helping
them restore their legitimate right to territorial integrity
and self-determination.

