Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me to join
others in welcoming the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to the Security Council. We
express our sincere gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her briefing and report. We also pay tribute to the
Prosecutor and her Office for their tremendous efforts
and leadership in a sometimes difficult context. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its full support
for the International Criminal Court. The city of The
Hague is its proud host.

The ICC is the principal institution created to
strengthen international rule of law by bringing
to justice those responsible for gross human rights
violations and international crimes. In that sense,
the ICC plays a crucial role in the Security Council's
efforts to promote peace and security in Darfur. I will
address three issues today: first, the outstanding arrest
warrants; secondly, accountability; and, thirdly, the
need for cooperation with the Court.

First, with respect to the outstanding arrest
warrants, 13 years ago, the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur to
the ICC. The Kingdom of the Netherlands deplores
the fact that all suspects of the Darfur situation still
remain at large. Let us not forget that the charges
against the suspects include genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity. One of the people at large,
Mr. Banda, is accused of leading an attack on the
African Union Mission in the Sudan, in North Darfur.
Twelve peacekeepers were killed during that attack.
We regret that the Government of the Sudan has not
arrested all the suspects and has not brought them to
The Hague.

Furthermore, we are deeply disappointed that
some of the suspects, like the President, continue to
travel unhindered to other States. We are even more
disappointed that, when the President travelled to
States parties, he was not arrested. We call upon all
States to meet their obligations under resolution 1593
(2005) - all States should cooperate fully with the
Court; all States should fulfil their obligations. In our
view, all States should arrest and surrender all those
persons against whom an arrest warrant has been issued
by the ICC.

Secondly, with regard to accountability, to date
there has been no accountability for victims of crimes
in Darfur. I pay tribute to the fact that some victims
and family members from Darfur are present here
today. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the recent relative decrease in violence in Darfur, but
remains deeply concerned about the continued human
rights violations, as well as the continued impunity.
We remain alarmed by the reports of continued
conflict-related sexual violence, arbitrary arrests
and extrajudicial killings. The Council must ensure
accountability for those and other gross human rights
violations. Accountability is the only road towards
sustainable peace.

Let me quote the words of the Permanent
Representative of Senegal, my friend Mr. Fode' Seck, in
his statement last December in the Council.

"No peace can be built on the vestiges
of impunity or failure to hold perpetrators
responsible. Accountability should never be
ignored" (S/PV8132, p. 9).

It is the responsibility of both the Government of the
Sudan and the Security Council to uphold that critical
principle. International law should prevail.

Thirdly, I will address the need for cooperation
with the Court. The Council referred the situation in
Darfur to the ICC 13 years ago because ofthe atrocities
committed there. Under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the Council decided that the
Government of the Sudan must cooperate fully with the
Court and the Prosecutor. The Council also urged all
States and regional and international organizations to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor. The
Court needs that cooperation to function effectively, as
the Prosecutor made abundantly clear today. In our view,
all States should therefore extend full cooperation to
the Court. Only with the full cooperation can the Court
fulfil the mandate the Council gave it. Regrettably, to
this day, full cooperation is not happening.

It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur have been waiting for more than 13
years. It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur are still waiting for the Council to
ensure that its own decisions are adequately followed
up. It is unacceptable that the victims of international
crimes in Darfur are still waiting for justice.

The Council should take action when the Council
concludes that States have breached their obligation
to cooperate. When the Court deems that, the Council
should invite non-compliant States to come to it and
should decide on concrete follow-up action, and we
support the suggestions related to that just made by our
Polish colleague.

In conclusion, history has taught us that we cannot
have lasting peace without justice, accountability or
reconciliation. If we are all fully committed to that
goal, we can help the victims in Darfur and their loved
ones and families. They deserve justice. International
law and the Charter must be upheld.

