Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the Special
Representative Mr. David Shearer for his update on the
situation in South Sudan.

The Security Council just unanimously extended
the sanctions regime for another year, and we continue
to view the current context negatively because of
the grave violations of human rights, the ongoing
humanitarian crisis and the ethnicity-based hate speech
that is spreading. There is a substantial number of
Italian non-governmental organizations in the country.
Through them, we follow with apprehension the plight
of the people. Despite the tragic situation that seems
to have no end in sight, I would like to address three
processes under way that have shown some potential
and attempt to find constructive elements therein.

First, I would like to speak about the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the Regional
Protection Force. The assertive posture of UNMISS
enables the Mission to react rapidly on the ground.
However, it does not deter the conflicting parties from
intimidating its patrols and blocking humanitarian
access, in violation of the Status of Forces Agreement
between the United Nations and the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan concerning the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. Data collected in April on
such humanitarian access incidents show an intolerable
situation. It is crucial that the Regional Protection Force
be deployed in Juba without further delay to allow
UNMISS to work more effectively in other parts of the
country. The arrival of the first contingent in recent
days is a positive step in that direction. We ask Juba to
cooperate responsibly with the United Nations so that it
may fully deploy the Regional Protection Force in the
shortest term.

Secondly, I turn to the ceasefire and national
dialogue. Two days ago, the national dialogue was
inaugurated in Juba and, as a follow up to the statement
made by Intergovernmental Authority on Development
on 25 March, President Kiir announced a unilateral
ceasefire. In principle, the two events represent
significant progress but the circumstances lead us to
believe that the premise is not so promising. For the
national dialogue to succeed, it must be genuinely
inclusive and at least fully representative of all
opposition groups and civil society, at the community
and national level. The process remains devoid of
those conditions. Until the opposition groups are fully
involved in the process, they will not abandon warfare,
as theyjointly announced a few days ago.

Most of all, the process needs a ceasefire in order to
flourish. That is the main precondition for the national
dialogue. The Council continues to urge both sides
to immediately and effectively suspend hostilities.
However, as the ceasefire was declared, clashes
continued. The Government announced the ceasefire
unilaterally but its efforts would be appreciated only
if its words were followed by action in retaining the
Sudan People's Liberation Army on the ground.

Thirdly, with regard to international and regional
mediation, we support the joint mediation of President
Konare, President Mogae, Special Envoy Haysom
and Special Representative Shearer and commend
their efforts. We hope that an action plan could be
finalized soon to coordinate the steps and timeline of
the mediation. We continue to believe that the regional
stakeholders, in particular the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) are those most
capable of breaking South Sudan's self-destructive
cycle. They can do more for peace in South Sudan.
We welcome the initiative launched in recent days
by Uganda and Kenya. Their actions acknowledge
the destabilizing impact of the South Sudanese crisis
in the subregion, starting with the continuous flow
of refugees. We look forward to the next Kampala
conference on 22 June on that issue and trust that at the
IGAD summit in June, Heads of State and Government
will make substantive progress in finding common
ground and unity in their approach to the crisis.

In the past month, we have constantly noted that
the time to contain the tragedy is running out. It is up
to the Government and opposition groups of South
Sudan, first and foremost, to help improve the situation
before time runs out. We therefore remind them that the
solution to the crisis must be political and all political
solutions require the will to compromise. Otherwise
the Council will have to consider further options to
maintain peace and security in the region.

