Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the presence of the Foreign
Secretary of Pakistan, Mr. Jilani, to preside over today's
open meeting on peacekeeping operations.

United Nations peacekeeping activities are facing
tremendous challenges today. The geography of
conflicts is expanding and their external influence
growing. Destabilization in one country threatens a
spillover of weapons and the movement of fighting and
terrorists into neighbouring States.

Many peacekeeping operations are deployed in
situations where the internal political crises are far
from over and peacekeepers therefore need to take
on functions which States cannot fully perform in the
aftermath of the most heightened phase of a conflict.

The Security Council is reacting to the changing
international situation by giving peacekeeping
operations more comprehensive and multidimensional
mandates. It is our view that they must remain realistic
and achievable in the field and have objectives that, if
met, will help to overcome the causes of the conflict
and to re-establish a firm peace.

In such situations, assistance in the areas of
security sector reform, demobilization, reintegration,
disarmament and demining all are of key importance.
Closely related to that is the need to restore the rule of
law in post-conflict countries.

The contribution of the Blue Helmets in dealing
with such challenges can hardly be overestimated,
because when a situation deteriorates they are the first
to arrive, and their presence, knowledge and experience
represents an important component of efforts to
normalize and stabilize the situation.

In the process of drawing down peacekeeping
operations, conditions must be created that are conducive
to long-term political stabilization and socioeconomic
development. In doing so, it is imperative to abide - not
in words but in deeds - by the principles of respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of post-
conflict States and of the recognition of the national
responsibility for peacebuilding, and priority must be
given to the area of national capacity-building.

Of course, peacekeeping operations cannot fully
take upon themselves the responsibility for long-term
peacebuilding and must coordinate their work with
other important players, the Peacebuilding Commission
and regional organizations, funds and programmes.

In connection with United Nations peacekeeping,
we would like to draw attention to several issues. Each
peacekeeping operation is unique, and its mandate is
determined by the Council for each specific situation.
We deem counterproductive, and in some cases even
dangerous, the broadening interpretation of Council
mandates by both individual States and the Secretariat,
which prepares guidelines and instructions for missions.
In that respect, there should be no generalized approach.

As important as the protection of civilians
is, we believe that it must not overshadow other
important challenges in the context of the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. We are equally concerned at
the trend towards an arbitrary interpretation of the norms
of international humanitarian law for the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and their application to the
responsibility to protect. It is unacceptable to use issues
related to the protection of civilians and overall human
rights to achieve political goals, especially as a pretext
for interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
States.

We call for extreme caution and for discussions on
strengthening mandates and increasing the operational
capability of peacekeepers with respect to the use of
force and intimidation. Peacekeeping operations have
a unique kind of legitimacy, so it would be dangerous
for both United Nations peacekeeping operations and
the United Nations system overall if a situation were
to arise in which the Blue Helmets transcended their
neutrality and were drawn into an internal political
conflict, providing support to one of the participants.

The safety of peacekeepers must be an absolute
priority. Recently, in South Sudan, the Sudan People's
Liberation Army shot down a Russian helicopter with
four Russian nationals on board who were working on
contract with the United Nations Mission in that country.
That incident is a tragic reminder of the responsibility
of States where United Nations peacekeeping missions
are deployed to ensure their security and to ensure
favourable conditions so as to enable them to meet
their objectives. The safety of peacekeepers must be
unconditional and a priority in the management of
peacekeeping operations. We are not pleased with the
very slow pace of the investigation of that incident. We
anticipate that the Secretariat and the South Sudanese
authorities will take measures to speed up its careful
investigation and that the perpetrators will be brought
to justice. It is necessary to ensure that such incidents
are not repeated in South Sudan or anywhere else.

Peacekeeping operations will be successful
if their efforts are in line with the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law,
with unfailing observance of the principle of the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
based on the degree of our collective preparedness to
invest in the Organization's knowledge base, resources
and personnel.

We thank the delegation of Pakistan for the initiative
of holding this meeting today, and we support the draft
resolution (S/2013/27) it has submitted, ofwhich we are
also a sponsor.

