The Secretary-General: With this resolution, the
United Nations Security Council has charted the way
towards a better future for the inhabitants of Kosovo: a
future in which all the refugees and internally displaced
persons can return safely to their homes; a future in which
full respect is assured for the civil, political and human
rights of all.

Today, we are seeing at least the beginning of the end
of a dark and desolate chapter in the history of the Balkans.
Today, we embark on the path of peace. This path will be
marked by difficulties and dangers that will require no less
courage and determination than the events that brought us
to this point. Let no one be in any doubt about the
magnitude of our challenge: after the violence, the human
rights abuses, the expulsions and the devastation of the past
year, the task of restoring Kosovo to a semblance of normal
life is immense.

Rebuilding homes, restoring infrastructure, renewing
institutions and revitalizing civil society will require
sacrifice, dedication and persistence on the part of all who
share responsibility for the future of Kosovo. In planning
terms, winter is fast approaching, and we are in a race
against time.

The United Nations is determined to lead the civilian
implementation of the peace effectively and efficiently. But
to do so, we need the cooperation of all parties, and we
need the means to carry out the mandate.

The commitment to peace is not enough. The will to
implement it - in all its aspects - is what counts. This
includes tasks for which the United Nations is not
responsible, but which are vital if peace and stability are
to be restored. I have in mind, for example, the need for
the full withdrawal of Serb military, paramilitary and
police forces, and for the demilitarization of the UCK. I
look to those responsible for the security aspects of the
resolution to act swiftly.

I intend very soon to revert to the Council with
specific proposals on how to make the civilian operation
authorized by this resolution truly integrated and effective.

There also lies ahead the hard and extremely
complex work of building a durable peace, of reconciling
positions which are far apart. In doing so, we need to deal
with the roots of this crisis.

I said a few minutes ago that this was the beginning
of the end of a dark and ugly chapter. Let us rejoice
today that the Council has adopted a landmark resolution
which gives strong legal underpinning to the task ahead.
But let us not be triumphalist, for that task is indeed
daunting. Instead, let us - all of us - buckle down and
get on with the job.
