Mrs. Arrieta Munguia (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We wish to thank Sweden for having convened
this very timely debate and express to all members
of the Security Council our hope that 2017 will be a
year of peace, as called for by the Secretary-General.
Mexico hopes that under the leadership of Secretary-
General Guterres, the Organization will effectively and
in a timely way address the current challenges on the
international peace and security agenda. We fully agree
with his vision of linking the pillars of international
security and development as a meaningful path
towards prevention.
That is why, given the current evolution of armed
conflicts, it is essential to make urgent and innovative
changes to the tools that the Organization has at its
disposal to prevent them, through a focus on the
underlying causes of such conflicts.

Unfortunately, the Security Council has sought to
resolve and manage conflicts and has not really focused
on preventing them. This has resulted in very high
monetary costs and a significant loss of life. However,
conflict prevention is also the responsibility of the
Organization as a whole. We must create a paradigm
shift so that people experiencing and suffering from
situations of conflict or post-conflict can be the
protagonists of public policies that strive to achieve the
well-being of societies in the long term.

The involvement of the Secretary-General directly
or through his envoys or special representatives is
vital to early warning of conflicts and could be key
in prevention efforts. Enabling the Secretary-General
to request advisory opinions from the International
Court of Justice could be a valuable instrument of
preventive diplomacy that would strengthen the work
of the Secretariat within the framework of the purposes
of the Charter.

The adoption of historic resolutions - General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) - has demonstrated that both
the Assembly and the Council are committed to guiding
the Organization's work on the basis of sustainable
peace, and the concept has also been incorporated in
the programme of work of the Secretary-General.

Mexico has supported the Group of Friends of
Sustaining Peace, and in this context we look forward
to working with the Secretary-General and members of
the Security Council in the coming years to gain a better
understanding of the potential of this conceptual and
systemic challenge, especially given the fragmentation
of the work of the Organization. This, of course,
requires the active and meaningful participation of the
principal organs of the United Nations as well as of the

Secretariat, agencies, funds, programmes, specialized
agencies and United Nations field operations.

This paradigm shift should lead to the achievement
of international peace and security not only as ends in
themselves, but rather as a way to prevent social and
humanitarian disasters caused by wars. This would
mean moving from a culture of non-interference to
one of non-indifference, particularly when it comes to
human suffering.
