Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): The
Government of Rwanda would like to congratulate the
Security Council on its important initiative, under the
auspices and with the support of the Secretary-General,
to visit the Great Lakes region of Africa. For us, that
visit was a success not only for the Council, which
conducted the visit, but also for the countries of the
region that it visited. With the arrival in the field of the
most important body of the United Nations, the Lusaka
peace Agreement has been reinvigorated and its
signatories have been given determination to see it
succeed.

Nevertheless, the disarmament and
disengagement of the negative forces, which include
those who planned and carried out the genocide in
Rwanda - namely, the Interahamwe militia and the
former Rwandan Armed Forces (ex-FAR), which have
been welcomed with open arms on Congolese soil
since the time of the Mobutu regime - continue to be
necessary. Those forces will continue to be an obstacle
unless they are brought under control. All support
provided for those forces, no matter by whom, must
immediately and definitely come to an end.

The Government of Rwanda is pleased to see that
in the report presented by the Ambassador of France,
who headed the mission, the Security Council
concluded from its visit that there is a need for
assistance for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and
social and economic development of countries that
have been victims of conflicts. That international
solidarity must take shape very urgently, especially for
Rwanda, which is unfortunately the African victim that
has suffered most from the odious crime of genocide.
The members of the Council were able to visit
genocide sites during their visit to Rwanda and were
able to realize the enormity of the crimes that were
committed.

In that regard, were the Security Council to pay
particular attention to the report of the commission led
by former Swedish Prime Minister Carlsson and to the
implementation of its recommendations regarding post-
genocide financial assistance to Rwanda, it would be of
great assistance to us.

The Political Committee for the Lusaka peace
Agreement, which is headed by Rwanda, will continue
to cooperate closely with the Security Council in order
that our desire to see the Lusaka peace Agreement
implemented in all its clauses can be realized.

Allow me to conclude this brief statement by
warmly congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
remarkable presidency of the Council in the month of
May 2001, as well as on having so effectively
conducted the current and previous debates.

