Mr. Pascoe: We are at a very important juncture
in the search for peace in the Middle East. A new push
for peace is being made and holds genuine promise.
However, the situation on the ground remains one of
deep concern.

Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas
continue their bilateral dialogue. They recently agreed
to set up negotiating teams to assist them in
transforming their discussions into an agreed text. A lot
of work remains to be done if these talks are to produce
a substantive agreement. United States Secretary of
State Rice is currently in the region to take stock of
progress and encourage further effort. She will brief
the Quartet when it meets here in New York on Sunday.

Quartet representative Blair recently completed
his second visit to the region to develop his agenda on
economic revival and institutional reform. He will also
brief the Quartet on Sunday. The United Nations
continues to give Mr. Blair's efforts its full support.

As these diplomatic efforts have proceeded,
violence among Palestinians has killed 11 and injured
95, including 8 children. There have been several
violent confrontations with heavy exchanges of fire,
reflecting a deep and continuing political crisis.
In Gaza, Hamas has replaced senior personnel in
ministries, while adopting increasingly repressive
measures to solidify its control. I am particularly
concerned at reports of mounting human rights abuses
at the hands of paramilitary Hamas forces, including
the violent dispersal of demonstrations and the illegal
detention of other Palestinians.

In the West Bank, Palestinian Authority security
forces have been arresting alleged Hamas members.
The Palestinian Authority has closed over 100 charities
and non-governmental organizations. In the absence of
sessions of the Palestinian Legislative Council,
President Abbas continues to rule by decree. A recent
decree introduced major changes to the electoral law
by adopting a full proportional system and requiring
any party participating in future elections to be
committed to the 1988 Declaration of Independence of
the Palestine Liberation Organization as well as the
Basic Law. Hamas has strongly attacked that decree.

The continued division of the occupied
Palestinian territory is a matter of deep political,
security and socioeconomic concern. Obviously, the
longer it continues the harder it will be to overcome.
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad insist that
Hamas apologize for its violent takeover of Gaza in
June, reverse the steps it has taken, and recognize the
Palestinian Authority. However, Hamas continues to
reject those demands and to call for dialogue, while
solidifying its de facto rule in Gaza.

Violence between Israelis and Palestinians has
also continued. In the reporting period, 20 Palestinians
were killed and 89 injured, while one Israeli was killed
and 50 were injured. I condemn the continued
indiscriminate rocket fire by Palestinian militants in
Gaza against civilian population centres in southern
Israel. Those attacks have caused casualties and
damage, particularly in Sderot, at which 10 rockets
were fired in the opening two days of the school year.
A rocket fired by Islamic Jihad also struck an Israeli
army base at Zikim on ll September, injuring 44
soldiers, including one critically, while 23 others were
treated for shock. Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit remains in
captivity in Gaza and efforts to renew talks for his
release appear to have made no headway.

Yesterday, the Israeli security cabinet declared
Gaza an enemy entity and announced its intention to
interrupt essential services, such as electricity and fuel,
to the civilian population. Israel has also closed the
07-51121

Strip for the movement of Palestinians in and out and
indicated that it will severely restrict the movement of
internationals. As noted yesterday, while we fully
understand Israel's security concerns, the steps
announced would, if implemented, violate Israel's
obligations towards the civilian population under
international humanitarian and human rights law. There
are 1.4 million people in Gaza, including the old, the
young and the sick. They should not be punished for
the unacceptable actions of militants and extremists.
We believe that Israel should rethink that decision.

Israel Defense Forces (IDF) actions have also
caused civilian casualties. On 22 August, Palestinian
twins aged 10 and a 12-year old from the same family
were killed by an IDF missile targeting northern Gaza.
No satisfactory public investigation or action has been
taken in similar incidents to give confidence that the
IDF is making a maximum effort to prevent such
casualties.

In the West Bank, the IDF conducted
110 searches, detaining 175 Palestinians. The IDF
claims that its security measures have prevented a
number of planned suicide bombings and that earlier in
the month it uncovered an explosives laboratory in
Nablus. A raid into Nablus which began on
18 September and is continuing has left a 17-year old
Palestinian and a disabled Palestinian man dead. An
Israeli soldier has also been killed in the incursion.

Earlier steps to build confidence and improve
conditions on the ground in the West Bank have not
been built upon in the reporting period. For example, a
welcome Israeli initiative to release a further number
of Palestinian prisoners appears to have been slowed
down. No action has been taken to ease obstacles to
freedom of movement in the West Bank, which have
risen to 563. This level of restriction is contrary to the
Agreement on Movement and Access and to the goal of
rejuvenating the Palestinian economy. Action on this
matter is now critical.

Settlement construction is continuing on both
sides of the barrier in the majority of settlements. No
action has been taken against outposts. A new outpost
is visible within 100 metres of an Israeli army post at
the northern entrance to Ramallah. Continued
settlement expansion is contrary to international law
and the road map and discredits efforts to advance the
peace process.
07-51121

Construction of the barrier deep within the West
Bank continues, contrary to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. On 4 September, the
Israeli High Court ordered a section of the barrier
rerouted where it deviates from the 1967 armistice line
to incorporate the settlement bloc of Modiin. The
Israeli army was unable to make a security case for the
planned route in front of a judge, and the route was
altered as a result.

The Palestinian Authority under Prime Minister
Fayyad is working to impose law and order, institute
reform and good governance, and improve living
conditions. On security, more needs to be done to build
confidence among Israelis and Palestinians alike that
the Palestinian Authority security services will operate
with professionalism and determination to prevail over
militias. That is a key test for the Authority and
meeting it is vital to the success of the political
process. For example, further action is required to
disarm militants Israel has agreed to remove from
wanted lists.

With the resumption of Israeli transfers of
Palestinian tax revenue, public sector salaries are being
paid in the West Bank and Gaza, though in the case of
Gaza most public sector employees are not reporting to
work due to the dispute over who they report to.

The Government has embarked on an integrated
budgeting and planning approach that will result in a
Palestinian development and reform plan for 2008-
2010. The plan aims to improve resource allocation to
national priorities, increase the predictability of
funding for services, and provide the basis for
strengthened public expenditure management.

The scale of the challenge to rejuvenate the
Palestinian economy is underlined by the World Bank
in a report prepared for the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
which documents a comprehensive drop in
socioeconomic indicators throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory. Per capita gross domestic product
declined from $1,612 in 1999 to $1,129 in 2006.
Chronic diseases have increased by 31 per cent since
2005. One in 10 Palestinian children under five years
of age is now stunted as a result of malnutrition.
Palestinian private sector capability and investment
potential are declining. The economy is becoming
increasingly reliant on short-term aid, mostly spent on
recurring expenditure rather than development.
3
The report goes on to recommend a series of
measures capable of reversing those trends if
implemented in parallel: full implementation of the
November 2005 Agreement on Access and Movement;
more work to consolidate the rule of law in the
occupied Palestinian territories; and aid delivered
predictably and through the Palestinian Authority. The
Bank also stresses that the Gaza Strip represents 40 per
cent of the population of the occupied Palestinian
territory and must be incorporated into any recovery
plan.

In that context, the continued closure of Gaza is a
source of deep concern. While humanitarian supplies
are reaching the population, the Karni and Rafah
crossings have been closed since the Hamas takeover
in mid-June. That has caused severe personal and
economic hardship. Some $200-million-worth of
United Nations and World Bank infrastructure
programmes in the Gaza strip have been halted. A third
of students have begun their school year without
textbooks. Almost all exports from the Gaza Strip have
ceased, though recently arrangements have been made
to facilitate a limited amount of exports through Kerem
Shalom. The inflow of foodstuffs into the Gaza Strip is
slowly declining - approximately 27 fewer truckloads
per day in August as compared to July. The World Food
Programme reports that current levels of food imports
only cover about 60 per cent of food import needs.

The Acting Special Coordinator is developing, in
close consultation with many interested parties, a
proposal to increase access through the crossings,
including re-opening Karni. I call on all concerned to
work with the United Nations to find a secure and
satisfactory way to re-open the crossings.

I now turn to the regional situation. During the
reporting period, a number of Arab League member
States, as well as the Arab League Secretary-General,
have stressed that the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue must
produce substantive results if it is to receive Arab
support and be the basis for a successful international
meeting. They have also called for the meeting to be
comprehensive.

On 9 September 2007, the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic wrote to
the Secretary-General and to the President of the
Security Council, alleging a breach of the airspace of
the Syrian Arab Republic by the Israeli air force on
6 September. The Israeli Government has not
commented on those allegations, which have been the
subject of extensive media speculation.

In Lebanon, Member of Parliament Antoine
Ghanem of the 14 March parliamentary group was
assassinated yesterday. Seven other people were killed
and many more were injured in the explosion. The
Secretary-General strongly condemned that act of
terrorism, which, like others before it, was aimed at
undermining Lebanon's stability.

The Secretary-General also urged the Lebanese to
exercise utmost calm and restraint and encouraged
continued dialogue among them. I would also like to
inform the Council that yesterday the Secretary-
General received a letter from Prime Minister Siniora
of Lebanon, requesting that the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
extend assistance in the investigation of this heinous
crime. The Secretary-General will convey that letter to
the Security Council immediately.

In a positive development, on 2 September, after
15 weeks of fighting in and around the Nahr el-Bared
refugee camp, the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
declared victory over Fatah al-Islam. The fighting,
which started on 20 May, resulted in 166 Lebanese
soldiers being killed. Approximately 222 militants
were also killed and 202 were arrested. In recent days,
the army has continued to arrest militants who had
managed to escape and is also questioning those under
arrest. I pay tribute to the LAF soldiers and stress the
importance of the Lebanese Government exercising its
full sovereignty and control over all Lebanese territory,
and for securing a victory for all of Lebanon against a
clear threat to its sovereignty and stability.

In order to address the immediate and longer-
term requirements of both the Palestinian and Lebanese
communities affected by the fighting, the Government
of Lebanon has appealed for approximately
$382 million, which includes a new emergency flash
appeal issued by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) for $55 million. The UNRWA appeal
remains underfunded, with only $17 million in pledges
to date. I urge Member States to assist the Government
of Lebanon to meet the humanitarian and
reconstruction challenges.

Political tensions remain high surrounding the
upcoming presidential elections in Lebanon. It is
paramount that the elections be held in accordance
with the time frame and procedures stipulated in the
Lebanese constitution. That requires an open and
genuine dialogue among the parties with a view to
electing a President who enjoys the broadest support of
the Lebanese people. The Secretary-General has been
in contact with Lebanese leaders to encourage them to
spare no effort in reaching an agreement on a
President. The Special Coordinator for Lebanon is also
continuing to work closely with all parties on the
ground towards that end.

The situation in the area of operation of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains calm, with no serious incidents to report. In
the monthly tripartite meetings, the parties agreed on
the modalities for visibly marking an initial
6-kilometre section of the Blue Line. Cooperation
between UNIFIL and the LAF is being further
enhanced by the initiation of some coordinated
patrolling activities, which it is hoped will increase in
the weeks ahead. During the reporting period, the
Commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces also visited
UNIFIL, and a successful joint UNIFIL-LAF military
exercise was held.

Israeli air violations of the Blue Line have
continued. UNIFIL observed a total of 99 violations
since the last briefing to the Council. Israel continues
to claim that the violations are necessary to counter
breaches of the resolution 1701 (2006) arms embargo,
which it says continue to occur. The United Nations
will continue to assert in the clearest terms with both
parties that one violation cannot justify another.

As the Council is aware, the Quartet meets this
Sunday, 23 September, followed by an iftar with a
number of members of the League of Arab States. The
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC) meets the
following day. The Secretary-General will host or
co-host all of those events.
07-51121

The Quartet will hear from Mr. Blair on his plans
for the period ahead, take stock of progress in the
bilateral talks and discuss the way ahead in preparation
for the international meeting called by President Bush.
The Secretary-General will also impress upon his
colleagues his concern for the welfare of the
Palestinian population in Gaza. The iftar is an
opportunity for the Quartet to convey its determination
to work closely with its Arab partners in an effort to
realize the potential of the Arab Peace Initiative and to
advance the cause of a comprehensive regional peace.

The AHLC meeting is the occasion for Prime
Minister Fayyad to present his Government's plan for
Palestinian economic revival and for donors to signal
their support in advance of a donor pledging
conference before the end of the year.

Those meetings will only be as useful as the
agreements and steps of implementation they help
bring about, and the changes on the ground they help to
catalyse. Much is at stake in the coming months. The
situation on the ground is volatile and there are many
obstacles to progress. The united effort of the
international community will be vital to ensure that the
renewed diplomatic effort produces something
meaningful and durable. There will be difficult and
unpopular choices ahead. Calculated risks are required
for peace. The risks of inaction or timidity are
incomparably greater than the risks of action. Now is
the time for leaders to put their long-suffering people
first, to think of the next generation and to do what
needs to be done.

