Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes this briefing on the situation in
Libya. We congratulate Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL), on the quality of his briefing and reiterate
our support for his tireless efforts to promote peace and
reconciliation in Libya. We also commend Ambassador
Juergen Schulz for his detailed presentation of the thirty-
second quarterly report of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate him on his election to chair the Committee
and to wish him and his team every success in their
work over the next two years.

The actions undertaken by Mr. Faiez Serraj,
President of the Presidency Council of the Government
of National Accord, including the publication of decree
1303, which established the Committee on Security
Arrangements for Tripoli, raised great hopes for a halt
to the wave of violence in the capital. But the renewed
fighting in Tripoli is not only a worrying violation of the
ceasefire negotiated by the United Nations in September
2018, it has also put the relative improvement in the
security situation in jeopardy. My country deplores and
condemns the sporadic attacks by Da'esh, particularly
that of 25 December on the Foreign Ministry building,
which should focus the Council's attention on the threat
that this terrorist group continues to represent.

On the political front, we regret to have to note the
continuing divergence of opinions on the interpretation
of the constitutional referendum law adopted by the
House of Representatives on 26 November, which could
delay the holding of the presidential and parliamentary
elections agreed to at the Paris meeting on 29 May
2018. In that regard, my country welcomes the ongoing
consultations between UNSMIL and the President
of the Assembly aimed at reaching a consensus on
the law, in order to enable the upcoming presidential
and parliamentary elections to be held. The elections
should help to end political instability, in line with
the commitments made at the Palermo conference on
13 November and as reflected in the Paris political
declaration. Also, in order to ensure inclusive and
credible elections, it is vital that all the stakeholders
do more to improve the security situation, reclaim
the areas controlled by armed groups and trafficking
networks and extend State authority throughout the
national territory.
My delegation welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to organize a
national conference in the first quarter of2019. We assure
him of our full support in organizing that important
event. We await the conference's conclusions with
great interest and hope fervently that it can culminate
in a national consensus among all the Libyan forces,
including the tribes, women and young people, whose
contribution to the national reconciliation process is
extremely important. In that connection the regional
actors have a significant role to play, which is why
my delegation would like to welcome the willingness
expressed by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on 17 October 2018 to support UNSMIL
in organizing the conference.

With regard to the humanitarian situation and to
human rights issues, my country calls on all actors to
respect international standards in this area by ensuring
the protection of the civilians and migrants who have
been inhumanely treated and arbitrarily detained. In that
regard, we would like to acknowledge Qatar's generous
contribution of $20 million for the establishment of a
fund, managed by the African Union, that will finance
the evacuation of migrants from Libya and their
reintegration into their countries of origin.

On the economic front, my country notes with
satisfaction that the National Oil Corporation's
revenues for 2018 were 78 per cent higher than in
2017, reaching their highest level in six years. We also
welcome Mr. Serraj's ambitious monetary and fiscal
reforms and his determination to solve the Libyan
financial system's problems, particularly the existence
of two central banks and two interest rate systems, and
the shortage of foreign exchange.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction
that there can be no alternative to a political solution to
the crisis in Libya. We therefore urge the international
community to support Mr. Salame's efforts to organize
a national conference in the next few months, thereby
giving new impetus to the political dialogue in the
country. We also urge all stakeholders to cease
hostilities and engage constructively in this direction
in order to break the impasse in Libya.

