Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are pleased to congratulate the
French Republic for the important work it has been
doing in the fight against terrorism financing and for
organizing this interesting debate where, without a
doubt, we have enriched ourselves with the information
shared. We are also grateful for the time taken by
Mr. Voronkov, Mr. Billingslea and Ms. Buku to enhance
this debate with their knowledge.

The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to combating all terrorist and terrorist-related activities.
In that regard, we applaud the efforts of all the
delegations of the member countries of the Security
Council, in particular the French delegation, which,
through their tireless work and after long hours
of negotiations, have succeeded in adopting today
resolution 2462 (2019), which is yet another tool for
combating terrorist financing activities.

Security Council resolutions have laid a solid
normative foundation that will serve as a frame of
reference for the national legislation of the various
States and strengthen the national legal framework
established to criminalize and punish terrorist
activities. For that reason, the Dominican Republic is
pleased to be a co-sponsor of the resolution that we
have adopted today. The Dominican State understands
the vulnerability of economic sectors to the financing
of terrorism or terrorism-related activities. That is why
we are working on an action plan to prevent and combat
the financing of terrorism, as part of the strategic plan
of the National Committee against Money Laundering
and Terrorist Financing.

In order to develop better communication and
cooperation between Dominican authorities and the
private sector, my country recognizes the importance
of investigating and identifying the areas that should
have priority in that bisectoral relationship in the
fight against terrorist financing. In that regard, the
Dominican State, since the enactment of Law 155-17
against money laundering and terrorist financing, has
identified the importance of training the private sector
on the scope of that law and has held frequent seminars
on its application and implementation.

The Dominican Republic stresses how important
it is for States to work internally to implement the
standards established in the text adopted today. That is
essential ifthe resolution is to be an effective tool in the
fight against terrorist financing.

Finally, we call on the Member States to take
account the relevance of the work carried out by
non-profit and non-governmental organizations. We
must always work together to find a formula that
ensures that the implementation of measures to prevent
and suppress terrorism financing does not end up
negatively affecting to the point of cancelling out the
excellent work that those organizations do.

