Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for convening today's
debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his briefing, and
the Executive Director of United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
statement.

The year 2015 is the first year of the 10-year
transformation decade in Afghanistan. Since the
beginning of the year, the Afghan Government has
made an effort to maintain national stability, remained
committed to promoting Afghanistan's economic
development, steadily advanced the rule of law and
achieved positive results. The rebuilding of State
institutions and the economic and social development
of the country continue to face challenges and
complexities and require long-term effort on the part
of various sectors within Afghanistan. Also required
is the international community's assistance and
support based on respect for Afghanistan's sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. I would like to
emphasize the following points.

First, China supports the Afghan National Unity
Government in the effective exercise of authority
and in the strengthening of its governance. In the
nearly one year since the Afghan National Unity
Government took office, positive results have been
achieved in Afghanistan's political, economic and
social development and in the rule of law, which is
quite encouraging. However, the Afghan Government
is still faced with numerous challenges in terms of State
governance, and the international community should
give it its due trust and support and help it to enhance
its exercise of authority and capacity for governance.
We hope that the different sectors in Afghanistan will
strengthen the country's unity, continue to resolve
differences through dialogue and consultation, and
remain committed to the broad picture of national
reconstruction and socioeconomic development.

Secondly, China is ready to continue to play a
positive role in taking forward the Afghan reconciliation
process. China has always supported this reconciliation
process. We are pleased to note that the Afghan
Government and the Taliban held formal peace talks
in July in Pakistan. We appreciate the efforts made by
both Afghanistan and Pakistan. China hopes that the
two sides, Afghanistan and Pakistan, will value and
maintain the good momentum of the relations between
the two countries and strengthen coordination and
cooperation in the reconciliation process. China is
ready to work with the relevant parties to continue to
play a positive and constructive role in taking forward
the Afghan reconciliation process.
Thirdly, the international community should
continue to help the Afghan Government strengthen
its security-building and maintain national stability.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains fragile,
and there have been frequent occurrences of security
incidents that have brought about heavy civilian
casualties. In July 2015, at the Council of the Heads
of State of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
President Xi Jinping of China said that the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization needed to properly respond
to the Afghan situation, strengthen cooperation with
Afghanistan in the security sector and help Afghan
security forces strengthen capacity-building. China
supports the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
other international and regional organizations in the
light of the Afghan need and will continue to help
Afghanistan build capacity in its security forces and
police sector so as to improve its ability to respond
to security threats and challenges and play a more
positive role in maintaining and advancing national
reconciliation and economic rebuilding. We hope that
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and other international organizations in Afghanistan
will strengthen their coordination with the country and
further improve their assistance to Afghanistan, thus
making further contributions to solving the Afghan
issue.

Fourthly, China welcomes Afghanistan's increased
participation in regional cooperation. Afghanistan's
peace and prosperity is in the common interests of the
countries of the region, but it cannot be achieved without
those countries' cooperation and shared participation.
China supports Afghanistan in taking advantage of its
geographic location and in strengthening its cooperation
in trade, energy and interconnectivity with the rest
of the region and in creating a good environment for
harmonious coexistence and common development. We
hope that the countries of the region will effectively
respond to terrorism, drug trafficking and other common
threats and challenges by strengthening cooperation.

China hopes that this fifth Foreign Ministers meeting
ofthe Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process will yield positive
results.

The year 2015 marks the sixtieth anniversary of
diplomatic relations between China and Afghanistan
and is also the Year of China-Afghanistan Friendly
Cooperation. We will continue to nurture the China-
Afghanistan strategic cooperation partnership and we
are ready to help the Afghan Government accelerate its
economic and social development within the framework
of the New Silk Road initiative.
On 26 September, China, Afghanistan and the
United States will jointly hold a high-level meeting on
Afghan peacebuilding and regional cooperation. We
welcome the active participation of all relevant parties
in order to jointly contribute to the achievement of
lasting peace in Afghanistan at an early date.

