Mr. Al-Otaiba (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I am delighted, on behalf of the United Arab
Emirates, to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
distinguished manner in which you have presided over
the Security Council this month, and I wish you every
success. I would like also to seize this opportunity to
thank your predecessor, the representative of Denmark,
for her wise leadership of the Council last month.

Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territories
are facing barbarous destruction at the hands of Israel.
It is general and deliberate destruction of their social
and economic infrastructure as well as the
displacement and massacre of thousands of their
inhabitants - in particular women, children and the
poor - by Israeli forces that are equipped with the
most sophisticated weapons, including weapons
condemned by the international community. Those
actions are a stark and blatant violation of all
international law provisions, the United Nations
Charter, and human rights conventions, including the
Geneva conventions. In addition, those actions
constitute an organized war crime and State terrorism,
which are punishable under international law.

Under no condition can those barbarous and
criminal Israeli acts, committed largely against
civilians, be justified. Those actions include the
adoption by Israel of a scorched-earth policy and
collective punishment targeting civilian infrastructures
that had been funded by donors over many years.
Electricity and water supplies have also been cut, as
well as humanitarian assistance. Israel has justified
those actions through its legitimate right to self-
defence. The question may be raised, however - how
can two peoples, in their entirety, be punished, and
how can they be exposed to such treatment for the sake
of the so-called campaign by Israel to release its
soldiers who have been abducted for a swap with
political prisoners detained in Israeli jails for years,
including children and women?

My country condemns the use of force and
military solutions, as such solutions do not solve the
problems of the civilian population. On the contrary,
military action complicates and prolongs such
problems. Therefore we strongly condemn the
continued Israeli aggression against Lebanon and the
Gaza Strip.

In addition, we remain deeply concerned by the
inability of the Security Council to put an end to the
suffering of the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. We
believe that such inaction incites Israel to continue its
barbarous violations and destruction in the Lebanese
and Palestinian territories. Therefore, we urge the
Security Council to reject the double-standard policy
and put pressure on Israel to end its aggression against
the Lebanese and the Palestinian peoples, and thus,
create greater balance in the region, rather than
conflict.

We urge the United Nations to take action to
mobilize humanitarian support on the part of the
international community in order to alleviate the
suffering of the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. In
that respect, we support all the current diplomatic
efforts aimed at finding a just, peaceful and
comprehensive solution to the crisis in the region.
Moreover, we support the attempts aimed - as far as
Lebanon is concerned - at the proclamation of an
immediate and unconditional ceasefire under the
auspices of the United Nations, calling upon Israel to
end its aggression against the Lebanese people, to stop
targeting civilian populations, to ensure access to
emergency humanitarian assistance in the affected
areas, and to stop targeting humanitarian convoys,
which has resulted in, among other things, the recent
and unfortunate destruction of a convoy from the Arab
Emirates which was carrying basic foodstuffs and
medicines.
We also call for the full implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004), including the
immediate withdrawal of Israel from the Sheba'a
Farms, as well as the start of negotiations for the
release of the detainees. Assistance should also be
provided to the Lebanese Government so as to enable it
to extend its authority over the entire Lebanese
territory. An emergency meeting of donors should be
convened in order to organize assistance for Lebanon
and to reschedule Lebanese debt to enable it to cope
with the current difficult conditions.

We reaffirm that our country, which has shown
great generosity to Lebanon so far, will continue to
offer assistance whenever it is required.
Concerning the occupied Palestinian territories,
we call upon the Israeli Government to immediately
cease all military operations in the Gaza Strip,
withdraw all its troops from the occupied territories,
release the thousands of detainees held in Israel, stop
taking unilateral measures - including settlement
activities and the construction of the separation wall -
halt the implementation of extrajudicial measures and
assaults with regard to the Palestinian people, and
ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance to the
affected areas. We also call for the liberation of the
detainees of the Palestinian Authority, so that the
Palestinian Authority can assume its full
responsibilities with regard to its people.

Finally, we call upon Israel to compensate all
victims of its actions in the region, in order to end the
crisis and guarantee its own security. We cannot accept
aggression. A solution to the problem can be achieved
only through continued negotiation, a continuation of
the peace process and the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the occupied Arab territories - including the
Golan Heights, Jerusalem and southern Lebanon - in
accordance with international resolutions, and the Arab
Peace Initiative, which calls for the establishment of
two States, a Palestinian State and an Israeli State,
living peacefully, side by side, in the region.

