Mr. Annabi: As you have just noted, Mr.
President, members of the Council have before them
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), which was issued on 14 April. The report
outlines the activities of UNMIK and the main
developments in Kosovo, Serbia and Montenegro,
during the first three months of this year.

As suggested by last year's Security Council
mission to Kosovo, the structure of the report follows
the eight benchmarks which have been defined by Mr.
Michael Steiner, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, with the aim of providing a realistic
picture of the progress made and challenges faced in
achieving these agreed-upon benchmarks. The report,
therefore, goes into somewhat more detail than is
usually the case.

The report highlights the continuation of the
transfer to the Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government of the responsibilities outlined in
chapter 5 of the Constitutional Framework. A
significant step in this regard was the establishment of
a joint Transfer Council, comprising representatives
from UNMIK and from the Provisional Institutions, to
oversee, coordinate and manage the transfer process.
The Transfer Council met for the first time on 8 April
and established three working groups: one on finance,
recruitment and logistics; one on technical assistance;
and one on monitoring and intervention. The transfer
process will continue to be implemented at a pace
which will take into account the capacity of the
Provisional Institutions to assume the relevant
responsibilities.

The authority of UNMIK under Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the reserved powers and
responsibilities listed in chapter 8 of the Constitutional
Framework will not be affected. At a later stage, the
increased involvement of the provisional institutions
and of the people of Kosovo in the administrative and
operational functions in the specific reserved areas
identified in chapter 8 will be addressed in accordance
with the provisions of that chapter. This involvement,
however, will not affect UNMIK's authority or
responsibilities, nor will it include a decision-making
role.
The report shows that Kosovo has some way to
go in establishing representative and functioning
institutions, particularly since the Provisional
Institutions have been hampered by political disputes
between and within parties. For example, while the
Kosovo Assembly continued to hold regular meetings,
it remained unable to bridge political and ethnic
differences, leading to several walkouts - by Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb parties - and to an
inability to hold two meetings.

The report also shows that ethnic violence and
crime seemed to be on the increase again after a
decline in December 2002 and that, in general,
important minority issues such as freedom of
movement, use of language and alphabet, and receipt of
fair share financing from the municipalities remained
problematic, with little tangible progress.

The continuation of ethnically motivated
incidents has remained a barrier to the free movement
of minority community members, prevented substantial
improvement in the level of confidence and made
achieving sustainable minority returns to Kosovo
difficult, time-consuming and resource-intensive. Still,
statistics for the beginning of 2003 indicate an
increased pace of returns, resulting from improved
structures to support the returns process, enhanced
engagement by local authorities and internally
displaced persons, and support from the donor
community.

The report highlights some positive achievements
during this period, such as the increased numbers of
minorities in the civil service, including in the
judiciary, and the continued development of the
Kosovo Police Service. The Kosovo Police Service
officers now outnumber the international police
officers by close to 1,000 and have been placed in
charge of three police stations. The local judiciary dealt
with all civil cases and with 97 per cent of the criminal
cases. Some progress was made in dismantling the
parallel judicial system in Northern Kosovo with the
appointment of Kosovo Serb judges and the official
opening of some courts in Northern Kosovo under
UNMIK administration. Institutional mechanisms in
support of minority participation in the civil service
were strengthened through legislation and
administrative support, with the Office of the Prime
Minister playing a leading role.

Another positive development has been the
transfer of administrative and operational
responsibilities for tax administration to the
Provisional Institutions. In addition, the Kosovo Trust
Agency adopted its operational policies and procedures
and approved the first six socially owned enterprises
for privatization.

It is also worth noting that the Council of Europe
continued its work in developing a concept for a
sustainable reform of local Government, aimed at the
gradual devolution of powers to the local level,
bringing service delivery and decision-making closer to
the people and identifying the most appropriate
structures for local democracy, in line with the
principles of the European Charter of Local Self-
Government and not based upon ethnic divisions. The
task is being carried out through consultations with
local political party leaders, representatives of the
Provisional Institutions, local leaders and international
representatives.

Also, a significant event was the arrest of Kosovo
Albanians by the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia, which occurred without major
incident and without opposition from the political
parties. There have been a number of peaceful
demonstrations against these arrests and other trials,
arrests and judicial investigations, primarily of former
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) members charged,
among other things, with war crimes, terrorism and
organized crime. The report notes that, overall, the rate
of criminal incidents for the first three months of this
year remained generally consistent with that of the last
reporting period. There were, however, grenade and
other attacks against UNMIK police stations in Pec,
Pristina and Mitrovica; fortunately, these attacks did
not result in any injuries. Since the report was
finalized, a witness for the prosecution in the
concluded trial of five former members of the KLA
was, unfortunately, shot dead.

One example of growing extremism was the
explosion on 12 April, which caused serious damage to
a railway bridge in northern Kosovo, cutting off
railway traffic to Central Serbia. Two individuals who
were reportedly involved in planting the bomb, and one
of whom was apparently a member of the Kosovo
Protection Corps (KPC), were killed in the incident. An
ethnic Albanian extremist group has claimed
responsibility for this attack, following which Mr.
Steiner issued an Administrative Direction
implementing the UNMIK regulation on the
prohibition of terrorism and related offences,
determining that this ethnic Albanian extremist group
is an illegal organization as defined by the regulation.
Three individuals have been detained in connection
with this attack. A trial on terrorism charges against
three suspects who are allegedly members of this group
is also currently underway. The Kosovo Protection
Corps has undertaken to determine if any KPC
members are involved in illegal activities and
organizations and to provide UNMIK and the Kosovo
Force with their names.

The report also provides what we feel is a candid
view of the development of the Kosovo Protection
Corps. Substantial work remains to be done with the
KPC, with the most fundamentally challenging task
remaining its transformation into a multi-ethnic body
focused solely on its civilian emergency mandate.

Overall, there appear to be increasing attempts to
try to undercut resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework, forcing the Special
Representative to intervene. The Kosovo Government
recently sought to challenge the Special
Representative's reserved powers in the Transfer
Council by asking for the creation of new ministries to
exercise authority over reserved areas. Mr. Steiner has
rejected this request, of course with our support here.
The Kosovo Assembly also sought to implement a law
on higher education, even though the Special
Representative had not promulgated it because it did
not take into account what are regarded under the
Constitutional Framework as vital interests of the
Kosovo Serb community. Mr. Steiner immediately
declared that the Assembly's action did not have legal
effect and we are grateful for the support expressed by
the Council in this regard.

Four laws, including the law on higher education,
have been returned to the Kosovo Assembly with a
request for appropriate remedial action, since they are
not in compliance with resolution 1244 (1999) and the
Constitutional Framework. The Assembly, however,
has not yet acted on these laws. UNMIK is seriously
concerned about the loss of time in enacting the
legislation, which is damaging for the governance and
development of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions.
Should the Assembly not amend these laws
appropriately, Mr. Steiner will need to proceed with the
promulgation of these laws with the necessary
adjustments.

On the Kosovo Serb side, I would like to recall
that Kosovo Serb representatives did not participate in
the first meeting of the Transfer Council, despite the
assurances provided by UNMIK that there would not
be any transfer outside the parameters set by resolution
1244 (1999) and the Constitutional Framework. In
addition, two unions of Kosovo Serb-majority
municipalities were formed, the first in Northern
Mitrovica and the second in Eastern Kosovo. UNMIK
has not recognized either of these unions as legitimate
structures, since they are based on mono-ethnicity.

Mr. Steiner also sought to start a dialogue on
practical maters between the Belgrade authorities and
the Kosovo Provisional Institutions. After initial
support, leading Kosovo Albanian politicians backed
away from the initiative, citing, among other factors, a
number of preconditions for the dialogue, including the
need for further progress in the transfer process.
Similarly, although the Belgrade authorities initially
endorsed the idea, they have also expressed an
unwillingness to participate owing to the transfer of
additional responsibilities to the Provisional
Institutions. Efforts to initiate the direct dialogue were
postponed following the assassination of Serbian Prime
Minister Djindjic.

Overall, the report provides a detailed account of
what is a complex and mixed situation on the ground in
Kosovo. It also shows that there has been steadily
increasing pressure on UNMIK from all sides, with
demands to satisfy either mutually exclusive desires or
to violate the letter and spirit of resolution 1244 (1999)
and the Constitutional Framework. Radical action and
pronouncements by one side or the other have
increased since the beginning of this year. Voices of
moderation do indeed exist, and a number of
constructive initiatives have been pursued. But, by and
large, those voices have been weak and, to some extent,
muted. That has made the promotion of dialogue across
political and ethnic lines within Kosovo more difficult,
both as regards the Kosovars and between Belgrade
and the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government.

As much as possible, the Mission has sought to
balance the competing, and often conflicting, desires
and demands of the leaders and people of Kosovo, with
a view to preventing instances of extremism. UNMIK
has stayed the course, and it will continue to do so. It
will continue to encourage dialogue and multi-ethnicity
and to facilitate the acceptance and achievement of the
benchmarks. The "standards before status" policy
remains the framework for the way forward. Of course,
local leaders and the people of Kosovo have the
primary responsibility to support UNMIK'S efforts to
achieve measurable progress towards meeting the
agreed-upon standards and to reject extremism. At the
same time, the continued and active support of the
Security Council will remain essential to ensuring the
full and fair implementation of the mandate entrusted
to UNMIK under resolution 1244 (1999).

