Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this high-level
meeting of the Security Council at the initiative of the
United States. I am very pleased to see Vice-President
Biden personally presiding over today's meeting.

I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing and Foreign Minister Zebari
for his statement.

I wish to make the following observations. First,
Iraq is about to enter a critical period in its
development. Despite many deep challenges, the
overall situation in Iraq is stabilizing. The international
community has increasing confidence in the future of
Iraq. We commend the Iraqi Government and people
for their efforts in that regard, and support the Iraqi
people in determining the future of their country
independently. China hopes that all parties in Iraq will
work to promote national reconciliation through
political dialogue and consultation, and strive to form a
new Government expeditiously and to facilitate its
effective functioning.

Secondly, now that a new page has been turned in
Iraq's history, we understand and support Iraq's
aspirations to complete reintegration into the
international community. China welcomes the adoption
by the Security Council of resolutions lifting the
sanctions imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter
with respect to weapons of mass destruction, missiles
and civilian nuclear activities, concluding the oil-for-
food programme, and providing for appropriate
arrangements for the Development Fund for Iraq. It is
our hope that Iraq will take this opportunity to
accelerate its peaceful reconstruction process and in so
doing become an active force in maintaining regional
peace and stability and contributing to common
development, together with other countries.

Thirdly, Iraq is still confronting a complex
security situation. China condemns the recent terrorist
attacks in the country. We support the Government and
people of Iraq in their efforts to preserve national
security. We hope to see a timely strengthening of the
Iraqi security forces to fully assume the responsibility
of safeguarding national security as soon as possible.
China encourages Iraq to enhance dialogue and
cooperation with its neighbours in the region and to
find appropriate solutions to outstanding issues in a
common effort to preserve national peace and stability.

Fourthly, the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) has played an important role in the
political process and peaceful reconstruction of Iraq.
China is grateful to the Mission. We hope to see
continued effective cooperation between UNAMI and
the Government of Iraq. We call on all sides to take
effective measures to provide the secure environment
necessary to UNAMI's operations and to ensure the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and

property.

