Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the convening of this Security Council
debate on a multidimensional approach to peacekeeping
operations. In many ways, this subject reflects the
interest that your Government, Mr. President, attaches
to this essential mission of the Organization.

Peacekeeping operations have contributed
immeasurably to the work of building viable peace,
from the adoption of resolution 50 (1948), which
established the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in Palestine, to the adoption of resolution
2085 (2012), which authorized the deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali.
Therefore, from a simple ceasefire observer force,
peacekeeping operations have evolved and changed,
depending upon the circumstances, into missions
seeking to re-establish, impose or build peace.

Because of those profound changes, it has become
crucial to re-evaluate missions in all their aspects. The
appearance of new threats to international peace and
security - such as terrorism, transnational organized
crime, an increase in the number of internal conflicts,
which provide fertile grounds for human rights
violations, and the terrible effects of poverty - has led
us to rethink the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
and rightly so.

For peacekeeping operations to be successful, all the
parameters that have an impact on the achievement of
lasting peace must be taken into account, as highlighted
in several reports, particularly the report of the High-
level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change entitled
"A more secure world: our shared responsibility"
(see A/59/565). Over and above the original mandate
of ensuring security in order to help rebuild defence
forces and facilitate humanitarian aid, we must add to
the responsibilities of peacekeeping operations those of
promoting human rights, supporting political processes
until strong institutions that can ensure democracy
and the rule of law are put in place, and supporting
the economic reconstruction of the country, without
forgetting the fight against certain pandemics.

The political process on which the viability of
any peace work depends must remain inclusive and
representative of the various social elements that are
involved in a conflict. We saw a perfect illustration
of that in Timor-Leste, where the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) succeeded
in organizing free and transparent presidential and
legislative elections by working effectively with all
parties involved in the crisis. The success of UNMIT
is all the more exemplary because the security sector
reform it undertook, particularly of the police, remains
a perfect illustration of the capacities of the young
Timorese nation to take responsibility for that important
aspect of its future.

I must also highlight the crucial role played by
the protection of human rights and the provision of
humanitarian assistance in maintaining security and
restoring a climate conducive to peace. Human rights
violations, especially of women and children, have
no place in peace processes, which are already so
fragile. The fight against impunity must not therefore
be sacrificed on the altar of national reconciliation.
It should instead contribute to the establishment of a
new society based on respect for human dignity and
the obligation to provide justice to all its members. In
addition, there is the immense and daunting challenge
of economic reconstruction, whose success would allow
for the avoidance of any relapse into hostilities, which
may be sought by those who may feel marginalized by
the restoration of peace.

The review of this multidimensional approach
also gives me an opportunity to welcome the option of
cooperation with subregional organizations to establish
hybrid forces, as well as the concept of inter-mission
cooperation, which allows troops to be shared among
several theatres of operation. That reflects the full extent
and complexity of the deployment of peacekeeping
missions.

Well aware of the various threats to collective
peace and security and convinced of the need for action,
since achieving national sovereignty, my country has
placed peacekeeping at the heart of its foreign policy.
Perpetuating that tradition for the good of world peace,
the Senegalese defence and security forces are currently
contributing 2,113 troops to a number of theatres of
operation, including Darfur, Haiti, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Liberia and South
Sudan. As the fourteenth largest contributor of troops
to peacekeeping operations and the fourth largest
police-contributor, Senegal reaffirms its commitment
to a world free of the spectre of war and reiterates its
faith in the ideals of peace that are at the foundation of
the Organization.

