Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa
abstained in today's voting on resolution 2471 (2019)
in the firm View that the sanctions imposed on South
Sudan at this time are not helpful to the current
complex political process. The region, through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
continues to assert that sanctions are not useful to the
political process.

South Africa appeals to the Council to heed and
support the efforts of IGAD and the African Union,
which have been seized of the issue of the peace
process in South Sudan. South Africa firmly believes
that sanctions should be seen as a tool to encourage
continued cooperation and progress towards a political
process and not as a punitive measure. Furthermore,
they should be used as an incentive to improve stability
and build an environment that is conducive to reaching
a political agreement in support of lasting and durable
peace. In that regard, the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan is setting a positive trajectory for the country's
future. We have seen progress in that regard, such as a
reduction in political violence and the development of
confidence-building measures among the signatories,
even if progress in implementing the Agreement has
been slow. South Africa encourages the Government of
South Sudan and other parties to do everything in their
power to implement the Revitalized Agreement.

When a volatile political process is on the table, it
should be safeguarded and free from external pressure,
which could aggravate the situation. Nevertheless,
the process of making peace never has been or will
be an easy task, as it is a many-layered process, not a
linear one.

Lastly, like many delegations, including that of
the United States, we remain concerned about the
continuing precarious humanitarian situation in South
Sudan. We call on all the parties to redouble their
efforts to improve the humanitarian situation in the
country and protect those who are vulnerable.

