Mr. Wittig (Germany): We have gathered today
to address the serious situation in Libya. Our intention
is to stop the violence in the country and to send clear
messages to Al-Qadhafi and his regime that their time
is over. Muammar Al-Qadhafi must relinquish power
immediately. His regime has lost all legitimacy and can
no longer be an interlocutor for us.

While we act on Libya, North Africa is
undergoing major political changes. Aspirations to
democracy and human and individual rights merit our
full support. They offer unique opportunities for
political, social and economic transformation. To
achieve this goal, we seek close cooperation with our
partners in the region, in particular the League of Arab
States and the African Union.

Our aim is to promote the political transformation
of Libya. We see a need to stop the violence and to
start a true political process. The basis for democracy
and the rule of law in Libya needs to be established and
broadened. In this process, the people of Libya, who
have so clearly expressed their aspirations to freedom
and democracy, need to succeed. With this aim in
mind, we regard the Interim Transitional National
Council as an important interlocutor.

We welcome the Secretary-General's appointment
of Mr. Abdel-Elah Al-Khatib as his Special Envoy for
Libya. His mission merits our respect and our full
support.

We are particularly concerned about the plight of
the Libyan people and the widespread and systematic
attacks they are suffering. It is therefore crucial that we
tighten the sanctions against the Al-Qadhafi regime
even more. We need to cut it off from the financial
means that have helped it to remain in power. In our
view, strong sanctions, backed by the whole
international community, will be an effective way to
end the rule of Muammar Al-Qadhafi and thereby to
initiate the necessary political transition. We have
contributed a number of proposals in this regard.
Germany fully supports the package of economic and
financial sanctions in the resolution just adopted.

Decisions on the use of military force are always
extremely difficult to take. We have very carefully
considered the option of using military force - its
implications as well as its limitations. We see great
risks. The likelihood of large-scale loss of life should
not be underestimated. If the steps proposed turn out to
be ineffective, we see the danger of being drawn into a
protracted military conflict that would affect the wider
region. We should not enter into a militarily
confrontation on the optimistic assumption that quick
results with few casualties will be achieved.

Germany therefore decided not to support a
military option, as foreseen particularly in paragraphs 4
and 8 of the resolution. Furthermore, Germany will not
contribute to such a military effort with its own forces.
Germany therefore decided to abstain in the voting.

