Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): Let me first
take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important open briefing to discuss the report of the Panel
of Experts on violations of the Security Council sanctions
against UNITA, an issue which is of critical importance
to my country and to the entire region of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC).

The presence here today of Mr. Joao Bernardo de
Miranda, the Minister for External Relations of the
Republic of Angola, is testimony to the importance
Angola attaches - and rightly so - to this matter. We
also commend Minister Hain's personal participation
today and we highly appreciate his contribution.

Let me take this opportunity to highly commend
Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of the Sanctions
Committee against UNITA, for his serious and tireless

 

efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council
sanctions against UNITA and the obligations of member
States to fully implement the Security Council resolutions
against UNITA. Not only did Ambassador Fowler prove his
leadership qualities and diplomatic skills, but, through his
determination, he also sought to promote and restore the
credibility of the Security Council in the preservation of
human security and the peaceful resolution of that conflict.
Indeed, my delegation notes with appreciation that there has
been progress in the work of the Committee since
Ambassador Fowler took over its chairmanship. My
delegation pledges its fullest support for his tireless efforts
to help bring peace to Angola.

We express strong support for the work undertaken by
the Chairman of the Expert Panel, Ambassador Mollander,
and his team, and thank them for producing this very
informative report within the prescribed period.

Eight years ago - on 15 September 1993, to be
precise - the Security Council adopted resolution 864
(1993), the first resolution imposing mandatory sanctions
against UNITA in the area of arms and military equipment;
thereafter, similar resolutions were adopted in the area of
petroleum products, diamonds and finances. That decision
by the Council was due to UNITA's intransigence and
non-compliance. In its determination to resolve the conflict
in Angola by compelling UNITA to comply with its
resolutions, the Council reaffirmed on several occasions its
readiness to review the measures and to consider the
imposition of additional measures against UNITA.

Contrary to the expectations of the international
community, with the assistance of some States, international
organizations and individuals, UNITA became stronger day
by day in its fight against the Government and the people
of Angola.

I am trying to recapitulate this scenario so as to
illustrate the various efforts which were employed by the
Council in trying to resolve this conflict and, more
importantly, so as to ensure that the Council will take
seriously the report which has been presented by the Panel
and the recommendations contained therein. If
implemented, the recommendations can help bring lasting
peace to Angola.

Resolution 1237 (1999), inter alia, established the
panels to inform the Council on how the sanctions against
UNITA were being violated, who was violating them and
what could be done to make the sanctions more effective.
As the report clearly indicates, the objective of the Expert
Panel was to promote a political settlement of the long
conflict in Angola by requiring UNITA to comply with
the obligations which it undertook when it signed the
1991 Bicesse Peace Accord and the 1994 Lusaka
Protocol. Full implementation of resolution 1237 (1999)
will do just that. It will deny UNITA the ability to keep
peace and development hostage in Angola and, indeed, in
southern Africa.

The situation in Angola continues to worsen. UNITA
is continuing with its atrocities, indiscriminate killing of
the innocent civilian population and the laying of
landmines, and this report clearly indicates that the
mandate of the Panel was to promote a political
settlement to the never-ending conflict in Angola. UNITA
must comply with the obligations it undertook when it
signed the 1994 Lusaka Protocol. Let me take this
opportunity to remind the Council that the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) itself has adopted various
resolutions on the situation in Angola, and those
resolutions should be taken into account. Furthermore, the
Southern African Development Community has declared
Savimbi to be a war criminal, a decision that was, in turn,
endorsed by the OAU.

We agree with the conclusions of the report that
UNITA would not have continued with its political and
military ambitions had it not been for the support of
certain States and individuals that have provided the rebel
movement with safe havens, facilitated sales and passage
of weapons and assisted it with end-user certificates. It is
also true that the willingness of some arms-supplying
countries with little or no regard as to where those arms
would finally end up contributed immensely to boosting
the morale of rebels in Africa in fighting against
legitimate Governments. Hence, peace in Angola lies in
the hands of those individuals and Governments which
are intentionally and knowingly assisting UNITA's war
machinery.

We note the information presented in the report on
the link between the war activities of UNITA in Angola
and the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We concur with the evidentiary standard employed
by the Panel. However, it is highly possible that important
links might have been omitted. We are therefore strongly
of the view that the ongoing investigations of persons
allegedly connected to UNITA will help during the
monitoring process, which my delegation endorses and to
which I shall revert later.

 

With regard to sanctions busting on arms and military
equipment, the conflict in Angola has caused immense and
unnecessary suffering to the people of Angola, resulting in
the loss of millions of lives and the destruction of property.
The United Nations continues to spend millions of dollars
to help resolve the conflict in Angola. Sadly, millions of
Angolans have known only war. This war could have been
ended and taken off the Council's agenda had it not been
for the support UNITA receives from within and outside
Africa. It is therefore imperative that the Council apply
sanctions to those leaders and Governments that have
sustained UNITA's political and war machinery, in
violation of Council resolutions. This bold and
unprecedented action will enhance its authority and
demonstrate its seriousness in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We appreciate the good work of the International
Criminal Police Organization (Interpol) in uncovering
UNITA's smuggling operations. Indeed, Namibia undertook
investigations into the existence and activities of such
operations, which have not been completed. The
conclusions relating to arms and military equipment prove,
among other things, that the capacity of UNITA to continue
to pay for what it wants has kept the war in Angola going,
thus maximizing the suffering and agony of the Angolan
people and those of the entire region.

Paragraph 68 of the report refers to small-scale
petroleum smuggling on the Namibia-Angola border. The
Government of Namibia will certainly look into this matter,
and we would appreciate assistance to curb those illegal
dealings. We will continue to contribute to the Committee's
work in this regard.

We commend the conclusions relating to petroleum
and petroleum products. We would have thought that the
conclusions would include all countries whose nationals are
implicated in these activities according to the report.

We are greatly concerned at the extremely lax controls
and regulations governing the world's rough diamond
market. Illegal trading in diamonds is the main source of
funding of rebel movements in Africa, particularly in
Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We take serious note of paragraph 84 of the report,
and we want underscore that Namibia has not been an
official channel for the illegal diamond transactions of
UNITA. We carried out investigations, going as far as the
diamond markets in London, and it was discovered that
those diamonds came from Namibian mines. We were
able to do that because Namibian diamonds have special
codes attached to them, thereby making it easy to control
smuggling.

The private sector has an important role to play here.
We welcome the measures taken by De Beers to cease
buying any diamonds from UNITA. This has undoubtedly
had an effect on UNITA's cash. We also highly commend
the Angolan Government for the reform measures
undertaken to restructure the mining and diamond
industry. We support the Panel's 6 recommendations
relating to diamonds.

With regard to UNITA's finances, it is important
that countries where UNITA representatives control
financial resources be identified. The panel should indeed
provide the Committee with information on particulars of
banks, bank accounts and credit cards used to facilitate
UNITA's transactions. We agree with the
recommendations relating to finances and assets. In our
view, recommendation number 20 will serve as an
incentive for disclosing finance busting.

It is our sincere hope that bank secrecy laws will be
revised to enable States to uncover the amounts of illegal
funds of the identified sanctions busters with a view to
freezing them and finally releasing them to the authorities
concerned, for the benefit of the people concerned, in this
case the Angolan people.

With regard to UNITA's representation and travel
abroad, the Government of Namibia has carried out
investigations and discovered that none of the people
whose names were provided by the Panel are residing in
Namibia. We regret, however, our failure to communicate
our findings to the Panel in time, as was indicated in the
report. We continue with further investigations in this
regard, and any information will be communicated to the
Committee.

We support the recommendations relating to
UNITA's representation and travel abroad. We have no
doubt that Interpol, if requested, can indeed coordinate an
international response to arrest warrants for these
sanctions busters.

We note the information provided on the role of
transport in sanctions busting and propose that those
proposals be further examined by the Committee. We
welcome the recommendations on related matters,
especially those inviting the Southern African

 

Development Community (SADC) to consider introducing
the mobile radar system with the assistance of the
international community.

On board the United Nations planes shot down in
Angola were Namibian nationals. For the sake of all those
who perished on the two planes and all other United
Nations workers whose lives were taken by the enemies of
peace, we support the relevant recommendation under this
section.

With regard to recommendation 35, on considering the
provision of medical supplies to UNITA, further thought
should be given to this proposal so as not to create any
loopholes for sanctions busting.

We also agree that a copy of the report should be
submitted to the Organization of African Unity and SADC
Secretaries-General. We are also in agreement that the
monitoring mechanism should be established.

The Panel has given us its report. The Chairman of the
Committee has introduced the report. Let us go to work on
the recommendations contained therein. Namibia looks
forward to the discussion of the draft resolution on these
recommendations at the earliest possible time.

Finally, peace is cheaper than war. Let us help bring
lasting peace to Angola.

