Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, and the
delegation of Luxembourg on your leadership of the
Security Council this month and on organizing this
debate on the important issue of children and armed
conflict.

I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Executive Director of UNICEF
Anthony Lake; and Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Herve' Ladsous for their useful
briefings. We also appreciate the insights provided by
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, from Sierra Leone, based on his
own experience as a child soldier.

We often say that children are the future of the
world, and indeed they are because they represent
humankind's hopes. As the most vulnerable group,
children are adversely affected by armed conflict. It
is therefore incumbent upon all Member States and
parties to conflicts to ensure that children are protected
from the harm of armed conflict.

Uganda condemns the recruitment, use and abuse
of children in armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law. The psychosocial consequences on
the well-being and mental health of the affected children
are traumatic. We therefore welcome the attention that
Security Council continues to accord to this issue and
the progress that is being made, including the adoption
of a series of measures to promote the protection of
children in armed conflict by the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Nevertheless,
there is still a lot of work to be done, especially in
assisting countries emerging from conflict to give full
consideration to the special needs of children as part
of their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

The challenge of protecting the rights and well-
being of children during conflict and ensuring
attention to their educational, health, rehabilitation and
nutritional needs in post-conflict periods is daunting.
Too frequently, the absence of participation by advocates
of youths and children during peace negotiations means
that their concerns are often not given the attention
they deserve.

We are convinced that addressing the needs
of children is not just a matter of fairness, equity
or humanitarianism; it is also key to building and
maintaining lasting peace. It is therefore crucial to
ensure respect for children's rights, hold accountable
those responsible for abuses and crimes committed
against children in armed conflict, and cater to the
needs of affected children in post-conflict situations.

Beyond the impact on peace and stability, there is
indeed the human dimension of the tragedy of children
caught up in armed conflict. Unfortunately, there have
been many instances of violent conflict where children
have been used as bearers, cooks, messengers and sex
slaves, and others have been involved in combat, taking
human lives. Besides child soldiers, all children become
victims in one way or another during armed conflicts.
They become victims when they are displaced or when
their Government cannot ensure adequate funding for
schools and health clinics, resulting in very low school
participation rates and high infant mortality rates.

No country emerging from war can, without risk,
leave its young people on the sidelines without any future,
knowing only a culture of violence. Programmes for
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating combatants
must therefore take into account the specific needs of
children, in particular young girls, who are even more
severely affected than boys and whose reintegration is
even more difficult. In Uganda, following the end of
the Lord's Resistance Army insurgency in 2006, one
of the priorities of the Government was reintegration
of formerly abducted children into their families and
communities.

In conclusion, it is vital that we constantly improve
strategies to make an impact in terms of protection
of children in armed conflict. The international
community must make sustained efforts to truly change
the situation. The United Nations should continue to
document its experience and lessons learned in the
area of protection of children during peacekeeping
operations so that future peacekeeping operations can
benefit from that experience.

At the same time, all parties to armed conflicts
should strive to meet their obligations under relevant
international law and to respect and safeguard the
rights of children. In post-conflict situations, the return
of children to their families, schools and communities
as well as the provision of sufficient resources should
be prioritized. Young boys and girls kidnapped or
coerced into joining armed groups must be freed to live
the rest of their lives without the stigma or trauma of
those early years shadowing their future.

