The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Dieng
for his briefing.

I have the honour to present this briefing to the
members of the Council in my capacity as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan. Iwill outline the
main conclusions and recommendations contained in
the final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2016/963).
I will speak briefly about the discussion that followed
the presentation of the Panel of Experts' report by
its Coordinator on 11 November and report on the
activities carried out by the Committee and the Panel
of Experts since my previous briefing (see S/PV.7628)
in the Chamber on 19 February. In its progress report,
the Panel of Experts analysesd the security situation,
the political process and the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan, which I shall briefly discuss.

With regard to the political situation and security
conditions, the Panel of Experts found that they had
seriously deteriorated and felt that an escalation of
violence that would herald the dry season in November
and December was expected. In paragraph 10 of its
progress report, the Panel of Experts statesd that the
principal factor driving the extension and expansion
of the war in South Sudan was the belligerent attitude
of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Government, led by President Salva Kiir,
on the one hand, and the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM-IO) in Opposition, led by
Riek Machar, on the other.

As Special Adviser Dieng has just stated, the Panel
of Experts underscoresd that the war in South Sudan is

"increasingly characterized by the targeting of
civilians on a tribal basis, given that it has evolved
into what is widely perceived to be a zero-sum
confrontation between the Dinka and non-Dinka
tribes in many areas" (S/2016/963, para.13).

Incentives to violence, in the form of open letters,
official statements or messages posted on social
networks, have also multiplied, as illustrated by the
Panel of Experts. The security situation has become
increasingly unstable because ofthe economic situation.
In that regard, the Panel of Experts statesd that the
Transitional Government of National Unity had not
yet demonstrated its commitment to sound economic
governance practices.
A large section of the report of the Panel of
Experts is devoted to the information it has gathered
on the extension of the war, in particular, conflicts in
the region of Equatoria, in which numerous cases of
conflict-related sexual Violence have been identified, as
well as the destruction of villages, looting and killing
of civilians including women, children and the elderly.
Yei County, Equatoria, was particularly affected by the
recent acts of violence. The Panel reported deliberate
attacks on civilians, including extrajudicial executions,
rape, kidnappings, forced recruitment, arbitrary arrests
and detention, torture, beatings and harassment,
intimidation and looting and the destruction of the
livelihoods and assets of civilian populations. The
Panel concludesd that atrocities and flagrant violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
were being committed in Equatoria.

In its report, the Panel indicatesd that it had
conducted several investigations, including one into
the purchase of the L-39 jet, which was delivered after
the formation of the Transitional Government in April
as it sought to discharge its mandate to collect, review
and analyse information concerning the supply, sale
and transfer of arms and related materiel in the country.

With regard to the political situation, the Panel
of Experts findsfound that it had deteriorated
considerably, as the permanent ceasefire provided for
in the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan had not been respected
by the parties following the clashes in July. The Panel
also considered that the resumption of the Clashes in
July had undermined the meagre progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement. The Panel identified
only two cases where progress appeared to have been
made in the establishment of institutions, namely, the
establishment of the provisional National Legislative
Assembly and the approval of cantonment sites in the
regions of Equatoria and Bahr el-Ghazal, which have
been challenged. In addition, the Panel of Experts
identified acts being committed that were at cross-
purposes with the security sector reform provided for
in the Agreement. The SPLA had continued to accept
new contingents and, representatives of SPLM/A in
Opposition who had been appointed by Machar had
been replaced by persons affiliated with Taban Deng
Gai. According to the Panel of Experts, legislation and
regulations adopted in 2016 include provisions that are
not in line with international best practices as provided
for in the Agreement. The Panel concluded that these
measures had led to a stalemate in the reconciliation
and political processes in South Sudan.
With regard to the humanitarian situation, the Panel
of Experts reported that there was an acceleration in
mass displacements of people. On 16 September, when
the Panel Coordinator submitted the Panel report on
its activities over the previous 120 days, the number
of refugees fleeing South Sudan had reached 1 million
persons. When the Coordinator briefed the Committee
on 11 November, he reported that in two months the
number of refugees had increased by a further 250,000
people, with most of the refugees crossing the border in
recent weeks fleeing Equatoria.

Some 4.8 million people, or one-third of the
population living in South Sudan, faced severe food
insecurity approaching famine levels in some areas.
The Panel of Experts also outlined what it viewed as
relentless obstruction of the efforts of the United Nations
and humanitarian missions and attacks against them.
The Panel reported that the most senior members of the
SPLM/A in the Government consistently demonize the
United Nations. The Panel gave examples of hostility
towards the international presence in South Sudan
through official statements and social media, which
was confirmed by sustained and systematic violations
of the status of forces agreement, with 19 Violations
in September alone. The situation for humanitarian
workers in South Sudan was particularly serious, given
that 67 of them had been killed since the beginning
of the conflict in December 2013. Furthermore, three
humanitarian workers were killed in a single week
in October.

With regard to humanitarian access, 640 incidents
were reported in the first nine months of 2016, and in
September alone 81 incidents were reported, 59 ofwhich
involved violence against humanitarian personnel and
the property of humanitarian agencies.

The Panel made three recommendations in
its report.

First, it reiterated a recommendation from its
January 2016 final report, in connection with its initial
mandate, namely, that in order to achieving the Council's
objective of an inclusive and sustainable peace in South
Sudan, the Committee should designate the high-level
decision makers who would be responsible for actions
and policies that threaten the peace, security and
stability of the country and who have the means, through
their power and influence, to change the course of the
war. In this regard, the Panel recalled the confidential
annex it had provided to the Committee in January,
which included the names of these decision makers.

Similarly, the second recommendation in the
Panel's report was a reiteration of a proposal that it
had made twice during its initial mandate, namely, that
the Council should impose a general arms embargo on
South Sudan in order to prevent further destabilization
of the security situation, and in particular the ongoing
large-scale human rights violations. The Panel
concluded that these violations were directly related
to the fact that the supply of arms and ammunition to
non-State actors and groups was done by all sides.

The Panel's third recommendation was aimed at
promoting the national implementation of the sanctions
measures taken against six individuals designated by
the Committee in July 2015. In this regard, the Panel
recommended reaching out to the banking regulatory
authorities in several States in the region as well
as issuing a press release encouraging State and
commercial banks to implement asset freezes.

With regard to the examination of the Panel's
findings and recommendations in the report, the ensuing
discussion among members of the Committee was
comprehensive and spirited. The Coordinator heard a
wide variety of comments from members and answered
many questions. The Committee's consideration of
the proposed action in connection with the Panel's
recommendations is ongoing, with special focus on the
two recommendations specifically addressed to it.

I would also like to provide the Council with a brief
overview of the Committee's work since 19 February,
when I last briefed the Council (see S/PV.7628). On
14 March, the Committee and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict held joint informal
consultations featuring a briefing by Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, on the impact
of the armed conflict on children in South Sudan. Citing
the names of perpetrators from both sides, the Special
Representative called upon the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan and its Panel of Experts to continue to
investigate and examine the individual and command
responsibility of all parties to the conflict for attacks
committed against children.

On 15 July, members ofthe Committee were briefed
by Coordinator of the Panel of Experts, whose mandate
was extended by resolution 2290 (2016), in connection
with the Panel's programme of work. On 16 September,
the Committee was briefed by Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Ms. Bangura
told the Committee that it was disturbing to report
that the war in South Sudan continued to be waged
on the bodies of women and girls. She reiterated that
addressing sexual violence in conflict required national
ownership, leadership and responsibility and that the
authorities in South Sudan were not carrying out these
three crucial functions in accordance with the letter and
spirit of the commitments they had made. Ms. Bangura
noted, inter alia, that, in the light of the continuous
systematic patterns of sexual violence in South Sudan,
and this in spite of the formal commitments undertaken
by the parties, the Committee should consider activating
targeted sanctions against perpetrators of sexual
violence and reiterated her Office's willingness to work
with the Committee and the Panel in this regard.

Before concluding, Iwouldlike to remind delegations
that I intend to travel to South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda
and the Sudan from 10 and 19 December. While I had
already visited South Sudan in early September as part
of the Security Council mission, my trip in December
is being undertaken with a view to implementing
paragraph 11 of resolution 2290 (2016), by which the
Security Council had emphasized the importance of
regular consultations with concerned Member States,
international, regional and subregional organizations,
and in particular neighbouring States and States of the
region, in order to ensure the full implementation of
the measures and encourage the Committee to consider,
as appropriate, visits to selected countries by the Chair
and/or Committee members. I am hopeful that all four
States will facilitate this visit by the Chair, which will
be the first such Visit to take place by the Chair of the
2206 (2015) Committee.

I now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.

