Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open briefing on
the situation in West Africa. Last year's Security
Council mission concluded that the highest priority
must be given to the coordination of a comprehensive
strategy, with clear objectives to address the regional
dimensions of the conflict in Sierra Leone. My
delegation therefore welcomes the comprehensive
report of the Inter-Agency Mission to West Africa,
contained in document S/2001/434, and the thought-
provoking analysis and recommendations contained
therein. This report has been very ably complemented
by the presentations made today by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator and the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who
led the Inter-Agency Mission.

The report and today's briefings clearly
emphasize the need for an integrated, holistic strategy
involving the Governments and people of the States
concerned, the United Nations system and the regional
and subregional organizations if we are to achieve a
sustained and lasting solution to the problems in the
region. We agree with the Secretary-General that an
integrated, subregional approach by the international
community is urgently needed to help prevent the
further emergence of conflicts, restore peace and
security and promote economic and social
development. It is in this context that my delegation
continues to support the holding of a meeting between
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. Such a meeting, which we hope will take
place in the near future, could usefully focus on the
situation in West Africa. Today's meeting is
nevertheless timely, as the Security Council considers
what action it can take with respect to its own
responsibilities for international peace and security.

I now wish to comment on some of the aspects of
the Inter-Agency Mission's report, as well as on the
briefing we have received. First of all, I wish to
welcome the report by Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno on the meeting held in Abuja on 10 May
between the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations, the
Government of Sierra Leone and the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF), aimed at reviewing the
implementation of the Abuja ceasefire Agreement. We
sincerely hope that the commitments made by the RUF
will be carried out.

Regarding the further forward deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
into RUF-controlled areas, we have heard from
Mr. Fall about criticisms of the United Nations
operations and we must again emphasize the
importance of the public information activities of
UNAMSIL aimed at sensitizing the population about
the Mission's mandate. At the same time, the proposal
for the expansion of UNAMSIL's mandate into the
neighbouring countries deserves our serious
consideration.

Second, Jamaica fully supports the
recommendation for the establishment of a mechanism
for systematic and regular consultations among entities
of the United Nations system for defining and
harmonizing national and subregional policies.
Frequent consultation with ECOWAS and other
subregional agencies would be critical to developing
cohesive strategies. As was clearly highlighted in the
meeting between the ECOWAS ministers and the
Security Council in February, there needs to be close
collaboration between the Council and ECOWAS in
seeking to bring about a resolution of the conflict
affecting the West African region.

Third, the establishment of a United Nations
political office for West Africa would, in my
delegation's view, be a step in the right direction. Such
an office could send a positive signal to the West
African region that the United Nations is serious about
enhancing its capacity and collaboration in the
subregion. Such an office must, we believe, be fully
staffed to tackle the wide cross-section of issues. This
should be done on a regional basis and collocated in
Abuja in order to strengthen its linkages with
ECOWAS. We also support, as an interim measure, the
establishment of an integrated mission task force,
which would be a useful mechanism for continuity.

Fourth, my delegation has consistently expressed
concern at the escalating conflict in the region. We
agree that dialogue among the leaders of the region to
devise ways and means to resolve the crisis is of
paramount importance, because peace agreements can
have little effect if there is no political will to effect a
sustained and lasting peace. We would encourage the
mediation efforts of the heads of State of Mali, Togo
and Nigeria, recently appointed by the ECOWAS

summit, and we hope that this meeting will take place
soon.

The situation in Sierra Leone and its effects on
Liberia and Guinea involving the border areas have
escalated into a humanitarian crisis involving
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Jamaica supports in principle the establishment of an
interposition force along the shared borders of Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea.

We have heard from Ms. McAskie, as well as
from Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Assistant
Secretary-General Fall, how this crisis has spread
across borders. We welcome the initiatives taken by
ECOWAS at its meetings last December and in April to
address the mounting concerns and we have noted the
concrete steps being proposed by ECOWAS. We
recognize only too well the dire need for international
assistance in terms of equipment and logistics in order
to mount a successful operation.

Fifth, Jamaica fully subscribes to the importance
of approaching conflict prevention and resolution from
a regional, rather than a national perspective. It is
disheartening, however, to see that there continues to
be a reluctance to devote resources to conflict-
prevention and peace-building measures, even though
we are prepared to meet the huge costs involved in
dealing with situations after conflicts have erupted. It
is therefore important that our conflict-prevention
strategies should aim at strengthening ECOWAS's
capacity for conflict prevention, management and
resolution and for ensuring security. The need for the
development of ECOWAS's early warning capacity is
also of importance.
The report of the Inter-Agency Mission mentions
that

"Cooperation between intergovernmental
organizations within the subregion with civil
society organizations in the areas of conflict
prevention and management remains limited and
could be strengthened considerably."
(S/2001/434, para. 33)

It is our belief that civil society plays a pivotal role in
conflict prevention and that it should be encouraged.
We therefore welcome the initiatives undertaken by
ECOWAS in the Mano River basin aimed at developing
support for civil society.

Sixth, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants are essential
components of the post-conflict peace-building
process. It is regrettable that, to date, such a
programme in the region has been thwarted, owing
primarily to the lack of funding. We are aware that
conflicts in the region are often fuelled by economic
reasons; war is a lucrative business and, therefore, any
incentive to curb the crisis must involve alternative
sources of gainful employment. We are particularly
concerned about the situation of ex-combatants, child
soldiers and girls, of which Ms. McAskie made
mention. Adequate and sustained funding should be
provided for job training and job creation and for the
counselling, rehabilitation and resettlement of all ex-
combatants. In this regard, I wish to draw attention to
the fact that, in these programmes, we have very often
ignored the fact that women are often ex-combatants as
well as men. We need to address the specific needs and
problems which these women face in the integration
process and to determine what steps can be taken to
address their psychological as well as their domestic
needs.

Seventh, the proliferation of arms in the
subregion continues to be of great concern to my
delegation. While we fully support the
recommendations outlined in the relevant section of the
report, aimed, inter alia, at strengthening ECOWAS'S
capacity to monitor and curb the illegal flow of arms,
we feel it to be equally important that efforts be
undertaken by arms manufacturers to cease the export
of small arms to conflict areas.

As I mentioned earlier, women have become
increasingly effective participants at the peace table
and they have continued to assist in creating an
enabling environment for conflict prevention,
peacemaking and post-conflict peace-building. We
therefore welcome the Mano River Union Women's
Peace Network, which links women from Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone, and we support the request
made by Assistant Secretary-General Fall and
Ms.McAskie for assistance to be given to that
programme.

Last, the flow of refugees across the borders of
the three countries has fuelled what can be described as
one of the most serious refugee situations in the world.
We believe that any solution to this crisis must also
involve a regional strategy entailing specific criteria
for action. We therefore fully support the two-track
approach by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, as well as the proposed
presence of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in the United Nations office for
West Africa.

We recognize, however - as Ms. McAskie
pointed out 4 that conditions for the full return of
refugees to Sierra Leone or Liberia do not at present
exist and we are disturbed at Ms. McAskie's reports of
harassment and thefts experienced by refugees and
internally displaced persons. It therefore must be
impressed upon all armed groups that they must
provide safe access and safe passage to refugees,
internally displaced persons and humanitarian
personnel operating in the areas of conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to commend
the Secretary-General and the agencies concerned for
the initiatives taken to address the situation in the
subregion in an integrated manner. We wish to assure
the Secretary-General, the men and women of
UNAMSIL and the people of the region of Jamaica's
continued solidarity and support.

