Mr. Stareevie (Serbia): Peacekeeping operations
are one of the most important aspects of the capacity of
the United Nations to safeguard international peace and
security, and I wish to join those who have spoken
before me in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
convening this meeting of the Security Council on this
important issue.

Serbia attaches great importance to the United
Nations role in promoting and maintaining
international peace and security, and is committed to
participating in the system of collective security. In this
way, it makes its contribution to projecting and
building a favourable security environment at the
global and regional levels, and continues the tradition
of Yugoslavia's participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, dating as far back as 1956.

Following more than a decade-long absence,
Serbia, by sending military observers to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor in June
2002, once again joined the ranks of States that take
active part in the establishment and maintenance of
peace and stability in the world. In addition to military
observers, Serbia's contribution to peacekeeping
missions has also included the dispatch of medical and
police teams. Today, Serbia takes part in five
peacekeeping operations.

The participation of Serbian personnel in United
Nations peacekeeping operations is becoming an ever-
more important element of the foreign policy of my
country and a new expression of its international
cooperation and its inclusion into international
integration processes. The defence and national
security strategies of the Republic of Serbia, adopted in
April 2009, provide for the country's active
participation in multinational operations mandated by
the United Nations. The main tasks and objectives of
these strategies in the security sector are aimed at
building and maintaining international peace and
security.

Peacekeeping mandates are much more
diversified today than they have been in the past and
include, in addition to conflict prevention and
maintenance of peace components, post-conflict
reconstruction and long-term social development tasks.
We therefore need a comprehensive approach that
establishes a solid basis and criteria for making
peacekeeping operations more efficient and effective.
We also need to establish more firmly a principle of
analysis and review of each individual peacekeeping
operation, and to strengthen the cooperation and
coordination of the Security Council and other United
Nations bodies in areas of j oint responsibility.

Furthermore, it is necessary to prepare an
integrated strategy for planning and implementing
peacekeeping missions. Despite the positive results of

those missions and their focus on the protection of
civilians, the number of civilian victims is,
unfortunately, increasing.

In order to ensure the success of a peacekeeping
operation, we need first and foremost to define its
mandate in clear terms, always taking into account the
specific situation in which the operation is going to
take place, as well as the involvement of external
factors. This is particularly true for the deployment of
rapid reaction forces, where we need to define very
clearly the role of the troop-contributing countries as
well.

Recently, the United Nations has been
increasingly involved in coordinating activities among
different peacekeeping missions. In addition, regional
organizations tend to be assigned an ever-greater role
in peacekeeping operations in various parts of the
world. However, their participation in maintaining
regional peace and security cannot be a substitute for
the key role of the United Nations in the
implementation of a peacekeeping operation. Regional
organizations' mandates must be strictly in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter and
fully under the aegis of the Security Council.

The success of a peacekeeping operation
depends, in great measure, on the cooperation of the
United Nations with troop-contributing States.
However, we must not disregard United Nations
cooperation with troop-receiving countries. This
cooperation should not be limited to the specific
questions of the conduct of the operation; rather, it
should encompass a whole range of other questions of
wider importance, such as terrorism, trafficking in
drugs and human trafficking, concerning which close
coordination can be very useful.

Such cooperation should be institutionalized
through status of mission and status of forces
agreements. Moreover, peacekeeping missions should
not deal with the causes of conflict and must be carried
out in strict respect for the principle of territorial
integrity and political independence.

Under resolution 1244 (1999), the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
has been engaged as the civilian part of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the territory of the
Republic of Serbia, in Kosovo and Metohija, with the
task of maintaining stability and security in that
province.

In June last year, an initiative was launched to
reconfigure UNMIK, involving an enhanced
operational role of the European Union in the rule of
law area. The Republic of Serbia took active part in the
UNMIK reconfiguration debate. Following an
agreement between the Government of the Republic of
Serbia and the United Nations, and with the approval
of the Security Council, the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) assumed full
operational responsibility in the rule of law area on
9 December 2008.

According to that agreement, EULEX will fully
respect resolution 1244 (1999) and operate under the
overall authority and within the status-neutral
framework of the United Nations. It will submit reports
to the United Nations on a regular basis. The
deployment of EULEX throughout Kosovo will be
carried out in close consultation with the relevant
stakeholders, taking into account the specific
circumstances and concerns of all communities, and
will coordinate with UNMIK. For Serbia, the
implementation of the six-point plan of the Secretary-
General remains of paramount importance.

As in the past, the Republic of Serbia is ready to
make its maximum contribution to the functioning of
UNMIK and EULEX, as well as to any other
peacekeeping operation under United Nations auspices.
Serbia continues to insist that UNMIK must continue
to play the central role in maintaining peace and
stability in Kosovo and Metohija, as well as the role of
coordinator in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). We also firmly believe that the proper funding
of the Mission should be maintained.

In conclusion, let me say that the recent
contributions of the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support towards defining the
present and future challenges of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and finding ways of dealing
with them are very valuable. They give us an excellent
base for further discussions that should be carried out
in the spirit of cooperation and awareness of the
importance of the issues involved.

