Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): First of all, we
would like to express our congratulations to you, Sir,
and to China on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council this month, and also to underline our
gratitude to Ambassador Kafando and the team of
Burkina Faso for their very successful shepherding of
the Council through the busy month of September.

We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing today and Ambassador Viotti
for her briefing on the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission on Guinea-Bissau. We welcome the
adoption of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding
in Guinea-Bissau. I think it is important that a
monitoring and tracking mechanism that sets out
realistic and tangible benchmarks for Guinea-Bissau be
developed soon.

I would like briefly to touch on three points. First
of all, we greatly welcome the progress made in
preparing for the elections to be held on 16 November,
including the successful voter registration exercise.
Clearly, it is critical that those elections go ahead on
time and that all, including the military and the
political parties, ensure that there is an environment
conducive to the elections being held freely and fairly.

Secondly, like others, we are deeply concerned by
the reported rise in drug trafficking and, increasingly,
drug trading, in Guinea-Bissau and other aspects of
organized crime. I think the events following the
landing of the plane from Venezuela on 12 July threw
those concerns into stark relief. It is clear that there
needs to be some further discussion on the Secretary-
General's suggestion of a role for a panel of experts to
look at these issues, and we would be happy to take
part in those discussions.

However, like others, we think that the primary
responsibility for action, certainly in the short term, is
at the national level, and we look forward to efforts to
enhance the cooperation among law-enforcement
agencies in Guinea-Bissau and to strengthen their
capacities. Secondly, action at the subregional level
would be very important too, and we look forward to
the outcome of the upcoming Economic Community of
West African States meeting.

Thirdly, we remain concerned about the case of
Alberto Dabo and continuing reports of intimidation of
journalists, magistrates and human rights activists.
Those issues surrounding the human rights situation in
Guinea-Bissau have implications both for the political
process and for the fight against drug trafficking, and
we hope that the Government and United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau will be
able to act to tackle those concerns.

