The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of February, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Hisashi Owada, Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the month
of January 1997. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Owada for the great diplomatic skill with and
unfailing courtesy which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Zaire, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Khabouji N 'Zaji
(Zaire) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1997/ 13 and
S/ 1997/98, letters dated 6 January and 1 February 1997,
respectively, from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Zaire to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council;
S/ 1997/94, letter dated 29 January 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the text
of the communique issued at the end of the meeting of the
Foreign Ministers of Cameroon, the Congo, Kenya, South
Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zimbabwe
on the current situation in the Great Lakes region, held in
Pretoria on 27 and 28 January 1997; S/ 1997/97, letter
dated 30 January 1997 from the Permanent Representative
of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/ 1997/ 109, letter
dated 4 February 1997 from the Permanent Representative
of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the deteriorating situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular Eastern Zaire, and at its
humanitarian consequences on the refugees and
inhabitants of the region. It calls for an end to the
hostilities and the withdrawal of all external forces,
including mercenaries.

"The Security Council also expresses its deep
concern over the humanitarian crisis in the region
and urges all parties to allow humanitarian agencies
and organizations access to deliver humanitarian
assistance to those in need. It also demands that the
parties ensure the safety of all refugees and
displaced persons as well as the security and
freedom of movement of all United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. It underlines the obligation
of all concerned to respect the relevant provisions of
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Zaire and other States in the Great Lakes
region; and to the principle of the inviolability of
borders. In this connection, the Council calls upon
all the States in the region to refrain, in accordance
with their obligations under the Charters of the
United Nations and the Organization of the African
Unity, from any act, including cross-border
incursions, which would threaten the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of any State and exacerbate the
situation in the region, including endangering the
refugees and displaced persons. It also calls upon
these States to create the conditions necessary for
the speedy and peaceful resolution of the crisis.

 

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the joint United Nations/Organization of African
Unity Special Representative for the Great Lakes
region, Ambassador Mohammed Sahnoun, in the
fulfilment of his mandate as set out in the letter of the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council dated 22 January 1997 (S/l997/73). It urges
all parties in the region to cooperate fully with the
mission of the Special Representative in the search for
a peaceful settlement to the crisis and calls upon
Member States to provide the Special Representative
with all necessary support, including logistical support.
It also encourages other facilitators and representatives
of the regional organizations, including the European
Union and the States concerned, to coordinate closely
their efforts with those of the Special Representative.

"The Security Council reaffirms the importance
of holding an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region
under the auspices of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity.

"The Security Council welcomes all efforts,
including those of the Organizations and States of
the region, aimed at resolving the crisis and, in
particular, the initiative of President Daniel arap Moi
of Kenya and other Heads of State, and encourages
them to continue their efforts.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.15 p.m.

