Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths for his clear and comprehensive update and
efforts to bring about a political and humanitarian
solution in Yemen. My delegation also welcomes the
Permanent Representative of Yemen, His Excellency
Ambassador Ahmad Bin Mubarak, to the Chamber.

Kazakhstan is closely following recent
developments and would like to make the following two
points today.

First, on the political track, we note the importance
of continuing to strive towards sustainable peace,
conflict prevention and resolution through political
and diplomatic means, including confidence-building
measures, as mentioned today by the Special Envoy
and the Permanent Representative of Sweden, and
which are also very important to us, as the country
that created the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, an organization
for confidence-building measures in Asia. That would
foster trust by bringing the parties together around the
common goals of peace and development.

We are closely following the recent United Nations
diplomatic efforts in Geneva, Sana'a and Riyadh, and
soon in Muscat, to persuade the warring parties to
return to the difficult but much-needed negotiations.
Undoubtedly, the diplomatic moves led by the
Special Envoy have helped Yemen a great deal, and
Al-Hudaydah in particular. Kazakhstan supports the
efforts of interested countries and parties to reach a
political path through negotiations for a full and fair
settlement, including at the political consultations in
Geneva. Only such an approach could preserve the
sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen and
realize the interests and aspirations of its people.

Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
dimension, we voice our support for the United Nations
repeated calls on all parties to safeguard civilian lives,
prevent deaths and injuries, allow the freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools.
That should be in accordance with relevant types of
international law. We therefore note and welcome
the coordinated efforts of the stakeholders - United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
and the Gulf countries - to provide humanitarian
assistance to the people of Al-Hudaydah. Kazakhstan
salutes the selfless work of the humanitarian partners
who have been providing food, water, emergency kits,
cash and health care. To our deep regret, 75 per cent
of the Yemeni population still require protection from
malnutrition, cholera and other diseases, which have
killed or afflicted thousands ofcivilians, especially after
a very hot summer season. Against that background,
we express hope that critical health infrastructure, and
in particular reproductive health centres, sanitation
facilities and water plants and stations that supply water
to the population, will be thoroughly protected.

Finally, Kazakhstan supports the Special Envoy and
his able team, as well as their untiring efforts to reach
an inclusive political solution, in close cooperation with
the stakeholders concerned.

