Mr. Feltman: On 16 January, the United Nations
welcomed the first anniversary of implementation day
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
which was endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015). One
year on, the Secretary-General is encouraged by the
continued reaffirmation by all JCPOA participants,
including during the meeting of the Joint Commission
in Vienna on 10 January, of their unequivocal
commitment to the full and effective implementation
of the agreement.

The JCPOA * adopted by the E3/EU+3 and
Iran on 14 July 2015 - is a good example of how
multilateral diplomacy, political will and perseverance
can resolve the most complex issues. It is imperative
that, as participants, the United Nations and the broader
international community continue to support the full
implementation of that historic multilateral agreement
for its full duration. Its comprehensive and sustained
implementation ensures that Iran's nuclear programme
will remain exclusively peaceful. It will help realize
the long-awaited aspirations of the Iranian people to
be reconnected to the global economy and bring to a
satisfactory conclusion the consideration of the Iranian
nuclear issue by the Security Council.

Today's meeting of the Security Council is taking
place against a backdrop of steady implementation,
cooperation and progress. Since Implementation Day, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has issued
five reports documenting continued implementation
by Iran of its nuclear-related commitments. In her
statement on the first anniversary of implementation
day, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
noted that the lifting of the nuclear-related sanctions,
as promised in the agreement, resulted in "a surge in
bilateral trade and investment in Iran, contributing
to better living standards for the benefit of all". The
Secretary-General has underscored the importance of
all JCPOA participants accruing equally the full benefits
of the agreement and calls upon all its participants to
continue to work together in good faith and reciprocity.

I am grateful for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the second report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2016/1136). The report was submitted to the
Council on 30 December 2016, pursuant to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015) and paragraph 7 of the note by
the President of the Council, issued on 16 January 2016
(S/2016/44).

As guided by the Security Council, the report of
the Secretary-General focuses on the implementation
of the provisions contained in annex B to resolution
2231 (2015). It does not cover the implementation of
annex A to the resolution, namely, the implementation
of its nuclear-related commitments by Iran and of the
sanctions-lifting commitments entered into by other
participants, nor does it touch upon issues falling
within the remit of the Joint Commission.

Inowturntothemainfindings andrecommendations

of the second report of the Secretary-General related to
annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
First, the Secretary-General has not received any
report, nor is he aware of any open-source information
regarding the supply, sale or transfer to Iran of nuclear-
related items undertaken contrary to the provisions of
the resolution. Moreover, and also on an encouraging
note, Member States have made greater use of the
procurement-channel process, through which the
transfer of nuclear-related items is approved by the
Council on the basis of recommendation provided by the
Joint Commission. Five nuclear-related proposals have
been submitted since July 2016. Three ofthose proposals
have been approved; the other two are still under
consideration. Those proposals have been processed
in accordance with the timelines established by
resolution 2231 (2015), with due regard for information
security and confidentiality. The operational linkages
established between the Security Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
are functioning well. I wish to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the excellent cooperation that we have had
with the European External Action Service, especially
with the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission.

Secondly, the Secretary-General has also not
received any information regarding Iranian ballistic-
missile activities or ballistic-missile-related transfers
to Iran undertaken contrary to the relevant provisions
of the resolution.

Thirdly, in terms of the restrictions on arms-
related transfers, the report includes information on
the seizure by the French Navy of an arms shipment
in the Northern Indian Ocean in March 2016. France
concluded that the arms shipment had originated
in Iran and that that transfer had been undertaken
contrary to annex B of the resolution. In addition, the
Secretariat also received information from Australia
and the Combined Maritime Forces about another arms
seizure by the Royal Australian Navy, which took place
off the coast of Oman in February 2016. That shipment
of arms was also assessed by the United States Navy
to have originated in Iran. Both seizures bear strong
similarities with the one reported by the United States
in June 2016 and mentioned in the first report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/589). The Secretariat is
looking forward to the opportunity to examine the arms
seized in all three instances and to obtain additional
information in order to corroborate the information
provided and independently ascertain the origin of
those shipments.

Still on the subject of arms-related transfers, of
particular concern is the June 2016 televised statement
by the Secretary-General of Hizbullah that Hizbullah
receives its salaries, expenses, weapons and missiles
from Iran. That statement suggests that transfers of
arms from Iran to Hizbullah may have been undertaken
contrary to resolution 2231 (2015). In addition, the
report notes the November 2016 letter by Israel to the
Secretary-General and the Council about the alleged
use of commercial flights by the Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps to transfer arms and related materiel
to Hizbullah (S/2016/987), and the subsequent
response from Iran that such claims were baseless and
unsubstantiated accusations (S/2016/992).

With regard to the case of the Iranian participation
in an arms exhibition held in Baghdad in March 2016,
which was presented in the first report of the Secretary-
General on this issue, I am able to inform the Council
today that Iraqi authorities confirmed in October 2016
that all items exhibited have been returned to Iran.
Therefore, no further follow-up will be taken by the
Secretariat in relation to that matter.

Finally, the report draws the attention of Council
members to possible ongoing travel-ban violations by
individuals on the list maintained pursuant to resolution
2231 (2015). The report includes information about two
possible foreign trips by Brigadier General Naqdi and
about numerous possible foreign trips by Major General
Soleimani, which are supported by photographic
evidence released by Iranian and other regional media
outlets. The Secretariat raised those possible violations
with the countries involved. Iraq and Syria did not deny
or confirm that information, but emphasized that no
invitations had been extended nor were visas issued by
their respective authorities to those individuals.

In response to the Secretariat's request for
clarification with regard to the possible transfer of
arms to Hizbullah, as well as the possible travel-ban
violations, Iran underlined that

"measures undertaken by Iran in combating
terrorism and violent extremism in the region have
been consistent with its national security interests
and international commitments".

Looking forward to the second year of the
implementation of the JCPOA, I would like to reaffirm
once again the particular responsibilities of JCPOA
participants to implement the agreement fully and
effectively. The wider international community also
has an interest in and must contribute to the long-term
implementation of the agreement.

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the
leadership of Ambassador Roman Oyarzun Marchesi
of Spain in his role as facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in 2016. I would also like to
congratulate Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy on
his selection as facilitator for 2017. Ambassador Cardi
and the Security Council can count on the full support
of the United Nations Secretariat in his stewardship of
the resolution endorsing that historic agreement.

