Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her briefing
today on the latest report of the Prosecutor of the ICC
to the Security Council in accordance with resolution
1970 (2011).

At the outset, Egypt would like to commend the
efforts of the Court to put an end to impunity and restore
justice in Libya in line with international law. For that
reason, in the case against Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf
Al-Werfalli, we are of the view that it is important to
ensure adherence to article 1 of the Rome Statute of the
ICC. Indeed that article stipulates that the Court is a
complement to national criminal jurisdiction.

It is furthermore essential for the Court to adhere
to the conditions regarding admissibility, pursuant to
the stipulations of article 17 of the Rome Statute. In that
regard, the Court cannot declare that the case against
Mahmoud Mustafa Busayf Al-Werfalli is admissible
or that other individuals are subject to an investigation
in their countries if Libyan judicial authorities are
effectively seized of the matter and if proceedings are
underway, unless it is established that the Libyan State
does not have the will or is unable to genuinely conduct
and carry through investigative proceedings. With
respect to handing Saif Al-Islam Al-Qaddafi over to
the Court, we reiterate that it is necessary to deliver all
requisite assistance to the Libyan Government so that it
can fulfil all of its obligations vis-a-vis the Court.

On the other hand, although Egypt is aware of the
tremendous challenges linked to the security situation
in Libya, which make it difficult to dispatch experts
from the Court to conduct research on the ground and
collect proof from Libyan territory, we favour and
welcome any forms of collaboration with the assistance
delivered by the Libyan Prosecutor-General so as to
enable the Prosecutor of the ICC to fully carry through
that Court's mission.

In addition to the assistance provided by the
Libyan Prosecutor or other competent authorities
from the country, Egypt requests that the Office of the
Prosecutor of the ICC prioritize a verification of all
other information received with respect to the crimes
perpetrated in Libya. That information must stem from
credible sources. The Court cannot focus exclusively on
allegations from one group to the detriment of another.
The Court must remain seized of all cases within its
jurisdiction, including crimes perpetrated by terrorist
organizations. Those organizations receive financial
assistance and weapons from some States, and it is
thanks to the availability of such weapons and financial
flows that the terrorists perpetrate crimes that indeed
fall under the jurisdiction of the Court.

The international community must deliver all
necessary support to the Libyan Government so as to set
up a comprehensive strategy to enable the fight against
the heinous crimes perpetrated in Libya. All required
assistance to Libyan authorities must be delivered so
that those authorities can restore justice and prosecute
terrorists. That requires that the Libyan Government be
provided with the necessary weapons, as well as that all
relevant Security Council resolutions be implemented.

Lastly, we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for all of her
efforts, and we thank her Office for the tremendous
efforts it has undertaken to restore justice and end
impunity. My country will continue to cooperate and
collaborate with the Court in that regard.

