I am delivering this statement on behalf of the co-penholders, Belgium and Germany. We would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing. We also thank Susannah Sirkin for being with us today to shed light on the situation of health facilities and health workers in Syria. Our thanks for her powerful statement. The destruction of health facilities and the shortage of health workers is an overwhelming humanitarian challenge in normal times; in times of pandemic, it is highly likely to cause further disaster. We thank Physicians for Human Rights for continuing to demand accountability and for continuing to hold warring parties to account. We should all work together to limit the impact of war on civilians and try to refine existing protection mechanisms, such as the humanitarian notification system. It is important to underline that parties who withdraw from that mechanism remain bound by international humanitarian law. As we just heard from Mr. Lowcock, the humanitarian crisis in Syria continues on an appalling scale. The demand for humanitarian assistance is not decreasing. On the contrary, nine years of war, the irresponsibility of the Syrian authorities, coronavirus disease and its economic impact and the crisis in Lebanon are causing more and more Syrians to sink into poverty. The World Food Programme recently stated that an additional 1.4 million Syrians have become food insecure since the beginning of 2020. Today and tomorrow, international partners will meet for the fourth Brussels conference, and new pledges will be made to support the future of Syria and the region. Tomorrow, donors will demonstrate that the world cares, that the people of Syria are not forgotten. The humanitarian co-penholders, Germany and Belgium, are important donors and we will continue our efforts to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people. But it is not only about funding. It is also - perhaps mostly - about access. Humanitarian assistance is of little use if the people most in need cannot easily be reached. Colleagues, that is why the humanitarian co-penholders are asking for your cooperation in good faith. Security Council members must work together for a renewal of resolution 2504 (2020). The lives of millions of Syrians depend on cross- border assistance from Turkey and Iraq. Six weeks ago, during the last meeting on Syria humanitarian in this virtual Chamber, Mr. Lowcock asked Security Council members for an early decision, stating that "this decision cannot be left to the last minute. Too many lives are at stake" (S/2020/427, p. 3). The co-penholders started the process early, in an inclusive and transparent manner. Moreover, comparing the latest bimonthly report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/576), published some days ago, with the previous ones, we see exactly the same recommendations. Regarding the north-west, the recommendation is for a renewal of resolution 2504 (2020) for 12 months because a failure to renew would sever that lifeline for millions of civilians and because it is simply impossible to replicate with cross-line assistance. As for the north-east, a combination of more cross-border and cross-line is required to sustain levels of humanitarian assistance. We all know that, as Mr. Lowcock explained very well, a humanitarian operation like the one taking place through the border crossings of Bab Al-Salam and Bab Al-Hawa, in north-western Syria, requires weeks and often months of lead time. Operations are at an all-time record level. By delaying the process, we put in danger the ability of humanitarian organizations to save lives. At the beginning of these negotiations, we promised each other to do better this time. Yes, the cross-border mechanism is meant to be temporary. Yes, cross-line aid is important and growing. But the reality on the ground is that cross-line aid is nowhere near the required level to meet the vast humanitarian needs. This means that the cross-border mechanism remains as relevant and necessary as ever and will be so for the foreseeable future. We must not allow ourselves to be misguided by political or military considerations. Let us concentrate instead on the essential: life- saving humanitarian assistance. I would like to add a few words in my national capacity. I have already mentioned the importance of the Brussels conference taking place tomorrow. German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas will attend the conference and announce the German pledge. Our support for the Syrian people has been unwavering. Germany pledged more than $1.6 billion in 2019. The needs of the Syrian population are even higher in 2020. We will take that into account and call on others to do the same. German assistance has amounted to more than $10 billion since 2012. More than 700,000 thousand Syrian refugees live in Germany. We truly care about the people of Syria. The German approach is a purely humanitarian one. Therefore, we are deeply committed to the renewal of the resolution on the cross-border mechanism. In addition, we must not forget to support the neighbouring countries. It is high time to stop those waging war in Syria.
