Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the presence of
Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of Timor-Leste at this
meeting, and we thank him for his statement. We also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Khare, for his comprehensive
presentation.

We have noted with pleasure that the situation in
Timor-Leste has generally remained calm and stable
since the beginning of this year under the leadership of
President Ramos-Horta and his Government. The
political dialogue among the various factions has
further deepened, and ensuring social stability has
become an important area of consensus among the
leaders of the factions. There has been a reduction in
various types of crime, and positive results have been
achieved in addressing the issue of internally displaced
persons. The National Police of Timor-Leste, with the
assistance of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), have been gradually taking
over responsibility for maintaining law and order.

The key to an effective response to the various
problems facing the country lies in actions being taken
by all factions - in particular, the Government and
FRETILIN - who must put aside their previous
differences and work in full cooperation. We appreciate
the efforts by Prime Minister Gusmao and Special
Representative Khare to promote dialogue among the
factions. We appeal to the factions to put the interests
of the country and its people first and to seize the
present favourable opportunity to restore peace and
achieve development in order to lead the people in
focusing their efforts on nation-building.

Attaining lasting peace and security in the
country will require vigorous efforts to develop the
economy and improve people's livelihoods. We have
noted that despite the momentum of favourable
economic growth, the situation still remains fragile.
Problems such as poverty and high unemployment may
adversely affect the stability and development of the
country.

Against the current backdrop, we support the
efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste, which,
while continuing to strengthen social stability, is
prioritizing building infrastructure and the human
resources capacity by focusing on improving the
economy and raising employment so as effectively to
remove those factors that contribute to destabilizing
the society. The international community should also
continue to provide all kinds of assistance to speed up
the nation-building process in Timor-Leste.
With regard to the mandate and composition of
UNMIT, we have noted that both the Secretary-General
and Special Representative Khare believe that at
present we should maintain its current composition and
that the reconfiguration of staffing and composition
should proceed in a gradual manner. We support that
proposal. At the same time, we also believe that in
order to ensure public security in Timor-Leste, and in
light of the reality in the country and the views of all
actors, the United Nations should focus on building the
capacity of the police sector for independent law
enforcement and should make police training and the
handover of policing responsibilities a priority. We
hope that UNMIT, out of respect for the views of the
Government of Timor-Leste, will eventually be able to
pull out of the country smoothly. That will serve as a
good example for the formulation of other
peacekeeping operations and the implementation of
exit strategies.

Both China and Timor-Leste are members of the
large family of the Asia and Pacific region. We have
therefore been closely following developments in the
country and supporting peace, stability and
development there. At a recent meeting with Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao, Premier Wen Jiabao of the
State Council of China declared that China would
provide Timor-Leste with 30 million yuan of gratis
assistance. We are ready to continue to help the country
to the best of our ability.

Finally, I will also take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Khare for his outstanding contribution to
maintaining peace and stability in the country during
his tenure. We wish him every future success.

