Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today and for his
leadership over the past three months.

It has now been more than nine months since the
Council adopted its sixth resolution on Iran, and its
fourth to impose sanctions in response to Iran's
11-27294
continued refusal to comply with its international
nuclear obligations. Unfortunately, once again, when it
comes to Iran's actions, little has changed since the
Council met three months ago.

Let me make three key points. First, the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) continues to report Iran's ongoing violation of
its Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, Security Council and IAEA safeguards
obligations. Most troubling, the Director General has
stated that Iran has once again refused to discuss the
possible military dimensions to its nuclear programme,
including credible reports of Iranian efforts to develop
a nuclear warhead - an issue that Iran incorrectly
asserts is closed. The report details Iran's many
ongoing failures to cooperate with the Agency's
investigation and its violations of international nuclear
obligations, including its failure to suspend
enrichment-related activities and its work on heavy
water-related projects.

After a careful presentation of the facts, the
Director General concludes that the Agency is unable
to provide credible assurance about the absence of
undeclared nuclear material and activities in Iran, and
therefore is unable to conclude that all nuclear material
in Iran is in peaceful activities. This conclusion is
cause for grave concern to this Council and the
international community at large.

Secondly, it is absolutely critical that all Member
States continue to take the necessary steps to fully and
robustly implement resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747
(2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010). This includes
taking the necessary steps domestically to ensure
effective implementation. It also includes submitting
national implementation reports and cooperating fully
with the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts. In this regard,
we welcome Nigeria's excellent example of enforcing
these measures, including its recent seizure of an
Iranian shipment of arms and related materiel and its
cooperation with the Committee and Panel in
investigating that violation. Recent press reports of
other potential violations, such as the Iranian weapons
seized on the MV Victoria, underline the continuing
need for a high level of vigilance on the part of all
Member States.

In addition to the important role played by
Member States, the 1737 Committee and the Panel of
3

Experts are critical to better implementation and
enforcement of the Iran sanctions regime. The United
States thanks the Panel for its efforts in the few months
that it has been operational. That group has started
strongly. We have been impressed by its hard work.
The 1737 Committee should be prepared to act quickly
to implement the recommendations of the Panel and to
take additional steps, in line with its programme of
work, to tighten sanctions enforcement.

A few weeks ago, my Government hosted the
Panel in Washington, DC, for a series of
consultations. We encourage other Member States to
take similar steps and do what they can to fully support
the Panel's efforts.

Finally, let me reiterate my Government's
commitment to a diplomatic solution. We met with Iran
a little more than a month ago with a sincere intent to
start a process of meaningful and constructive
engagement between the P5+1 and Iran. The P5+1
came to the meeting without preconditions and with
specific, practical proposals aimed at building
confidence. We made every effort to secure agreement.
We had hoped to have a detailed, constructive
discussion about those ideas, but instead Iran presented
unacceptable preconditions.

Iran's performance in Istanbul was deeply
disappointing. We now look to Iran to show the
international community that it has decided to address
the international community's serious concerns about
its troubling nuclear activities. Our goal remains to
prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We
remain committed to working closely with our partners
in this Council and the international community
towards that goal.

