Mr. Egeland: On behalf of my colleagues in the
humanitarian community, I thank you, Sir, for giving
me this opportunity to address the Council in an open
meeting. This is my first opportunity to brief the
Council, and it is most fitting that the topic is the
critical issue of how better to protect civilians in armed
conflict.

Mr. President, we have a common agenda. The
Security Council is the principal mechanism of the
United Nations for the promotion of peace and security
around the globe. The humanitarian community
administers to victims in the absence of peace and
security.

It was my predecessor, Sergio Vieira de Mello,
who, with his usual foresight, first introduced this topic
to the Security Council. Sergio had a keen awareness of
the important nexus between peace and security,
humanitarian affairs and human rights. Indeed, his
career spanned all these aspects of the Organization's
work.

The tragic and untimely death of Sergio and those
serving with him has underscored a number of
unwelcome truths relating to that critical nexus. Most
obviously, the landscape in which the United Nations is
operating is changing. We have in recent months
witnessed what I can only describe as assassinations of
humanitarians from across the spectrum: the United
Nations, the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement
and non-governmental organizations. Those deliberate
attacks against humanitarian personnel dramatically
reduce access to civilians in armed conflict and the
humanitarian space required to render support. And
without those two prerequisites, we fail in our
responsibility to protect.

We seem to be moving into a time where the
protection challenges are more complex. If we fail to
keep abreast of this changing environment, we will end
up with even greater challenges to international peace
and security. The threats are constantly evolving: new
weapons, new ways of conducting war, new ways of
inflicting violence, new ways of deterring those who
would keep the peace and those who would bring
assistance. Seen against that evolving context, the
protection of civilians should be viewed not as a static
problem, but rather as a shifting series of challenges
that we must all address with innovative and direct
policies and tools.

Together, we can and must confront those
challenges. We have made some headway over the past
six months. In my briefing today, I shall outline
developments since the last update was presented to the
Council by my predecessor, Kenzo Oshima, in June. I
shall review a number of current country situations
through the lens of the protection of civilians. I shall
also present two important documents developed by my
Office over the past year - the road map and the aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians - and I shall
conclude with a lO-point platform for future collective
action.

In the current complex environment for
humanitarian action that I have described, what should
be done?

First, we should address access and protection. It
is not acceptable that we are denied access to affected
populations in the majority of crises where we are
deployed. There are more than 20 countries where
access to civilian populations in need is in some way
restricted. Together, we must work with
Governments - and, where necessary, with armed
groups - to systematically address restrictions on
access. Vulnerable communities have the right to
receive humanitarian assistance, and we have the right
and the obligation to provide it.

For example, on my recent mission to Uganda, I
saw a stark picture of what the absence of humanitarian
access means. Outside the main northern and eastern
towns, access has been dramatically reduced by the
increased activity of the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA). Some 1.3 million people have been displaced
by the war. Many of those people are living in
"resettlement camps" in inaccessible areas, with
severely limited access to their lands, to their
livelihoods and to humanitarian assistance. In those
circumstances, food aid provided through the World
Food Programme is saving more than 80 per cent ofthe
population from starvation, but even that food aid is
vulnerable to looting during LRA attacks.
Humanitarian access is entirely dependent on too-
limited and too-unreliable military escorts.

Issues of humanitarian access in the occupied
Palestinian territory also continue to be of serious
concern. Recent developments - including the
construction of the Israeli security barrier - will serve
only to further limit the access that affected
communities have to humanitarian assistance, to
essential services and to their livelihoods. Our efforts
to secure access where it is denied require unflagging
commitment provided on a systematic basis by all of
us.

By contrast, today we are seeing in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo what the return of a
measure of security can mean for the restoration of
humanitarian access. The turning point came with a
strengthened peacekeeping force and the political
commitment of the Government and the regional
actors - supported by the international community -
to a peace process that has begun to take hold. As a
result, humanitarian access has begun to improve after
years of deterioration. In the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, increased access has inevitably
revealed greater need. If we are to consolidate peace
and security, the humanitarian community must be able
to meet those expectations.

Despite the inherent risks in these fragile
situations, the international community must recognize
its responsibility to ensure adequate and timely
resources or risk losing the momentum towards peace.
The history of the region has demonstrated too-
cautious donor behaviour. The international community
must now demonstrate the same level of commitment
that it has to higher-profile crises in the Middle East
and elsewhere.

The second major challenge is the security of
humanitarian workers. There can be no access when
humanitarian workers are denied security. Our
emblems have always provided us with a certain
protection based on an understanding and acceptance
of our humanitarian mission. That has now been
tragically challenged in Iraq and Afghanistan. The past
six months have also seen our humanitarian colleagues
threatened and targeted in Somalia, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi, the occupied
Palestinian territory, Chechnya and various other areas.
I wish to emphasize that national staff in several
countries have, at great personal risk, continued to
deliver humanitarian assistance in the absence of an
international presence. Our international responsibility
is to provide solidarity through our presence and to
establish effective measures for our common security
as humanitarian organizations. I therefore encourage
the Security Council to continue to stress to all parties
to armed conflicts their obligation to ensure the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel and to ensure
that those responsible for attacks are brought to justice
without delay.

The third challenge I should like to highlight is
the special protection needs of children affected by
conflict. Children are in no way spared from the
violence and suffering of war. Tragically, in today's
conflicts we find children increasingly targeted and
subjected to some ofthe most unconscionable atrocities
the world has ever witnessed. Last month, when I
visited northern Uganda, I was confronted by a war
against children, fought primarily by children. More
than 10,000 children have been abducted by the LRA
over the past 12 months alone and have been forced,
through brutal means, to become child soldiers,
labourers and sex slaves. Fear of abduction by armed
groups has created tens of thousands of "night
commuters" throughout the north and east of
Uganda - children who walk up to three hours to the
major towns every evening before dark, simply to
avoid abduction.

We are all aware that the recruitment and use of
child soldiers is a problem mirrored in many other
conflicts around the world today, notably in West
Africa. It is incumbent upon all of us to do more to
respond to the tragedy of children being recruited and
used as child soldiers, suffering extremely violent
sexual attacks or bearing the burden of responsibility
for their younger brothers and sisters because they have
lost their parents to the ravages of HIV/AIDS or the
violence of war. That is but one example of the
suffering of children in conflict zones. The rape of both
boys and girls in Liberia and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is a further justification for making the
protection of children a particular priority in our daily
efforts.

The fourth of our challenges is demobilization,
disarmament, reintegration and resettlement. One of
the features ofthe conflict in the Mano River Basin and
C6te d'Ivoire has been the pervasive involvement of
youth. The extensive engagement of largely young
unemployed men in the militias fighting in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire threatens to
undermine the security of the region as a whole if that
culture of youth violence is allowed to become
entrenched. The spread of a violent youth culture can
be stemmed only by comprehensive regional protection
solutions - in particular, control of arms flows and
sustained, well-designed and resourced DDRR
programmes that address the particular needs of young
people brutalized by war, with no means of survival but
the gun.

DDRR must be addressed on a regional basis, and
neighbouring States should recognize their
responsibilities to assist. I welcome the current
initiatives that are taking place in Cote d'Ivoire to
establish a process of demobilization, and hope that
these initiatives will complement the DDRR measures
in Liberia. A stronger peacekeeping presence in Cote
d'Ivoire is now needed to provide a more secure basis
for taking this critical process forward.

Fifthly, with regard to the challenge of sexual
violence in armed conflict, the fact that women and
children continue to constitute the majority of civilian
victims demands our urgent and vigorous attention.
Rape and other forms of sexual violence continue to be
used as brutally devastating weapons of war - in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, northern
Uganda and West Africa and in far too many other
conflicts around the world. The attention of the
Council to these issues is critical, and I ask it to
maintain a strong focus on sexual violence in its future
missions to areas of conflict. I wish to draw particular
attention to the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, where extreme crimes of sexual
violence - described by some as sexual torture -
have taken place on a chilling scale. The transitional
process, the increased presence of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and the strengthened security
situation in areas of the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have improved humanitarian
conditions where MONUC is deployed, but more
physical protection is needed. Given the cultural
sensitivities, the most effective response is to work
with and support local initiatives to assist the victims.
We also need to address the special needs created by
the increase in female-headed households.
However, we will be unable to stop the scourge of
sexual violence in these countries without a
functioning justice system. This brings me to my sixth
challenge: justice and reconciliation. In too many
conflicts around the world, sexual violence, torture,
murder and other serious crimes under international
law continue to be committed with total impunity. The
need to end this culture of impunity is fundamental. I
would, therefore, like to ask the Security Council to
continue to denounce strongly such terrible acts and
take concrete measures to address the issue of
impunity. The swift re-establishment of the rule of law,
justice and reconciliation is vital during the transition
from conflict to peace, and the actions of the leaders of
the parties are crucial. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and elsewhere, it is critical that political and
military leaders stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the
victims and make clear that human rights violations
will not be tolerated. Prompt, independent and effective
investigations must be carried out. Perpetrators must be
brought to justice. Potential perpetrators must be
deterred.

To this end, I welcome the statement of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court that his
Office is following the situation in Ituri, including the
allegations of widespread sexual violence and other
serious violations of international criminal law. I
encourage the Prosecutor to pursue his efforts in this
regard. I welcome the Transitional Government's
announcement of its intent to cooperate with the
Prosecutor, and would like to encourage the
Government to pursue all other relevant means in order
to bring those responsible to justice.

The seventh challenge is the special protection
and assistance needs of the displaced. Given the
millions of internally displaced men, women and
children throughout the world, the special needs of
these particularly forgotten people remain a natural
focus of our work. In Liberia, the entire population has
suffered displacement at one time or another. Yet, more
than 500,000 remain displaced. The security and return
of such people is a key component for the successful
restoration of peace and stability. In Angola, there has
been a rapid return of a large portion of the displaced
population. Despite the encouraging signs of large-
scale return, however, re-establishing their economic
future will be critically affected by unexploded
ordnance problems.

Likewise, the humanitarian situation in Colombia
continues to be of great concern. There is a large
number of internally displaced persons, with more
being forced to leave their homes and land every day.
The conflict is also creating increasing numbers of
refugees.

We welcome the encouraging progress that has
been made by the Government of Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement in preparing a national
policy for internally displaced persons. The recent
displacement of more than 600,000 people in the
Darfur region, however, remains a serious concern.

The eighth and final challenge relates to charges
of sexual exploitation of civilians in conflict by our
own United Nations personnel. Since the most recent
briefing on the protection of civilians, there has been
progress on a protection issue on which the United
Nations itself has been called to account, namely
sexual exploitation and abuse. The Secretary-General's
Bulletin on special measures for protection from sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse was promulgated last
month. At the Secretary-General's behest, all parts of
the United Nations system with a field presence are
working very closely, together with our non-
governmental organization partners and the Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement, to establish a coherent
system for the implementation of the Bulletin at the
field level. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs are
an integral part of this joint effort, and the Bulletin
applies equally to United Nations staff serving in peace
operations.

We all agree that acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse perpetrated by United Nations-affiliated
personnel do irreparable damage, both to the image of
the United Nations and - more importantly - to our
ability to serve and protect war-torn communities. We
also agree that any such act by anyone affiliated with
the United Nations - whether soldier, political officer,
aid worker or police officer - affects all of us. While
over the coming year we establish better systems of
redress and managerial oversight, we must not lose
sight of the need for vigilance and follow-through, in
which, I hope, troop-contributing countries will also
wish to play a part.

I would like now to turn to the practical work
undertaken by my Office over the past six months to
consolidate United Nations efforts to meet the
protection needs of civilians in armed conflict. In the
past, the Council has asked us for greater integration of
these issues among the various parts of the
Organization. I am pleased to report that the creation of
a cross-cutting protection and human rights unit within
the United Nations Mission in Liberia, integrating the
range of expertise required to adequately protect
civilians, represents a significant development for
future cooperation in this respect.

Our work has been based on three key areas. The
first of these is the continuation of our regional
workshop programme as a means of disseminating
information to Governments and other concerned
parties on the key principles, responsibilities and
priorities for the protection of civilians. The second is
the updating of the aide-memoire and its further
application in the field; and the third is the
development of the so-called road map on the
protection of civilians, which establishes a shared
commitment to action on the protection of civilians.

Turning first to the regional workshops, over the
past 14 months, six regional workshops have brought
together representatives of Governments, United
Nations country teams and civil society organizations
in West and Southern Africa, Europe and the Balkans,
East Asia-Pacific, the South Pacific and, since the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
last briefing to the Council, South Asia, to identify and
address the major regional concerns on the protection
of civilians.

In some regions these workshops have formed
part of a sustainable process. Concerns for the
protection of civilians are becoming adopted
institutionally by regional organizations such as the
Southern African Development Community and the
Economic Community of West African States in
Africa, the European Union and the Pacific Islands
Forum.

In early 2004, we intend to convene a regional
workshop in Latin America, and country-level
workshops in Indonesia and the Solomon Islands, in
cooperation with their respective Governments. I wish
to take this opportunity to sincerely thank Member
States for their support for these vital workshop
initiatives.

I am presenting to members of the Council today,
two documents for your consideration. The first is the
updated version of the aide-memoire on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. You will recall that the
Security Council adopted the original aide-memoire in
March 2002 as a means to facilitate its consideration of
protection of civilians issues in its deliberations on
mandates for peacekeeping operations. At that time, the
Council undertook to regularly review and update the
aide-memoire to reflect the latest protection of civilians
concerns, trends and measures to address those
concerns. Last December, the Council expressed its
willingness to update the aide-memoire annually.

The first such update, which is before you today,
reflects important new language that the Council has
used since March 2002 and provides a clearer structure
of the key protection issues. It is the product of wide
consultation throughout the United Nations system,
particularly through the Executive Committee on
Humanitarian Assistance Implementation Group on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

I hope that you will endorse the updated aide-
memoire today as a tool that reflects evolving
protection priorities, and will assist the Council in its
efforts to ensure that the protection needs and rights of
civilians are reflected in relevant Security Council
resolutions and mandates. I cannot stress strongly
enough that the language included in Security Council
resolutions does make a difference to our work on the
ground.

An important evolution that I would like to
highlight is the aide-memoire's use in the field as a tool
that provides a systematic basis for analysis and
reporting during humanitarian crises. We have used it
effectively as a protection matrix in Iraq and Burundi.
We intend to take this approach forward in northern
Uganda as a matter of priority, and to extend its
practical application in other humanitarian crises.

I commend the updated aide-memoire to Council
members, and look forward to its endorsement in a
Presidential Statement at the end ofthis week.

The second tool for your consideration is the road
map, which Council members called for as a tool to
clarify responsibilities, enhance cooperation, facilitate
implementation and further strengthen coordination
within the United Nations system. The version before
you today focuses primarily on the role of the United
Nations system and reflects the outcome of extensive
consultations within the United Nations system over
the past 10 months. To truly reflect the needs of
civilians in a constantly changing humanitarian
environment, this instrument must be seen as a living
document. Like the aide-memoire, it will need to be
updated and developed in line with the new and
evolving protection challenges that confront us.
We, as a United Nations system now have the
tools, the early warning capacity, the technical
expertise and the logistical capacity to provide more
timely and targeted humanitarian assistance and
protection than ever before. What we sorely lack is the
ability to have our humanitarian principles become a
reality for political, military and economic leaders
around the world. That is where we, the humanitarian
and human rights workers, need your help. That is
where the Council can make a real contribution
towards achieving real forward movement on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Let me conclude by presenting 10 action points
that build on the areas in the road map that enjoy
consensus support of the Security Council. First,
improve humanitarian access to civilians in need, better
utilize negotiations on the ground and explore all
possible avenues for political leverage by Member
States. Secondly, improve the safety and security of
humanitarian personnel, irrespective of circumstances
and environments. Thirdly, ensure that the special
protection and assistance requirements of children in
armed conflict are fully addressed, to better reflect the
more complex protection requirements of children and
the problem of youth violence. Fourthly, ensure that the
special protection and assistance requirements of
women in armed conflict are fully addressed in light of
the high levels of sexual violence and abuse. Fifthly,
combat impunity for grave breaches of international
humanitarian law, genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes, thereby promoting compliance with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law.

Sixth, assist in ensuring the provision of the
necessary resources to address the needs of vulnerable
populations in so-called forgotten emergencies.
Seventh, examine how to better implement measures to
respond to the security needs of refugees and internally
displaced persons. Eighth, address short-comings in
our approach to disarmament, demobilization
reintegration and rehabilitation, particularly with
regard to child combatants and the need to address
regional concerns. Ninth, address the impact of small
arms and light weapons on the protection of civilians,
specifically with regard to confidence-building
measures and the need to address regional flows; and
tenth, develop further measures to promote the
responsibility of armed groups and non-State actors to
protect civilians, to provide access, ensure the safety,
security and freedom of movement of humanitarian
workers and, more generally, to respect international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law.

In furthering those action points, we propose a
process of consultation, led by the Security Council, to
facilitate a structured dialogue which would identify
protection gaps. My Office stands ready to provide all
necessary support in that respect.

We must not let ourselves believe that the agenda
for future action on the protection of civilians consists
only of complex and difficult issues which require
lengthy negotiation. Let me remind the Council that
there have been achievements in the missions by the
Security Council to areas of conflict and in Council
resolutions and peacekeeping mandates which have
more effectively considered the protection needs of
civilians. I am grateful to you for this opportunity to
outline the new challenges and some of the practical
steps that we can take if we are to create a culture of
protection that reflects the real needs of innocent
civilians trapped by conflict.

