Mr. Lovald: I want to thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to participate in your meeting on
Burundi in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It is
timely that the Security Council once more is focusing
on the situation in Burundi.

I have just returned from Burundi, together with a
delegation from the Peacebuilding Commission, and it
must be said that Burundi is presently facing a number
of difficult challenges requiring international attention.
Allow me to highlight some of them.

First, with regard to the security situation, it goes
without saying that the present security situation in the
country is of particular concern. It is clear that without
peace and security, there can be no development or
economic recovery. The recent and ongoing fighting
between Palipehutu-Forces nationales de liberation
(FNL) and Government security forces is a source of
deep concern. The return of the Palipehutu-FNL to
Bujumbura last week is promising, however. Without
Palipehutu-FNL'S return to the Joint Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism and the full implementation of
the Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of 2006, the
concrete peace consolidation gains that Burundi has
achieved so far will be jeopardized. Several thousand
people who have been internally displaced as a result
of the recent fighting add in a dramatic way to the
seriousness of the present security situation.

Secondly, with regard to the Parliament, there is
also reason for concern over the recent political crisis
that continues to block its work. The political parties
need to find a way out of the present impasse in a spirit
of reconciliation and dialogue, so that the Parliament
can resume functioning when it meets again in June. A
continued deadlock not only undermines trust in the
political system, it will also impact negatively on
international efforts to assist Burundi.

The third challenge is the elections. The 2010
national elections are already high on the political
agenda in Burundi. Successful democratic elections
will be important for the development of the country.
In that regard, I would like to underline the importance
of preparing a roadmap for holding the elections in a
timely, well-prepared and transparent manner, and of
the establishment of a national electoral commission.
The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to
supporting efforts in that respect and invites the
Government to initiate that process.
08-35110

Fourth is the concern over the land issue, for
Burundi is a densely populated country. The return of a
large number of refugees who went into exile in 1972
and 1993 will exacerbate an already existing problem
of land and will pose an additional challenge to the
State's administrative, judicial and legislative capacity,
and it could be a source of tension for the consolidation
of peace in Burundi. I want to bring to the attention of
Council members that the Peacebuilding Commission
will have, on 27 May, a thematic meeting on land
issues in Burundi, with particular focus on the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

Fifthly and finally, with regard to the economic
situation, Burundi is among the poorest countries in the
world, and it is experiencing extra suffering under the
present international economic situation. As described
in the report of the Secretary-General, the country
continues to suffer from structural poverty and
stagnating standards. That complicates peacebuilding
efforts and underscores the need for continued support
from the international community.

Last time I addressed the Council in my capacity
of Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, at the 5793rd meeting on
6 December 2007, I reported that the Commission the
day before had adopted the Monitoring and Tracking
Mechanism for the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding and had entered the implementation
phase of its work. Hence, we have focused on how to
assist Burundi in responding to our common
peacebuilding priorities. Now we are preparing for the
first biannual review of the implementation of the
Strategic Framework at the end of June.

The Government of Burundi and its partners have
instituted an inclusive and participatory process to
prepare for the biannual review. Diverse stakeholders,
including representatives of the Government, political
parties, civil society organizations, the private sector,
women's organizations, the national council of wise
men, religious groups and international partners, are all
involved.

I would like commend the Government and all
the national stakeholders for their constructive
engagement in the implementation of the Strategic
Framework and the review process. It is encouraging
that the Government of Burundi has been able to give
priority to this in the present situation. It shows
commitment. Let me also use this occasion to thank the
08-35110
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi (BINUB)
for assisting the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Government of Burundi so ably in that regard.

The Peacebuilding Commission is committed to
undertaking urgent action, should the biannual review
in June reveal gaps that need to be filled in order for
our efforts to succeed - and indeed they must.

To sum up, peacebuilding is at present under
stress in Burundi. The following courses of action
commend themselves.

First, given the present challenges facing the
country, the international community must reiterate its
pledge of solidarity with Burundi and remain steadfast
in its support for peacebuilding in the country.

Secondly, the security situation in the country,
and its potential regional implications, must be given
special and ongoing attention. In particular, we must
consider how we can best support the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Ceasefire
Agreement from 2006. The entry into force of the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region offers an additional avenue for support.

Thirdly, in that respect we must welcome the
statement of the Political Directorate of 18 May in
which the Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-
FNL reiterated their commitment to respect the terms
of the Agreement of Principles towards lasting peace,
security and stability signed on 18 June 2006 and the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement of 7 September
2006.

Fourthly, we must also welcome that the two
parties agree that the current hostilities should cease
immediately in the event all obligations of the
Government of Burundi and the Palipehutu-FNL are
respected.

Those commitments are indeed the crux of the
matter. As always, the primary responsibility rests with
the parties themselves. Yet the Regional Initiative and
the South African Facilitation have taken on a crucial
role. This Council and, indeed, the international
community must give full support to their efforts at this
critical time. The international community must stand
together in pushing the peace process forward. In the
report of the Secretary-General, special attention is
given to the fragile situation in the country. We must
encourage the Secretary-General to remain focused on
the situation and, at all times, to consider bringing to
3
bear the full weight of his good offices should the
situation warrant it.

Sixth, continued attention by the Security Council
to the security situation is, of course, especially
important. The Council must follow the present
situation closely. As we approach the elections in 2010,
we are entering a period of potentially greater
instability. That may require increased vigilance on the
part of the international community.

Seventh, the Peacebuilding Commission itself is,
of course, actively seized of the situation in Burundi at
the present time. It must be said quite clearly that all
Peacebuilding Commission members remain strongly
committed to peacebuilding in Burundi. That was
reiterated during our recent visit there. At the same
time, it is also clear that practical peacebuilding can
succeed only when all stakeholders are clearly
committed to peace.

Eighth, there can be no doubt that Burundians
want peace and development. At this time, it is of
particular importance that the commitments made by
the international community to reconstruction and
development be honoured. The present difficult
international economic situation underscores this.

Ninth and finally, it would be a highly
meaningful response to the country's situation if the
political parties in parliament could resume their
important work without further delay. That would also
seem necessary in order to begin well-organized
preparations for the upcoming elections at an early
date, thus making sure that they will be free and fair
and will contribute to political stability.

A future free from fear and want is also available
to all Burundians. It will require determination by all
in order for them to get there. This is the time for
Burundians to come together and to overcome the
difficulties. At the same time, the international
community must remain vigilant and unequivocal in its
determination to support them in this important
struggle.

