The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Chile.

We are satisfied at progress in the implementation
of the recommendations of the Council mission to West
Africa, and we commend the Secretary-General on his
initiative to hold consultations on cross-border issues,
because a regional approach is increasingly necessary.

In the case of Guinea-Bissau, the political process
should lead to free elections this year. The Economic
and Social Council has continued its work through its
Ad Hoc Advisory Group based on an innovative
approach - which we commend - in order to
construct in the post-conflict phase.

The favourable developments in C6te d'Ivoire,
we hope, will enable the establishment in the near
future of a new United Nations peacekeeping mission
with a robust mandate.

The peace process in Liberia has entered a phase
that we hope will be irreversible, as some believe it is.
For that reason, we should accelerate the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in
the interior of the country.

In Sierra Leone, growing stability has made it
possible to carry out the plan for the drawdown of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
in accordance with the phases set out in resolution
1492 (2003) and to transfer gradually responsibilities
for security, police and local armed forces. In the
meantime, it is necessary for the international
community to continue to provide financial support to
UNAMSIL.

All in all, we are seeing significant progress, and
we hope that that lasting peace and economic stability
in West Africa will be one of the best contributions the
United Nations can make.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

Before proceeding, I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Nigeria, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ndekhedehe
(Nigeria) took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Ireland, to whom I give the floor.


