Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun for his briefing. We in the Russian
Federation are deeply concerned about the tragic events
in the Gaza Strip. We are alarmed about the reports of
an increase in the number of victims and casualties
resulting from the Israeli army's efforts to restrain
Palestinian protest actions, which began on 30 March
as part of the so-called March of Return in a campaign
lasting several days. We call on the Palestinian and
Israeli sides to show restraint and to refrain from actions
that could result in the deaths of innocent civilians.
What is on the agenda is the urgent need to mobilize
diplomatic mediation efforts aimed at de-escalating the
situation around the Gaza Strip.

We should all understand that it is impossible
to resolve the situation by putting out the fires that
periodically flare up in the Palestinian territories. The
relapses are inevitable and what is needed is a strategy
for a settlement. The tragic events going on now make
the task of achieving inter-Palestinian reconciliation
as soon as possible even more urgent. In cooperation
with our regional partners, especially Egypt, we are
determined to continue our efforts to unite Palestinians
around the political platform of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which we see as essential both for the
economic revival of the Gaza Strip and for a practical
way to realize the aspirations of the Palestinian people
to establish their own independent State, coexisting in
peace and security with Israel within internationally
recognized borders.

The path to that goal is through convening direct
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis on
all final-status issues, including Jerusalem. Any
settlement should be based on the generally recognized
international legal framework, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative. We affirm our readiness to provide a Russian
platform for a meeting between Palestinian and Israeli
leaders. The tragic history of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict has shown once again that the longer the
political process is postponed, the more often unilateral
steps are taken that make relaunching it even harder.
The Israeli settlement activities in the Palestinian
territories, which are contrary to international law,
along with provocative rhetoric and Violence, are not
conducive in any way to creating the conditions for
starting direct talks.

It is crucial that we continue to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) can do its work
effectively. We welcome the outcome of the conference
held in Rome on 15 March in support of UNRWA, whose
budget Russia contributes to regularly. Right now what
is especially needed is a well-coordinated effort, every
day, on the part of the entire international community.
It is important to take action together and at the regional
level. In that regard, we note the forthcoming summit
of the League of Arab States in Riyadh in April. We
hope that its agenda will be genuinely unifying and
constructive, designed to overcome the obstacles to
political and socioeconomic restoration in the Middle
East and North Africa and to develop confidence- and
security-building measures for the entire region.

For its part, Russia will continue its efforts to find
a way out of the impasse in the long-standing Arab-
Israeli conflict and to help to stabilize the situation in
the region as a whole. In that regard, the proposal of
Russia's Minister for Foreign Affairs Lavrov to conduct a
comprehensive Security Council review of the situation
in the Middle East, with the aim of identifying areas for
joint efforts to stabilize the situation in the region and
settle its many crises, old and new, is very relevant.

