Mr. Biagini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the European Union and wishes
to add the following remarks in its national capacity.

Last October, at the initiative of Spain, Member
States recommitted themselves to the principles and
the values of the Charter. These principles and values
hold the same relevance today as they did 70 years ago.
They are the bedrock of the effective multilateralism
that the United Nations embodies when we work
together constructively. We must continue to promote
and strengthen these values to address today's pressing
challenges: from climate change to sustainable
development; from preventing violent extremism to
addressing regional conflicts; and from managing
migration to finding solutions to the unprecedented
number of refugees.

This is how our Organization has been able to
achieve significant results in the past 70 years, lifting
millions out of poverty, promoting the rule of law and
respect for human rights, and advancing fundamental
freedoms. This is how we reached milestone agreements
last year such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1) and
the Paris Agreement. Rest assured of Italy's continuous
commitment.

At the same time, 70 years have passed, and a fresh
look is needed. Allow me to make some brief points.

First, concerning awareness, we must recognize
that today's security challenges are different from
those of the past and that the security landscape before
us is rapidly changing. While respecting the different
roles and mandates of the United Nations organs, closer
attention should be paid to broader security issues,
which are a matter of concern for a growing part of
the membership, and closer cooperation between the
General Assembly and the Security Council should be
sought. As a best practice, I would point to the open
debate held during the New Zealand presidency of the
Council on the security challenges facing the small
island developing States and also recall the prompt and
efficient response taken by the Council with regard to
the Ebola crisis.

Secondly, with respect to fostering an integrated
approach and addressing the root causes of instability,
I would note that today's challenges are complex by
nature. Among the merits of Agenda 2030 is the fact
that it introduces an integrated approach to security;
just as the

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will
promote peace, so is peace essential to the SDGs. It
is therefore vital to understand and address the root
causes of today's challenges. The implementation of
the recently adopted Sustainable Development Goals
will also play a critical role in the prevention of violent
extremism and contribute to the effective management
of migrations and of the unprecedented number of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

This leads me to my third point, which is also
my final one: revitalizing the preventive tools at the
disposal ofthe Council. The rhetorical battle on conflict
prevention has been won. There is broad consensus on
its centrality and on the great risks that can stem from
inaction. Not only is prevention the right choice: it is
also the smart choice.

The emerging broad consensus among the
membership should now be operationalized by
strengthening the tools of preventive diplomacy,
including financially. It is thus important to renew
our collective focus on the peaceful settlement of
disputes under Chapter VI of the Charter and to
develop our partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular with the African Union,
under Chapter VIII.

In the same spirit, Italy believes in closer
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, for instance by inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations to
participate in Council meetings as appropriate.

