Ms. Soderberg (United States of America): Last
night, there was a service at the United Nations Chapel
commemorating the fourth anniversary of the genocide in
Rwanda. Four years ago, hundreds of thousands of
Rwandans were brutally massacred, and still the Violence
continues. The United States remains extremely concerned
about the continuing violence in the Great Lakes region
and the renewed threat of genocide. A contributing factor
has been the fluid traffic in small arms through the
region.

In the aftermath of the 1994 Rwandan genocide and
the international community's search for more effective
responses, the Security Council established the
International Commission of Inquiry into arms flows to
Rwanda in 1995, which carried out its investigation
through September 1996. Its final report came out just as
the fighting began in the Rwandan refugee camps in what
was then eastern Zaire.

The ground-breaking work of the Commission was
overtaken by the dramatic events in the region, and the
Council took no action on the Commission's reports and
recommendations. One of those recommendations was to
extend the Commission's investigation due to the nature
of the information it had begun to document on the
movement through the Great Lakes region of arms, funds
and members of the former Rwandan government army
and Interaharnwe militia, many of whom were implicated
in the genocide.

At the regional summit in Kampala two weeks ago,
President Clinton and six Heads of State from the Great

 

Lakes region pledged to prevent a resurgence of genocide
in Rwanda. The United States and these regional
Governments affirmed their commitment to take concrete
steps to combat the culture of ethnic violence that pervades
Rwanda. The Kampala communique endorsed the
reactivation of the International Commission of Inquiry on
arms flows as a means to identify and to stop illegal arms
trafficking to the former Rwandan army and militia forces.
The United States will continue to work with all parties that
recognize the necessity of a proactive front against a
resurgence of genocide in the region.

Today's draft resolution enables the Commission to
take up its work where it left off, to continue investigating
the sale, supply and shipment of arms and related materiel
to former Rwandan government forces and militias in
Central Africa. Since 1996, the former Rwandan army and
militias have dispersed widely throughout Central Africa
and reportedly have forged new links with other insurgents
in the region. The Commission will present
recommendations to the Secretary-General and to the
Council, with specific steps that could be taken to end the
continuing illegal flow of arms and resulting violence.

The draft resolution calls upon all States, United
Nations bodies and relevant organizations, including the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, to cooperate
with the Commission as it pursues its investigation. It also
urges their cooperation in countering hate propaganda, those
publications and radio broadcasts that incite acts of
genocide and violence in the region.

The efforts of the international community to assist the
Commission are crucial to its ultimate success. The United
States intends to contribute $100,000 to the United Nations
voluntary Fund in support of the Commission's inquiry. We
strongly encourage other States to contribute to this
important endeavour and welcome the statements of support
that we have just heard this morning.

The draft resolution the Council is endorsing today is
a critical first step towards halting the violence in the Great
Lakes region, but more will have to be done. We hope the
work of the Commission and the subsequent reports by the
Secretary-General will place the Commission's findings
within a broader regional context and provide both accurate
assessments and specific recommendations for further
action. With the vital information the Commission can
provide and the support of the regional and international
community, we can begin to unravel the complex networks
supporting violence in the region and work together for
permanent solutions.

