Ms. Loj (Denmark): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking you for convening this important debate.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing and report.

The complexity of these issues requires that we
sometimes take a step back and look at the picture
from a distance. The Secretary-General's report and
briefing did just that. I will reflect on some of the
proposals in the report, while others require more
thorough consideration. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for keeping the international
community focused on the goal of bringing lasting
peace to the Middle East throughout his tenure.

Two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace within internationally recognized
borders - that is the goal. There is nothing new in
that, but, as the Secretary-General also indicates, the
longer it takes to reach that goal, the harder it is to
reassure people that there is reason to hope, that there
is a better future ahead. Therefore, it is essential that
the parties, the regional players and the international
community rededicate themselves to the goal.

The key to success, however, rests with the
parties. The international community can help, working
with the parties to lay the groundwork for a solution.
The Quartet plays a pivotal role in this effort. But
success can come only when the parties are committed
and ready.

To this end, there are, again, encouraging recent
developments. First, there is a ceasefire in Gaza. It may
be only a first step, but reaching that agreement was
not easy. We encourage the parties to extend the
ceasefire to include the West Bank, as suggested by the
Secretary-General. Secondly, Prime Minister Olmert's
speech on 27 November was a welcome Israeli
renewed effort towards a negotiated two-State solution.
It also indicated Israel's willingness, among other
things, to release prisoners, including ministers and
parliamentarians, when the captured Israeli soldier is
freed.
The challenge is to convert this current
opportunity into sustainable change for the better. Both
parties must take urgent steps to boost confidence and
solve problems that could undermine peace efforts.

First, Israel must ease humanitarian conditions
for civilians in Gaza and the West Bank. One such step
is to release the Palestinian tax and customs revenues it
is withholding. Secondly, the Agreement on Movement
and Access must be implemented. Thirdly, it is
essential that Israel halt new settlements and outposts,
which are in contradiction to Security Council
resolutions and the Road Map. Finally, Demark
continues to recognize Israel's right to defend itself.
Israel must ensure that measures to protect Israeli
civilians are in accordance with international law.
Disproportionate use of force could hamper the
achievement of a lasting solution to the conflict.

Likewise, the Palestinians must build confidence
and become a partner with whom it is possible to build
lasting peace. First, the captured Israeli soldier must be
released immediately. Secondly, Denmark supports
President Abbas's efforts to create a national unity
Government that reflects Quartet principles. Thirdly, it
is essential that all Palestinian factions do their utmost
to keep and consolidate the ceasefire and avoid
infighting. It is not a solution, but it provides a much-
wanted opportunity. With due respect for the desire of
the people, I sincerely hope that all parties are ready to
make the best of it.

At a time when the outlook seemed as grim as
ever, the parties succeeded in creating yet another
opportunity. All well-intentioned parties must join
forces to see if, this time, the peace process can be
revived. The parties, the neighbours and the
international community, through the Quartet, all must
play a part if this moment is to be seized. We agree
with the Secretary-General that the Quartet needs to
enhance its activities, to play a more active role.

Progress is critical, mainly for the principal
parties involved, but equally for the greater region.
Over the past summer, we were reminded that conflicts
in the greater Middle East region are linked. The
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is the main source of
instability in the region, and, as stated by the
Secretary-General, without progress on this track, we
are not likely to achieve lasting stability in the Middle
East.

