Mr. Powles (New Zealand): I would like first of all
to congratulate you, Sir, for arranging this open debate.
The topic is a vitally important one. The question of how
the international community, through collective action,
can effectively prevent armed conflict has been much
studied and discussed over the past decade.
We remember that at the end of January 1992 the
Security Council, meeting for the first time at the level of
heads of State or Government, asked the then Secretary-
General to prepare recommendations on strengthening the
United Nations capacity for preventive diplomacy,
peacemaking and peacekeeping. The result was "An
Agenda for Peace", whose precepts were to be sorely
tested in peacekeeping operations in Bosnia, Rwanda and
Somalia. Other contributors on the subject included the
then Foreign Minister of Australia, Senator Gareth Evans,
who put forward the idea of "cooperative security". A
further substantial contribution was made in 1997 by the
Carnegie Commission on Preventing Deadly Conflict.

 

Among other things the Commission identified some of the
chief impediments to preventive action. These included on
the one hand a reluctance of countries closest to a conflict
to want preventive assistance at the time when it could be
most effective and, on the other hand, a certain
"intervention fatigue" on the part of those States most
capable of offering assistance.

Most recently we have to hand the valuable action
plan offered by the Swedish Government in the pamphlet
"Preventing violent conflict", written against the
background of the human catastrophe in Kosovo. At the
regional level, the Association of South-East Asian Nations
(ASEAN) Regional Forum is doing important work on the
concepts and principles of preventive diplomacy. This
renewed focus and discussion, including today's open
debate, is most timely, given the events of this year now
almost passed and the considerable resurgence in United
Nations peacekeeping.

The United Nations Charter clearly envisages a strong
conflict-prevention role for this Organization. Article 1,
paragraph 1, speaks of "effective collective measures for
the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for
the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of
the peace". The second part of this paragraph also
envisages the "adjustment or settlement" by peaceful means
of "disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace".

The Security Council is given primary - but not
exclusive - responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It exercises this
responsibility on behalf of the wider membership. In Article
33 an impressive bag of tools is provided within the
Charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes. These
include "negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or
arrangements", and so forth. The Security Council is also
empowered, under Article 34, to investigate any dispute or
situation which might give rise to a dispute that might
endanger international peace and security.

The provisions of Chapter VII give the Security
Council enormous powers to deal with threats to the peace
or acts of aggression, and they impose serious obligations
on the wider membership to assist the Council. Finally, the
Secretary-General is given a particular role under Article
99, a role that would seem quite relevant to the idea of
"early warning" so often mentioned in discussions of
preventive diplomacy. He is able to bring any matter that
in his opinion may threaten international peace and
security to the attention of the Council.

The Charter, although more than half a century old,
therefore contains a comprehensive, relevant and entirely
practical set of options for conflict prevention, in the
Articles I have referred to and elsewhere. And it
empowers the Council, primarily, to use them. If the
Security Council has failed to carry out its responsibilities
effectively in the past, it would not seem to be a failure
of system design but a consequence of other factors.

Two key factors of course are political will and
resources. Member States look to the Council members to
show leadership, given their special responsibilities. This
includes, at the very least, timely, complete and
unconditional payment of assessed contributions. It also
includes a willingness on the part of Council members to
ensure that the United Nations will have the wherewithal
to do the job that has been mandated, whether it is
sufficient troops to defend a "safe area" or money to pay
for the restoration of public services in post-conflict
peace-building under the Council's mandate.

There is also a view that the Council's effectiveness
in conflict prevention is hindered by its working methods.
The Council does so much of its work these days,
perhaps 90 per cent, through informal consultations. Non-
members do not have access. We are aware that among
some Security Council members there is concern that this
practice denies the Council the opportunity to invite
representatives of States directly affected by a matter
which the Council is considering to participate in
substantive discussion of it. We can also envisage that
there might be occasions when the chance for Council
members to deliver a strong, collective and private view
directly to the parties to a dispute could be a very useful
step towards resolving it.

Finally there is that old incubus, the veto. As so
many speakers observed during the general debate of the
General Assembly, this instrument wreaked havoc on the
Council's conflict-prevention capacity in 1999. It started
with the untimely termination of the United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), a successful
preventive-deployment mission in a highly sensitive area.
It exerted its unwelcome influence when the Council was
by-passed in the decision by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) to bomb Yugoslavia. And it dogs
the Council's efforts to arrive at a new weapons-
inspection regime to replace the United Nations Special

 

Commission (UNSCOM), which departed Iraq before
Operation Desert Fox almost a year ago.

Against these persistent negative features, which we
hope can be resolved in the future, I am pleased to say that
from my delegation's perspective there have also been some
very positive developments in the Council's recent handling
of its conflict-prevention responsibilities. Perhaps the
highlight was the rapid dispatch of a mission of the
Security Council to Indonesia and to East Timor in
response to the violence following the popular consultation.
The mission was a crucial step in helping to end the
bloodshed. And we acknowledge as we have before the
distinguished leadership of the Permanent Representative of
Namibia. The authorization of the multinational
International Force, East Timor (INTERFET) - and,
subsequently, of the Transitional Administration and
peacekeeping force within it - were also done by the
Council as quickly as the extraordinary requirements of one
member's legislature would allow.

New Zealand will remain a significant contributor to
INT ERFET and to the peacekeeping operation that will
succeed it, we hope very soon. While we are speaking on
the subject of East Timor we would like to take the
opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Holbrooke on his
very recent personal contribution to efforts to ease the
plight of East Timorese refugees in Indonesia. And,
regarding a completely different theatre, we also wish to
acknowledge the efforts of Ambassador Fowler, as chair of
the Angola sanctions Committee, to investigate the illegal
trade in diamonds and arms that has brought so much
misery to that region.

While the Council has primary responsibility for
international peace and security, there are other important
actors within the system. There is a strong link between
international peace and security, on the one hand, and
disarmament and development on the other. If, as we
believe the Charter intends, "international peace and
security" is to mean more than the absence of war or even
an absence of the threat of war, the contributions of the
other organs of the United Nations, including the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council, are of
obvious importance in laying the foundations which are
necessary.

Finally, there is the role of the Secretary-General's
special political missions. These are typically small-scale
but effective interventions, such as the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB), Papua New
Guinea. UNPOB and the regionally provided Peace
Monitoring Group play a critical confidence-building and
indeed conflict-prevention role as the parties to the
dispute engage on the political issues concerned.

The Carnegie Commission, in its 1997 Final Report
on preventing deadly conflict, wrote of the need to create
a culture of prevention. This included such measures as
preventive diplomacy and early warning to deal with
imminent violence, and other measures, such as the
promotion of well-being and justice, to deal with the root
causes of violence. There can be no institution better
placed than the United Nations to take on this
multifaceted task. We look forward to the Security
Council's continuing to carry out its key leadership role
on behalf of Member States as part of this endeavour.

