Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this debate, and we thank all the briefers for
their informative presentations.

I also welcome our new French colleague,
Mr. Nicolas de Riviere. In addition, I congratulate
Ambassador Ma Zhaoxu on his new functions and
thank him for his exemplary cooperation over the
several months we have spent together on the Council.

Although several Security Council resolutions have
already expressed the Council's concern about the links
between terrorism and organized crime, those links
need to be further identified and addressed. They may
include financial assistance to terrorist movements,
logistical assistance or even the formation of an ad hoc
coalition. We also note that the dividing line between
terrorism and organized crime, both transnational
and domestic, can be very blurry. While terrorist
movements often finance their operations through
criminal activities, criminal organizations sometimes
adopt methods similar to terrorist movements to
achieve their ends.

The links between terrorism and organized crime
varies greatly by region. Multilateral actions to combat
terrorism and organized crime must take those different
realities into account and our measures must be adapted
to different regional contexts.

Unfortunately, Europe has also seen many violent
terrorist attacks on its territory in recent years. Belgium
has not been spared, having been attacked in March
2016. Most of the terrorists who participated in these
recent attacks had a criminal history, often involving
petty crime. These individuals were radicalized
and joined terrorist groups with a speed that greatly
outpaced us and through a process that differed from
the radicalization processes we have known until now.
They were deliberately targeted by Da'esh through
a rhetoric of redemption for their past crimes. This
process of radicalization occurred mainly within our
prisons, which has led us to reconsider our analysis
of both the radicalization processes, but also of our
prison systems.

In addition, it is also important to understand the
close links among several types of organized crime
and how terrorist movements benefit from them. We
note that there is an important link between trafficking
in human beings and terrorism. That link exists not
only in the financing of terrorist movements, but also
through sexual exploitation as a terrorist tactic. Those
practices have been used by Da'esh, Boko Haram and
other terrorist movements.

In addition, terrorist movements continue to exploit
arms trafficking both to finance their operations and to
supply themselves with weapons. They focus on small
arms and light weapons, which allow them to pursue
their dangerous and violent objectives, leaving many
innocent victims in their wake. We strongly condemn
the illicit transfer of weapons to terrorist movements.

We welcome the draft resolution initiated by the
Peruvian mission, which not only seeks to understand the
complexity of the links between criminal organizations
and terrorist movements but also proposes concrete
measures. We reiterate the importance we attach to the
fact that no measure taken in the context of the fight
against terrorism and organized crime should hinder the
work of humanitarian organizations, whose activities
are neutral and impartial. Respect for international
humanitarian law and the fundamental principles
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions remains
paramount everywhere and in all circumstances.

We also note the importance of strengthening the
capacities of States in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime, and welcome the important role played
in that connection by the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Office of Counter-Terrorism.

We once again thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. You can count on our cooperation
in the drafting of this new resolution.

