Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the Foreign Ministers of Afghanistan and
Pakistan and express our gratitude for the presence of
and briefings given by Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.
Over the past three decades, Afghanistan, a
country surrounded by hills and mountains, has been
the arena of abrupt political change, almost always
brought about by war and violence. Its centuries-old
history offers no explanation for the situation; quite the
contrary. Afghans, the international community and the
United Nations are currently facing one of the most
complex situations with which we are seized. The three
founding pillars of the United Nations - the search for
peace and stability, the protection of human rights and
economic and social development - have yet to be

erected in that country.

The situation is not unprecedented or exclusive to
Afghanistan. It is quite common - indeed, practically
the rule - for countries emerging from armed conflict
to suffer serious setbacks in their economic
development and in the protection and promotion of
human rights. In the case of Afghanistan and certain
African countries, however, that syndrome is
particularly acute. Afghanistan is caught up in a
vicious cycle wherein insecurity engenders further
violence, which stifles foreign investment and the
development of democratic institutions, in turn
promoting more fighting and violations of human
rights.

The process also requires us to take into account
the serious problem posed by the cultivation and
processing of drug crops, with all their consequences.
The regional dimension of the conflict is another factor
complicating the response and further aggravating the
threat to international peace and security.

With regard to the issue of drugs, Afghanistan's
share of global opium production rose from 11 per cent
in 2001 to 93 per cent currently. It is estimated that
drug trafficking represents half of the gross national
product of Afghanistan and that one in seven Afghans
is involved in opium-trafficking activities. Such facts
and figures reflect the magnitude of the problem, but
the gravity of the situation may be better understood
when we consider that, as in other regions, insurgent
groups - the Taliban in this instance - receive most
of their income from such illegal activities, which
provide them with the resources necessary to recruit
citizens who lack employment and all other economic
activity to support themselves.

Another factor aggravating the situation is the
fact that 300,000 young people join the economically
active population every year. As part of the unskilled
labour force, they lack the tools and skills that would
enable them to take charge of their own future. Those
young people are easy prey for extremists.

We believe it is possible to change this Vicious
circle a virtuous circle. This requires a holistic
approach in which the undoubtedly crucial ongoing
fight against the insurgents is combined with the
creation of jobs and economic opportunities. The
Afghanistan National Development Strategy, which has
been endorsed by the Government and the international
community and is based on the Afghanistan Compact,
provides a good road map to that end, so long as
progress is made simultaneously on all tracks, in
particular in those areas that will most quickly provide
economic opportunity and jobs for the people.

Also, the Afghan people must play an
increasingly central role in shaping their future. There
is reason to think that the upsurge in violence is linked
to progress made in preparing for the 2009 presidential
elections and the 2010 parliamentary elections. The
elections must therefore be flanked by actions that will
realize the promise of democracy, improving the daily
lives of the Afghan people. We support the holding of
those elections.

As the report of the Secretary-General makes
very clear, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) has a very important role to
play throughout this process. To ensure that it can play
that role, it must be strengthened - both in terms of
the quality, quantity and specialization of its human
resources and in terms of material resources of many
kinds. We endorse the report of the Secretary-General
and hope that it can be translated into practice.

Finally, Costa Rica is of the View that, in order to
achieve all that I have mentioned - albeit gradually,
but also progressively and sustainably - the pledges
made at the 12 June Paris Conference must not be
empty promises: the $20 billion pledged must be
disbursed in keeping with the needs expressed and the
plans made. Those responsible for carrying out the
corresponding actions - first and foremost the Afghan
Government - must do so efficiently and
transparently. Only the clear attainment of the
objectives proposed in the strategy set out in the
Secretary-General's report and the speedy achievement
of some concrete results will help change
Afghanistan's direction, rescue it from this vicious
circle and return it to a path on which every
achievement will improve the chances of attaining the
next one.

