Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The Security Council is
meeting this evening under the impact of a serious turn of
events in the Gulf. Ever since the adoption of resolution
687 (1991) in April 1991, the Council has been grappling
with the difficult task of ensuring the Iraqi regime's
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) in the implementation of their mandates.
Although Iraqi cooperation has all along been far from
satisfactory, UNSCOM. and IAEA have performed very
valuable work in dispossessing Iraq of its weapons of
mass destruction, as widely recognized. It is regrettable
that just as the Council was preparing to undertake a
comprehensive review of the sanctions regime imposed on
Iraq, as suggested by the Secretary-General, the
international community was confronted with yet another
impasse. Had Iraq demonstrated full cooperation and
complied with its obligations under Security Council
resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding, we
would not be experiencing the present crisis.
We were informed this afternoon that military action
had been decided upon at the very moment when the
Security Council was gathered to discuss the report
presented by the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM. We
had expected to participate in a discussion of the three
options suggested by the Secretary-General in his letter.
As it turned out, the Security Council did not have the
opportunity to reach its own conclusions.

 

We deplore the fact that circumstances have led to the
use of force. Brazil has always favoured dialogue,
diplomacy and multilateralism in the articulation of
responses to threats to international peace and security. The
use of military force should be considered only as an option
of last resort. When the use of force is indeed
contemplated, this should take place within a multilateral
framework. The Security Council remains the sole body
with legal authority to mandate actions aimed at enforcing
compliance with its own resolutions.

