Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Judge Robinson and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings on the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and on the implementation of the
completion strategy. I also thank Judge Byron and
Prosecutor J allow for their briefings on the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the implementation of the completion strategy.

We note that, since the last reports, the Tribunals
have continued to work to carry out the completion
strategy and have made further progress. We
acknowledge such progress, but we also note with
concern that neither Tribunal will be able to complete
its work this year. The schedule for the completion
strategy set out by the Security Council will not be
met, and part of the work may even be postponed or
extended until 2014. Of course, the delay is due to
many factors and is understandable given that some
could not have been anticipated by the Tribunals.
However, it remains imperative that the completion
strategy defined by the Security Council be pursued in
earnest by all parties.

We hope that the Tribunals will, on the basis of
their previous efforts, further explore effective means
to speed up the implementation of the completion
strategy. In this regard, we note that, according to the
Tribunals' new trial schedules, the ICTR will have
completed pre-trial preparations for all its current cases
by the end of 2011, while the ICTY will have done so
by the end of2012.

I wish to emphasize once again that the handing
over of cases and fugitives to the maximum extent
possible to countries willing and able to handle them is
a very important step in the completion strategy. We
hope that the Tribunals will continue to take measures
to implement this step and we appeal to the countries
concerned to provide full cooperation in this regard.
We are ready to consider seriously any relevant
proposal that will facilitate the Tribunals' referrals.

The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is having consultations on the
draft resolution on the residual mechanism of the
Tribunals and has now started a third reading of the
draft. We appreciate the work of the Informal Working
Group and look forward to the early conclusion of the
consultations. I wish to take this opportunity to thank
Austria, as Chairman of the Working Group, and the
Office of Legal Affairs for their unremitting efforts in
the interest of the work of the Working Group.

