Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me to thank
you, Sir, and Ambassadors Peter Wittig and Baso
Sangqu for your very comprehensive briefings. I wish to
congratulate all three for your leadership, commitment
and the smooth and efficient way in which you led the
work of the Committees that you chair. I agree with
your analysis, conclusions and recommendations. A
lot of ground has already been covered by previous
interventions, so I will not repeat them and I can be
very brief, which I think will be to the general relief.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
(CTC), let me state the obvious, which is that an effective
long-term sustained fight against terrorism must
continue to address simultaneously three main aspects.
Those are prevention, compliance with human rights
and the rule of law, and technical assistance to States
and regions particularly in need. Let me also highlight
the particular attention being given by the CTC and
its Executive Directorate (CTED) to the reinforcement
of regional cooperation in such areas as the Sahel,
North Africa, Central Asia and East Africa. Providing
assistance to States and regional organizations is indeed
one of the most significant priorities of the international
community, and the coordination efforts of the United
Nations are crucial to ensuring its effectiveness.

With regard to the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, let me highlight the
issue of fair and clear procedures for delisting. In this
context, I wish once again to express our full support
for the important and useful work of the Office of the
Ombudsperson. The contribution of the Ombudsperson
to furthering the credibility, transparency and fairness
of the delisting regime of the 1267 Committee is indeed
of great importance, and we believe that the Council
should look forward to the establishment of such a
useful instrument in the framework of other relevant
United Nations sanctions committees, building on the
positive experience gathered.

On the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), let me commend in particular
the efforts to better match assistance requests with
offers from Member States, as well as outreach activities
that contribute to strengthening national capabilities
with regard to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) and to advancing cooperation with all relevant
international organizations in one of the areas where
the Committee should continue to build upon.

In conclusion, I reiterate our support for all the
measures that could be instrumental to enhancing
coordination mechanisms and joint tools between
the three Committees and their groups of experts,
thus maximizing their effectiveness and cooperation
towards the common goal of preventing and countering
international terrorism.

