Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. I also pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of China, for a successful presidency.

Morocco welcomes the Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2127 (2013), concering the
Central African Republic. The resolution is the
culmination of a process by the Council to monitor the
worrying situation in the country over the past year. We
hope that its adoption will make it possible to begin a
new chapter in the tumultuous history of this friendly,
brotherly country.

Throughout its term on the Council, Morocco has
worked alongside France to place the situation in the
Central African Republic at the top of the Council's
agenda, just as we did in the case of Mali. We are
pleased that the Council has come to unanimity on this
resolution.

We commend the mobilization of the international
community and the Council on the urgent need for an
augmented intervention that is able to restore security
in the country in order to end the serious crisis it is
experiencing. Whether on the security or humanitarian
front, the worrying spiral of interreligious clashes - in
a country where Christians and Muslims have always
lived side by side in peace and harmony - is a new
element in this crisis.
We thank France for its efforts leading to the
adoption of this resolution, as well as for its commitment
to peace on the African continent, both recently in Mali
and today in the Central African Republic. We hope
that the adoption of the resolution will be a turning
point that allows for the swift deployment of French
forces in support of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic. We
also hope that it will open a path for the establishment
of a peacekeeping operation once the right conditions
are in place. In that regard, we share the views of the
regional and subregional organizations involved in this
crisis that are seriously considering that option. I would
especially like to pay well-deserved tribute for the
tireless efforts of the Economic Community of Central
African States from the beginning of the crisis.

Morocco also welcomes this resolution owing to
its long history of friendly relations with the Central
African Republic. That is why we spared no effort to
deploy our soldiers, who will serve as a guard unit for
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic. We are prepared to
further support the Central African Republic on its
journey to peace and stability. Such a commitment to
peace and development on the African continent on the
part of Morocco, which His Majesty the King wants to
be ongoing and manifold, will continue beyond the end
of our term on the Security Council.

