Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou Moussa, for his
comprehensive briefing, including on efforts to counter
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA).

Significant progress has been made in operations
against the LRA. However, the LRA continues to pose
a serious threat to the region, especially to civilians.
On 7 November, for the first time in nearly two years,
attacks were reported in South Sudan. We must
therefore redouble our efforts to implement the United
Nations regional strategy to counter the threat of the
LRA.

We also welcome the progress made in the
implementation of the Regional Cooperation Initiative
of the African Union against the LRA. Contingents of
the Regional Task Force from Uganda, South Sudan
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are now
fully operational. We must now mobilize the resources
and materiel essential to the effective functioning of
the force. In that context, I would like to announce
that, following the meeting of the international
working group on the LRA in which we participated on
4 October in Brussels and at the request of the African
Union, the Luxembourg authorities have decided to
provide support for the operation of the headquarters
of the Regional Task Force located in Yambio, South
Sudan.

It is essential that the United Nations and the
African Union continue to work hand-in-hand. Joint
missions conducted in the Central African Republic by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Special Envoy of the African Union, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, are good examples of the synergies
that can be created.

Member States of the region also have a role to play.
In particular, we encourage them to cooperate in the
execution of arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court in July 2005 against Joseph Kony,
Okot Odhiambo and Dominic Ongwen. Accused of
war crimes and crimes against humanity - including
murders, rapes and the recruitment of children - these
main LRA leaders must be brought to justice.

Women and children are the main Victims
of the LRA. In this context, I would stress four
recommendations contained in the conclusions on
the situation of child victims of the LRA, adopted on
19 April by the Working Group of the Security Council
on Children and Armed Conflict.

First, it is important that peacekeeping operations
and special political missions deployed by the United
Nations in the region have sufficient means to protect
children. Secondly, the African Union is encouraged to
include child protection measures in the activities of the
Regional Task Force. Thirdly, the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan are encouraged to develop
standing instructions, similar to those adopted by the
Uganda People's Defence Force, governing the care of
children rescued from the LRA and their delivery to
civilian child protection agencies. Fourthly, donors are
invited to mobilize resources needed, especially for the
reintegration of children formerly associated with the
LRA.

I turn now to the situation in the Central African
Republic, which is deteriorating continuously in every
way, eight months after the Seleka rebels took over. I
share the concern expressed by my French colleague.
Systematic and gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law continue to be
committed with impunity across the country. We are
also highly alarmed by the rising tensions and secterian
violence with religious overtones, which according to
some observers, are harbingers of genocide.

The Security Council must act to prevent the worst
and decisively support the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union in the Central African Republic. We welcome
the Secretary-General's report of 15 November
(S/2013/677) detailing the options available to support
the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic, including the option to
turn the Mission into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. Luxembourg is ready to contribute actively
to discussions for the early adoption of a resolution that
could change the situation on the ground, especially
in the field of civil protection and the promotion and
protection of human rights.

Before concluding, I would like to acknowledge
the joint work done by UNOCA and the United Nations
Office for West Africa in the fight against piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. This phenomenon is indeed a growing
threat to the economies of the States concerned and to
trade and international relations in the region. We are
therefore pleased that the regional summit of Heads of
State and Government on maritime piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea, which took place
in Yaounde on 24 and 25 June, was able to establish the
foundations for a joint regional strategy to combat that
scourge.

Finally, we encourage the Special Representative
to continue to support the fight against poaching
and ivory trafficking in the region. This is a case of
large-scale illegal activities whose proceeds, as the
Secretary-General's report points out, are used to
finance transnational criminal networks and armed
rebel groups, including the LRA. They must be
combated effectively if we want to establish lasting
peace in Central Africa.

I conclude by commending the draft presidential
statement that has been prepared by the United
Kingdom. The statement provides the Council an
opportunity to reaffirm its determination to combat the
scourge of the LRA and to face the serious challenge
confronting the Central African region.

