Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We listened carefully to the briefings by Special
Representative Chambas and Mr. Sma'il Chergui, the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security.
Their opinions and suggestions deserve the Security
Council's full attention.

China strongly condemns last week's terrorist
attack in the Niger. We would like to express our sorrow
for the victims and our deep condolences and sympathy
to the bereaved families and the injured, to whom we
wish a speedy recovery from their pain and injuries.

The current situation in West Africa is generally
stable. The economy continues to develop, and
the efforts to achieve strength and unity have had
remarkable results. There have been many success
stories for the good offices, mediation and peacekeeping
operations of the United Nations in West Africa. For
example, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire
have graduated, as we say, from the Security Council
agenda and have embarked on a path of sustainable
development. However, the region is also facing threats
and challenges, traditional and non-traditional, that call
for the international community's attention and support.

One ofthose challenges is intercommunal violence.
Transhumance has led to increased competition for
resources such as land and water, resulting in frequent
conflicts between farmers and herders. Among other
factors, ethnic and religious differences, climate change
and the prevalence of weapons have exacerbated the
region's problems. What is even more worrying is that
in the past few years terrorism and extremism have
taken advantage of those problems as opportunities.
Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
have continued to grow in West Africa, and extremist
militants have returned and used these conflicts
to launch attacks, posing unprecedented threats to
regional peace and stability. At the same time, the links
between intercommunal violence and terrorism have
increased and demand a holistic approach on the part of
the international community.

We must accelerate development in West Africa
with a view to eliminating this breeding ground
for intercommunal violence and conflicts, which in
essence are a struggle for development resources.
Extreme poverty and a lack of development are the root
causes. We should put our full weight behind economic
and social development in order to increase investment
and trade in Africa with a View to eradicating poverty.
Education and employment opportunities should be
provided, especially for young people. All communities
should be guaranteed the right to development and
the equal provision of public services. Economic
development should also help to enhance the capacity
of the countries of the region to adapt to climate change
and give them the resources they need to improve
governance and protect their various communities.
China is actively helping countries of the region to
work on infrastructure and development in order to
strengthen connectivity. It has also provided education
and vocational training opportunities to young people
in Africa through scholarships for their study in China
and the establishment of education and training centres,
among other things.

We should also adopt integrated policies to
eradicate the root causes ofterrorism. The international
community should promote the political settlement
of hotspot issues in West Africa and the settlement
of disputes through peaceful means. Dialogue on
an equal footing among different civilizations and
religions should be encouraged in order to promote
their harmonious coexistence. The countries of the
region should be helped to enhance their counter-
terrorism and deradicalization capacities. There should
be a major focus on settling ongoing issues such as the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters, the diversification
of financing channels for terrorist organizations
and the convergence of terrorist organizations and
organized crime. The countries of West Africa should
be supported in strengthening their border control and
law-enforcement coordination, intelligence-sharing
and other practical cooperation measures.

We have established the China-Africa Peace and
Security Fund to boost our cooperation with Africa
in the areas of peace, security, peacekeeping and law
and order. The first batch of assistance materials,
worth ¥200 million, has already arrived in Africa to
support the African Standby Force and its capacity to
respond immediately to crises. We have also provided
¥3OO million in aid for the counter-terrorism operation in
the Sahel and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We should ramp up our cooperation
to jointly address the challenges in this area. China
supports African countries in finding African solutions
to African problems, and commends the special
summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) held in September for coming up
with new ideas and measures to combat terrorism. We
also support ECOWAS and the Economic Community
of Central African States in jointly exploring solutions
to intercommunal conflicts and terrorism.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force and the Multinational
Joint Task Force for combating Boko Haram are
examples of proactive initiatives that West African
countries are taking to jointly respond to the terrorist
threat in the region, and they constitute important
contributions to international and regional peace
and security. The international community should
support the United Nations in providing the financial
support that these relevant regional efforts need. Since
the China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund was established it has provided financial
support to various peacekeeping and counter-terrorism
capacity-building projects in Africa.

We should also strengthen coordination, and
the various United Nations entities should forge
synergies. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) should continue to work in
accordance with its mandate to strengthen cooperation
with all parties to promote regional peace and stability.
The United Nations country teams, the United Nations
Development Programme and other entities should
fully leverage their respective advantages, strengthen
coordination and cooperation with UNOWAS and
work together to play a constructive role in achieving
regional peace and stability. China will continue to
support the work of Special Representative Chambas
and UNOWAS.

