Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic would like to extend its thanks to you,
Mr. President, for holding this public meeting to
discuss the recent developments in Kosovo. We would
also like to welcome the presence among us of Mr.
Nebojsa Covic', Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav
constituent Republic of Serbia. We also welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We welcome as well Mr. Steiner, whose briefing on
developments since he became the Secretary-General's
Special Representative in Kosovo, in February 2002,
we find very useful.

As I said, the delegation of Syria welcomes the
Secretary-General's report, which contains references
to many recent positive developments in Kosovo. The
most important of those developments was the
formation of a coalition Government in Kosovo, on 28
February 2002, under the leadership of Mr. Bajran
Rexhepi, and Mr. Ibrahim Rugova as President of the
country. With the formation of the Government, many
interim functions have been transferred to specialized
ministries. Since their establishment, those ministries
have met many times under the authority of the Prime
Minister to discuss long-term priorities, and a special
budget has been earmarked for their work. The new
Government has stressed the need to provide work
opportunities and has confirmed the fact that there is a
need to integrate all ethnic communities into the
country's development structures.

My delegation welcomes the efforts made by the
authorities in Kosovo to create a multi-ethnic civil
service with an acceptable percentage of ethnic
minorities, ranging from 10 to 25 per cent and made up
primarily of persons from the ranks of the poor. This
also applies at the local level, where we find that the
level of ethnic minorities is less than 10 per cent. My
delegation encourages the structure that has been
established to facilitate the participation of ethnic
minorities in civilian posts. That could be achieved by
providing minorities with means of communication,
security and protection. This has encouraged ethnic
minorities to submit applications for civilian posts in
the new ministries.

Syria also welcomes the efforts made to facilitate
the return of all the various ethnic groups and displaced
persons. A source of optimism for us is the initiative by
the new Government of Kosovo to lay the foundations
for economic progress, and UNMIK's efforts to
establish a propitious climate, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), to attract
investment and strengthen foreign trade, which will
result in improving the standard of living in Kosovo,
the lowest in all of Europe. However, in that context,
we must also combat the economic crime confronting
the development process in Kosovo, represented by the
black market run by organized criminal groups.

Despite the fact that the security situation in
Kosovo has recently improved, there continue to be
occasional acts of violence and crime against KFOR
and the UNMIK police force. It is necessary to combat
such illegal acts of violence by organized crime, which
serve to cause unrest and instability in Kosovo. The
granting of amnesty for the collecting of arms is a very
important step that will enable KFOR and UNMIK
police to collect weapons and prevent the illegal
acquisition of arms by organized crime groups that are
trying to undermine the entire climate of security and
stability achieved to date in Kosovo.

We would like to emphasize here that it is
necessary to provide all the necessary conditions to
guarantee the return of refugees and displaced persons,
as well as to integrate the various ethnic groups into all
walks of life in Kosovo.

We would also like to stress once again that it is
necessary to continue cooperation between the United
Nations Mission, Belgrade and Skopje to reach
agreement with both countries on the demarcation of
the border in accordance with the Agreement signed by
both sides.

My delegation supports the various observations
contained in the Secretary-General's report. We also
support Mr. Steiner's efforts to make progress in the
important areas of the rule of law, democratic
institutions, the economy, freedom of movement and
the return of internally displaced persons and refugees,
as well as his participation in achieving regional
stability in the Balkan region.

Finally, my delegation would like to welcome the
Council's adoption later today of the draft presidential
statement on Kosovo that has been submitted to us.

