Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Mr. Griffiths and Ms. Mueller for
their briefings.

It is becoming clearer every day that a political
solution must be found to the Yemeni crisis. As the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen has
shown, we are seeing positive and encouraging signs
of de-escalation, momentum that must continue and be
translated into tangible progress on the ground so as
to achieve a significant reduction in the hostilities. We
welcomed the adoption of the Riyadh agreement, which
is an important step in the settlement of the crisis and
helps to preserve Yemen's unity and territorial integrity.
It must now be fully implemented.

Discussions on a comprehensive and inclusive
political solution must be resumed without delay or
preconditions. The United Nations has an essential
role to play in mediation and supervision in the quest
for this political solution and its implementation. A
political solution is the only way out of the conflict for
the Yemeni people, who continue to suffer as a result
of the disastrous humanitarian situation. Respect for
international humanitarian law is not negotiable. It
is binding on us all. That means protecting civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, along
with civilian infrastructure. It also means guaranteeing
full humanitarian access. All the parties to the conflict
must ensure that. The increasing restrictions imposed
by the Houthis on humanitarian actors are preventing
millions of people from receiving aid, and that is
unacceptable. The effective coordination of assistance
must be a priority and every effort must be made to
facilitate the work of humanitarian actors. It is also
essential to ensure that the United Nations has access to
the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which is a serious potential
threat to the environment. An oil spill would have a
disastrous impact on the entire region.

The Council can rely on France to remain fully
engaged in the pursuit of a political solution to the
Yemeni crisis, both within the Council and as part of its
broader efforts to promote de-escalation in the region.

