The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Singapore.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
Ambassador Chowdhury for his excellent presentation
on the report of the Panel of Experts established under
resolution 1306 (2000), concerning the collection of
information on possible violations of the arms embargo
imposed under paragraph 2 of resolution 1171 (1998)
and the link between trade in diamonds and trade in
arms and related materiel, as well as the inadequacy of
the air traffic control systems of the West African
region.

I would also like to thank the five members of the
Panel - Mr. Martin Chungong Ayafor, the Chairman;
Mr. Atabou Bodian; Mr. Johan Peleman, Mr. Harjit
Singh Sandhu, and Mr. Ian Smillie - for their efforts
in producing the report. Each of the Panel's
recommendations speaks forcefully for itself and,
possibly, for the future of Sierra Leone. The
recommendations in the report are sobering,
particularly in relation to the allegations against
Liberia, its support for the activities of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and its role in
fuelling the conflict in Sierra Leone.

The situation concerning Sierra Leone has been
on the Security Council's agenda for some years now.
The civilian population of Sierra Leone has endured
more than 10 years of shocking brutality, failed peace
agreements and the murder, rape and mutilation of
thousands at the hands of the RUF. We note that if the
recommended sanctions proposed against Liberia in the
Panel's report are taken up by the Council and
implemented, they will constitute the most serious and
comprehensive United Nations embargo imposed on an
African country in recent times.

Sanctions are an important tool of the Council in
carrying out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is therefore the
obligation of all Members to comply with the sanctions
imposed by the Council. However, we need to give
teeth to United Nations sanctions and take that one
further step to ensure that States do not violate them
with impunity. The credibility of the United Nations
demands that we deal firmly with sanctions-busters and
those who support or take part in activities aimed at
undermining the stability oftheir regional neighbours.

We have read the Panel's report very thoroughly
and with an open mind. When we read the report, we
bore in mind two very important principles: evidentiary
standards and due process. On standards of
verification, we are glad to note that the Panel, as
stated in paragraph 63 of its report (S/2000/1195),
agreed at the outset of its work to use high evidentiary
standards in its investigations. According to the report,
this required at least two credible and independent
sources of information to substantiate a finding. On
due process, we also note from paragraph 63 of the
report that

"Wherever possible, the Panel also agreed to put
allegations to those concerned in order to allow
them the right of reply."

Today's debate is very much a part of this
process. That is why we have provided the opportunity
today for all affected States to be heard on the report.
Some countries have availed themselves of this
opportunity. In this connection, we look forward to
hearing the views of the ministerial delegation of the
Economic Community of West African States in the
coming week. We also urge all other affected parties to
communicate their views to the Council soon.

It is imperative that the Council act quickly, but
we must also be seen to act justly. However, this
Council must not flinch from acting resolutely and take
all necessary measures once such a course of action is
clearly justified.

I resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Sierra Leone, to whom I give the
floor.

