Mr. Mandela: We are honoured by the
opportunity of returning to the Security Council to
report to you and to our world body on progress and
the current state of affairs in the Burundi peace
process.

Our role as Facilitator of the process to which the
leaders of that region saw fit to appoint us was in a
sense inaugurated with a visit to the Security Council
in January of this year. On 16 January we paid our first
acquaintance-making visit to Arusha, the seat of the
peace negotiations, from where we proceeded directly
here to brief the Council and to seek its support for the
continuation of the process started by the late Mwalimu
Julius Nyerere.

The support we received from the Security
Council by way of a resolution and the general
expressions of encouragement from members inspired
us. It allowed us to take on the daunting challenge of
following in the footsteps of the great Mwalimu
Nyerere, the highly gifted and revered international
statesman, and to continue the sterling work he had
done up to that point. We could do so in the confident
knowledge that our world body, and through it the
international community, took a serious and direct
interest in the quest for peace in Burundi. That sense of
the international community making the plight of a
small and poor country its concern inspired us to
involve a range of heads of State and Government in
the Burundi peace process.

We said here at our first visit to the Security
Council that the continuation of preventable suffering
of people anywhere in the world demeaned all of us.
The manner in which the international community
responded to calls for involvement in the Burundi
process was a powerful demonstration that the shared
responsibility for the fate of humankind was
increasingly being accepted by the modern-day
leadership.

It will remain for us one of the most promising
features of the Burundi peace process that so many
heads of State or Government, or their delegated
representatives, gave of their time and energy to attend
and participate in the plenary sessions at Arusha. The
significance of this, we believe, will resonate even
beyond the Burundi issue. It must have sent a powerful
message that the leaders in the immediate region, on
the continent and on the broader international front
care about peace in the world, no matter where it may
be under attack. This demonstration of commitment to
Burundi must be a clear indication that the neglect of
Africa, particularly, is being turned around.

The international interest and participation were
crucial for moving the peace process forward. They
convinced the Burundian leadership that peace in
Burundi was not merely a domestic matter over which
they had the liberty to take as much time as suited
them. The physical presence of so many other leaders
persuaded them of the urgency to find peace. It
forcefully demonstrated to them that the quest for
peace in Burundi was part of the global search for a
world in which conflicts and differences are resolved
through negotiation and compromise, rather than
through resort to violence.

We must commence our report on the progress in
the Burundi peace process with a tribute to the political
leadership of Burundi. We reported to this Council in
January our faith that there were leaders of quality and
commitment in Burundi, people dedicated to finding a
lasting peace that would end the carnage and suffering
visited for too long on the people of that beautiful
country. We are proud to report today that our faith was
not misplaced and that the leadership rose
magnificently to the challenge. The leaders committed
themselves to a particular methodology and procedure
that we proposed for advancing the process, and at the
end of the day were able to reach an agreement of
significant proportions for the future of Burundi.

We proposed in confidential discussions with
each of the parties represented at the Arusha talks, and
subsequently at a plenary session in the presence of
attending regional, continental and international
leaders, that the facilitation team be mandated to draw
up a comprehensive draft compromise proposal based
on the inputs received over the lengthy period of
negotiations. On receipt of comments on the draft
compromise, a final plan would be drawn up and the
parties would agree to accept it as the basis for
implementing peace plans in Burundi. The parties
agreed to these procedural proposals, and on 28 August
a political agreement among the majority of
participating parties was signed in Arusha - once
more, in the witnessing presence of an impressive array
of leaders. A number of parties that did not sign on that
date subsequently did so, and the Security Council
needs to congratulate and commend the political
leadership of Burundi for this courageous step towards
peace in their country.

I wish to publicly record my personal pride, and
that of the facilitation team, in the quality of leadership
displayed. Few people are aware that the leaders of
Burundi that are negotiating in Arusha are highly
qualified academically. There are 19 political parties.
Six of their negotiators are university graduates in
engineering, having qualified overseas, in Brussels,
Paris, Germany and Russia. Four of them are university
graduates in law, and they too qualified abroad. There
are two medical doctors, who also qualified abroad. In
addition there are university graduates in mathematics,
in economics, in French literature, in biology, in
sociology. I have used this in order to move the process
forward, and that is why I am supremely confident that
whatever problems still lie ahead, we are going to have
solid peace and stability in that country.

There obviously remains a range of matters
relating to details and implementation that the parties
would like to pursue, and that we ourselves require
them to resolve among themselves. This is now,
however, being done within the framework of a firm
political agreement to which the parties are committed.
The significance of the agreement is that the political
parties now represent a united forum, joined by the
compromise agreement reached, and they can deal with
the remaining issues and with the combatant forces that
are not yet part of the process.

Of these 19 political parties, there are two major
political rallies in the country: Unity and National
Progress (UPRONA) - the oldest political party and
the one to which President Buyoya belongs - and the
Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU), which
is the largest political rally in Burundi, led by Mr.
Minani. And one of the most encouraging
developments is the agreement between President
Buyoya and Mr. Minani to work together to resolve
problems among themselves, and the two of them have
done remarkable work.

Numerous areas of agreement can be cited as
examples of how the Burundi leadership practised the
art of compromise. We would like to refer only to one:
the very crucial and sensitive issue of the integration of
a Burundi national defence force. Both Hutu and Tutsi
leaders had to depart significantly from their starting
positions to arrive at the final agreement that 50 per
cent of the defence force would be from the Hutu
community and 50 per cent from the Tutsi community,
with accommodation being made for the Twa
community as well.

It was further agreed that a body of respected
persons, independent from the Defence Force, would
oversee this process. This, we believe, reflects one of
the underlying and fundamental features of the
agreement, namely that the democratic rights of the
majority are respected, while the fears and concerns of
the minorities are simultaneously addressed.
The political agreement reached is obviously not
yet the comprehensive and final peace agreement, as
some of the main combatant rebel forces are not
parties to the signed agreement. The process now
continues with a major focus on engaging those forces
in direct talks with the political leadership. When we
last reported to the Council, we undertook to make the
process as inclusive as possible and particularly to
open talks with the combatant forces not included at
that time.

My concern, when I became Facilitator, was that
if the armed groups on the ground were not included,
there was no guarantee that if the 19 political parties
agreed on the issues, the rebel groups on the ground
would respect them. I therefore urged that we should
invite the rebel groups to join these negotiations, so
that they could be part and parcel of the important
agreement that would be reached in Arusha.

That has been done, and we have had numerous
fruitful discussions with the leadership of the rebel
forces, both in South Africa and in Arusha. From their
sides too we have received commitments to finding
lasting peace. I say, "that has been done", but I am
referring to inviting them to join the Arusha process.
We fully accept the sincerity of these pronouncements
on the part of leadership of the combatants.

At the same time, we must repeat, here in the
Council, what we have on a number of occasions stated
to them in our private discussions as well as in public
calls: there cannot be any justification for continuing
violent attacks on the civilian population when a
political agreement has been reached and the way
opened for them to bring their concerns to the
negotiating table. We call upon them once again to
demonstrate the quality of their leadership by
announcing a ceasefire and halting the slaughter of
innocent women, men and children, including the
disabled.

I must repeat that I regard the leadership of the
armed groups as composed of innocent men - men of
integrity. But serious political commentators have said
that these are not genuine leaders; they are agents of
external forces that wish to exterminate the Tutsi
community, wherever they are, in Burundi, in Rwanda
and other areas. They have said also that no genuine
leadership of Burundi, of the Hutu, could continue
slaughtering innocent people when in fact the political
parties have reached a breakthrough. I have said to
both Jean Bosco Ndayekengurukye and Kabura Cossan,
the two leaders of the rebel groups, that although I as
an individual do not believe this accusation from
serious political leaders, nevertheless, by their action
of not joining the other leaders in Arusha, they are
giving ammunition to their own detractors and
undermining my confidence in their integrity, and I
have urged them to stop slaughtering innocent people.

One of the questions that they have not answered,
but that I have put to them frequently, is, "What
military installations have you attacked? How many
soldiers have you attacked?" They are unable to
answer. But recently - and I do not claim that is
because of the pressure I have been putting on them -
they have been able to ambush a few military leaders,
which one can count on the fingers of one hand, and at
one time they were able to attack a number of cadets.
But it is quite clear that they are unable to tackle the
military installations and the army itself, and that their
activities have led to the deaths of innocent civilians.
But I have confidence that we will be able, in due
course, to convince them.

Some reports to my leader here, the Secretary-
General, have indicated that the last summit that we
had, in Nairobi, on 20 September, did not produce any
good results. That is inaccurate, because although Jean
Bosco did not attend, Kabura Cossan of the National
Forces of Liberation (FNL) attended, and the heads of
State hammered him to give an explanation as to why
they are intensifying the arms struggle, killing innocent
people, when already there has been a breakthrough
and we have signed an agreement. He then said, finally,
"I am going back to my organization, and I am going to
brief them on what you have said to me. I am confident
that I will come back to you with a positive report".
Now that is an achievement, and I have confidence in
his honour and integrity. I do not think that he was
taking the leadership that was present there for a ride.

I want to add that Burundi stands at the threshold
of a completely new chapter in its history. That history
will judge very harshly those who deliberately choose
to obstruct the road to peace and progress. I am
confident that the leadership of the combatant forces
will not be among those, and I ask the Council to
encourage and urge them to help bring about a speedy
conclusion to this final part of the Burundi peace
process.

Another important new phase awaiting us is that
of directing our activities towards Burundi society
itself. We have during the course of the present phase
of negotiations already visited Burundi, where we met
with the Army leadership, the legislature and the
judiciary, spiritual leaders and various sectors of civil
society. We had the opportunity to visit other areas of
the country besides the capital, and also to inspect
some of the regroupment camps then still in existence.

The armed groups are saying that the
regroupment camps have not been dismantled, that
although President Buyoya told me that he would
dismantle them all by 31 July he had not done so. I
checked with the envoys, the representative of the
Secretary-General here, as well as the representative of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and they
assured me that all the camps had been dismantled. But
there is a problem, not with Buyoya and the Burundi
Government, but with the inmates themselves, as some
of them refuse to leave the regroupment camps because
of the security situation inside the country. They are
afraid that if they go out they will be slaughtered, and
they prefer to remain in these regroupment camps. I
have no reason to believe that that is not true. When I
return to Burundi, I will go back to the regroupment
camps, and I am confident that all the envoys have told
me the truth.

We now intend to intensify our attention to the
internal situation. The agreement reached in Arusha
needs to be explained to the people of Burundi and we
need to ensure their understanding and concern. A
situation needs to be speedily reached in which the
leaders of the signatory parties can all return to
Burundi to play their parts in this process. I am moving
my entire office from Arusha to the capital of Burundi,
Bujumbura. For one thing, every time I Visit Burundi,
the people there, a wide range of different sections of
society, ask me the question: "Those so-called leaders
who are negotiating in Arusha - in another country -
who gave them the authority to do so? We did not give
them the authority."

I have explained to the people in Burundi that our
decisions in Arusha will bind us, the 19 political
parties and the facilitation team. As far as the people of
Burundi are concerned, those decisions will be
recommendations. They will be entitled to accept those
recommendations as they are or with amendments, or
they can reject them totally. But I have the confidence
that those decisions are sound, and that good men and
women in Burundi will endorse them.

We realize that the security situation in Burundi
may not make possible the immediate return of the
exiled leaders. I have discussed with the Secretary-
General the question of assistance in providing
appropriate security for the returning leadership.
We believe that the political leaders of Burundi
have made remarkable progress towards peace in these
last nine months since we have had the privilege of
working with them. We are confident of being closer to
the conclusion of this process. The people of Burundi
deserve to enjoy the developmental fruits of what will
be a remarkable national achievement. For that reason,
we have solemnly undertaken to the leaders and people
of Burundi that we shall mobilize the international
community to assist massively in the reconstruction
and development of the Burundi economy and society.
We hope with the support of the international
community to make of Burundi a showcase of a
country where the commitment to peace carries a
dividend.

An underlying cause of the conflict in Burundi is
to be found in the fierce competition for limited
resources, where access is mainly through the State.
We hope that the development of a greater private
sector component will go a long way to addressing that
underlying problem. We have already also started
mobilizing countries from the developed world to
provide study opportunities to young people from
Burundi. The Burundi peace process is not an end in
itself; we see it as one part of bringing a better life to
the people of that country on a sustainable basis.

We must conclude with expressions of sincere
gratitude to all those who have played such crucial
roles in the peace process. The Secretary-General of
the United Nations has been a constant source of
support and encouragement, as has his counterpart in
the Organization of African Unity.

The support of so many leaders from the African
continent and from further afield has already been
mentioned. Without the generosity of the international
donor community, none of this would have been
possible. The facilitation team did all the hard work,
and public acknowledgement of them is due. And, as I
have already indicated, ultimately it was up to the
leaders of Burundi themselves to make peace.

We look forward to returning here in the not too
distant future to report to the Council on the conclusion
of the negotiating process and real progress with the
implementation of the agreement.

We trust, too, that the international world will
with similar enthusiasm participate in the proposed
project for the reconstruction and development of
Burundi society and Burundi's economy. That will be
the ultimate victory for peace.

