Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): As a
country associated with the European Union, Bulgaria
aligns itself with the statement that will be made
shortly by the representative of Denmark on behalf of
the European Union.

The cycle of violence in the Middle East
continues without respite. Last week, two terrorist
attacks caused civilian deaths. On 23 July, an Israeli
missile hit a building in a densely populated area of
Gaza City. Civilians, including children, died. The
sight of children's corpses, torn apart, is intolerable.
Bulgaria rises forcefully in opposition to the loss of
innocent civilian lives, in particular those of children.
We make a solemn appeal to both parties to respect the
lives of the most vulnerable - namely, children.

Bulgaria fully recognizes Israel's right to prevent
terrorist attacks on its territory and on its citizens.
However, the latest attack, carried out with such force,
was unacceptable and counterproductive. We deeply
deplore the loss of human life that it caused.

Much has been said about the unacceptable
character of terrorism, including terrorism in the
Middle East. I need add nothing to that. There is an
urgent need to put an end to the situation that feeds
such terrorism. I am thinking primarily of the very
grave humanitarian situation affecting the Palestinian
population. It is very important that that situation be
improved so as to isolate within Palestinian society the
terrorists and those who glorify them.

The international community has found ways and
means to act together in favour of peace in the Middle
East. Bulgaria unreservedly supports the ministerial
statement made by the "quartet" when it met in New
York on 16 July. It is fully in line with resolutions
adopted by the Council, which laid out the path
towards a solution to the Middle East conflict. Only by
implementing the Council's resolutions will a just and
lasting solution to the Middle East conflict be found.

One important element of the international
community's recent endeavours has been the attention
rightly paid to efforts to give greater legitimacy and
representativity to the Palestinian Authority. Only
democracy can resolve the Palestinians' problems, and
we fully support the efforts being undertaken in that
regard.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm Bulgaria's
position, which has been expressed on a number of
occasions and which is reflected in resolution 1397
(2002), which my country not only supported but also
helped to formulate, since Bulgaria is a Council
member. Only when Palestinians and Israelis believe in
the possibility of living side by side, within secure and
recognized borders, will the Middle East peace process
truly be able to extricate itself from this cycle of
unacceptable violence. It is very important that the
parties to the conflict not be seduced by the temptation
to retaliate to acts of violence. In the current situation,
we fear that may happen.

We hope to see a continuation of the modest signs
of resumed dialogue that have been observed in recent
days in the context of ministerial contacts between
Israelis and Palestinians.

Bulgaria will continue to strive, within the
Council and bilaterally, to bring about an end to the
violence in the Middle East.

