Mr. Fedotov: Today's meeting demonstrates the
Security Council's strong commitment to confronting
the crime oftrafficking in persons in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

I thank the Italian presidency for its initiative and
for inviting the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to brief the Council.

This meeting is also crucial, as it examines the
progress made in implementing resolution 2331 (2016).
The draft resolution to be adopted today (S/2017/ 973) sets
new goals and targets in combating human trafficking.

Since the Council's last meeting on this topic
(see S/PV.7898), large movements of vulnerable
refugees and migrants, driven out by conflict, have
continued to be exploited by traffickers. We were all
outraged by images showing that criminals are openly
operating slave markets in Libya, where people are
sold like commodities. Ijoin the Secretary-General in
condemning these appalling acts, and take note of the
assurances given by the Libyan Government that this
case is being investigated. Our collective horror at this
news serves an important purpose; it can quicken the
pace of our actions and encourage a global partnership
against human trafficking.

What can we do? We can strengthen Libyan law
enforcement capacities to investigate and prosecute the
criminals, and align national laws to the United Nations
Convention Against Transnational Organized Crime; its
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children; and its
Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land,
Sea and Air. We can build partnerships among States of
the region against this crime, and improve the capacity
of the law enforcement authorities of Libya and other
countries to investigate the finances flowing from
these crimes. UNODC, as part of a complete response,
is prepared to engage with the Libyan Government.

In more general terms, the widespread and
systematic violations of people's fundamental rights
in mass movements continue to be a cause for grave
concern. As the Secretary-General mentioned,
Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant and other terrorist groups are exploiting
young boys and girls as sexual slaves or soldiers.

Thanks to the Security Council's efforts and the
United Nations system's work, including the General
Assembly's recent review of the United Nations Global
Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
there is forward momentum against this crime. The
international community's resolve needs to be translated
into action across all regional processes and initiatives.
Such efforts are firmly rooted in international law. The
Palermo Convention and its Protocols provide that solid
legal foundation. I encourage parties to those treaties
to strengthen international cooperation, develop
comprehensive legislation and ensure that no offender
escapes justice. Early-warning and early-screening
initiatives must be used proactively, while offering
victims, especially women and children, protection and
affording them the assistance to which they are entitled.

UNODC's response to resolution 2331 (2016) has
been extensive, including help to disrupt and dismantle
networks and tackle connected crimes, such as money-
laundering and corruption. We have designed tools for
United Nations bodies in conflict situations, enhanced
data-collection processes, engaged in developing
training of police officers seconded to the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, assisted victims under
the umbrella of the Trust Fund for Victims of Human
Trafficking and helped States to implement the
Trafficking in Persons Protocol, among many other
actions. I welcome the recent contributions of Italy and
other States to the Trust Fund and call on everyone to
follow their example.

Greater coordination is needed among the United
Nations family, and the Inter-Agency Coordination
Group against Trafficking in Persons (ICAT) can help
achieve that goal, as recently acknowledged by the
General Assembly. To give new impetus to the joint
work and efforts of ICAT partner members, UNODC
is considering convening a meeting at the principals'
level in 2018.

UNODC stands ready to provide further briefings
to the Security Council on the implementation of the
draft resolution to be adopted later today, as well as to
work closely with it to end this heinous crime.

