Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): My
delegation welcomes the initiative of the Russian
delegation to convene today's meeting and thanks
Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy for his briefing.
We have also listened attentively to the thought-
provoking briefings of the five Force Commanders of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. In particular,
I warmly welcome all the Force Commanders present
at today's meeting of the Council. They work under
harsh conditions throughout the world to carry out the
noble responsibilities entrusted to them by the Security
Council and have made special contributions to the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
Chinese delegation pays tribute to them and to the Blue
Helmets deployed worldwide.
I shall highlight three points in my statement.
First, United Nations peacekeeping operations must
have an inclusive, strong and viable political process to
back them up. In circumstances where there is no peace
to keep, the most that a peacekeeping mission can
accomplish in carrying out its responsibilities,
including the protection of civilians, humanitarian
assistance and reconstruction and development, is to
play the role of firefighter, which is unsustainable.

At present, the deployment of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is nearing completion. However, the
political process continues to face serious difficulties.
Last week, the Council adopted resolution 1935 (2010)
extending UNAMID's mandate and requesting it,
among other things, to prioritize the promotion of the
political process in Darfur. This not only demonstrated
the international community's dual-track strategy in
Darfur, but also complemented and reinforced the two
tracks. We hope that the objective embodied in
resolution 1935 (2010) will be implemented.

Secondly, the main purpose of deploying
peacekeeping operations is to help countries in conflict
to stabilize the security situation and take
responsibility for their own defence, security and
governance. From the first day of deployment, a
peacekeeping operation should formulate and gradually
improve its exit strategy. This strategy should focus not
only on the eventual withdrawal of a peacekeeping
operation, but also and more importantly on effective
interface with peacebuilding to promote the eventual
smooth transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

Peacekeeping operations in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
provided the Council with rich experience. We hope to
hear more views and suggestions from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the Force
Commanders on how to achieve the strategic
benchmarks of peacekeeping operations.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have exhibited a tendency to grow in size and to
assume multiple functions. While their logistical
systems lag behind, peacekeeping operations face such
challenges as mission deployment and inefficient
operations. My delegation welcomes the series of
studies by the Secretariat in this regard. We believe
that United Nations peacekeeping operations mandates
should be mission specific, in line with specific

circumstances. They should be more focused and
flexible. When discussing the deployment of
peacekeeping operations or adjustment of mandates,
the Council should listen fully to the views of the
special representatives of the Secretary-General,
military commanders and military and civilian experts.

