The President: I shall now make a further statement
in my capacity as the representative of Ukraine.

Today is indeed Groundhog Day. The first statement
made by the Russian delegation repeats word for word
what was said in the consultations two days ago. As
far as the second statement is concerned, I do not even
wish to comment on that cocktail of demagogy.

I wish to stress that such frivolous interpretations
of the reports of the Special Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) are more than ridiculous. There is no reference
to Ukrainian forces in OSCE reports; that is a known
fact. I would rather trust the assessment of Ambassador
Apakan, who is with us today.

The Russian Ambassador asserted that the coal
factory in Avdiivka was shelled by Ukrainian forces.
I have to clarify once again that this factory is located
on territory controlled by the Ukrainian Government,
so the shells that rained down on the factory were
propelled by Russian guns. This was reported by all
three briefers.

Russia blames President Poroshenko and other
high Ukrainian officials for stirring up the violence
around Avdiivka. However, it is not Poroshenko who is
supplying the terrorists with ammunition and armour.
Indeed, one of them, captured during the recent attack
on Avdiivka, already confessed, just yesterday, that the
Russian officers commanding his unit had given orders
to capture the town before the end of last week; this is
all documented.

The reality is very simple. It is Russian weapons
that are killing Ukrainians. It is Russian soldiers and
mercenaries who have come to Ukraine to earn money
for murder. Recalling my remarks about the resumption
of shelling in Avdiivka about an hour ago, I would like
to inform my colleagues that, as a result, at least two
civilians were killed and another injured. The shelling
continues to batter residential areas even as we speak,
including the school building used for the distribution
of humanitarian supplies.

Thus, we do not exclude any escalation or
provocation in and around Donetsk, in further attempts
to discredit the Ukrainian armed forces and the
Ukrainian leadership. We have information about the
evacuation of civilians in Donetsk that we believe to
be a preparation for a possible provocation similar to
what happened in August 2008, when Russia prepared
to attack Georgia.

As I stated at the beginning of the meeting, we
expected a serious, professional dialogue that would put
an end to the violence and help to avert a humanitarian
disaster and save lives. Denying reality is not the
way to achieve this. It seems that Russia is living in a
parallel reality created by current Russian propaganda,
a parallel reality that becomes even more twisted when
Ambassador Churkin starts to talk about Crimea.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 4.55 pm.
