Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Zahir Tanin, for his
briefing. I also thank the First Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Ivica
Dacic, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for their statements.

Uruguay, a civilized nation, understands that

compliance with resolution 1244 (1999), including full
respect for Serbia's territorial integrity and sovereignty,
is the international legal basis for resolving the situation
in Kosovo. As such, it calls for political dialogue and
constructive approaches that may lead to solutions that
promote progress and stability in the region. Despite
certain general economic and political progress, internal
political tension and violent outbreaks are challenges
we must continue to address. In that regard, Uruguay
rejects of the use of violence and encourages all parties
to find common ground that will lead to stability and
cover the entire population of Kosovo.

We also welcome Sunday's technical agreement
on telecommunications as well as progress in the
reconstruction of Mitrovica Bridge. As for the recent
tensions over the Trepca mining complex, I call on the
parties to seek a solution through political dialogue.

I want to raise three important aspects that will
help reconcile the various communities that live in
Kosovo: the protection of cultural property, respect for
the differences within the communities, and the living
conditions of internally displaced persons.

From her visit to Kosovo in October, Ms. Karima
Bennoune, Special Rapporteur in the field of cultural
rights, expressed concern over the politicization of
cultural heritage. Respect for the culture and religious
beliefs of every community, as well as policies aimed at
minorities, are essential to reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence, and will help internally displaced persons
return to their homes.

According to Mr. Chaloka Beyani, Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights of
internally displaced persons, while positive measures
have been taken, the authorities must redouble efforts
to achieve lasting solutions for those who have been
internally displaced for 17 years. Of particular concern
is the situation of communities of minorities and the
most vulnerable displaced persons. I also agree with his
view that the international community must follow up
and support those efforts.

Uruguay underscores the importance of the
accountability, access to justice and, in particular,
cooperation with the special court set up to judge
crimes committed by the Kosovo Liberation Army.
We also echo the concern expressed in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/901) regarding the protection
of witnesses in trials for crimes committed in Kosovo
during the 1998-1999 conflict. Moreover, Uruguay
agrees with the conclusions of the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of
Women on the need to prioritize policies that give voice
to survivors of sexual violence in conflicts and, in
particular, its defence of providing full reparation to
the victims of sexual violence in the Kosovo conflict.

Finally, I want to express our support for and
recognition of the work of Special Representative
Mr. Zahir Tanin and UNMIK, in their task ofpromoting
security, stability and the respect for human rights, as
well as to the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the United Nations
agencies on the ground.
