Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Madam
President, may I begin by complimenting your skilful
stewardship of the Council's deliberations today and
Chile's leadership during the current month. We also
express our deep appreciation to Mr. Olara Otunnu and
Ms. Carol Bellamy for their comprehensive briefings.

During the past decade and a half, the
international community has taken some significant
measures to alleviate the sad plight of millions of
children in armed conflict. The Convention on the
Rights of the Child has provided a tool at the national
and international levels for the protection and
development of children worldwide. The Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the involvement of
children in armed conflict has strengthened these
universal norms. At the special session of the General
Assembly in 2002, world leaders reiterated their
determination to ensure a world fit for children. The
Security Council in its successive resolutions has
further consolidated international standards for the
protection of children in conflict and post-conflict
societies.

These achievements took considerable efforts on
the part of all concerned, including the United Nations
and its agencies, the Member States, international civil
society and parties to conflicts. The dedication of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, in raising awareness of the protection
regime deserves special mention. Bangladesh has
consistently advocated bringing the Special
Representative's Office under the United Nations
regular budget.

As we deliberate today, some 300,000 children
are still being used as child soldiers around the world.
Millions remain physically disabled. Many have been
gravely psychologically traumatized. Twenty million
children have been uprooted from their homes due to
wars. Entire generations of children are growing up
permanently scarred by the brutalities of conflict. The
most vulnerable are the girl children. They fall victim
to sexual abuse, other violence and the deadly
HIV/AIDS. Haunted by horrific memories of atrocities,
the children often find little scope for healing as they
witness the perpetrators getting away with impunity.
The vicious cycle of their sufferings continues into the
post-conflict stage as they inexorably descend into
poverty, illiteracy, hunger, malnutrition, trafficking or
foreign occupation.

Far more, as all will agree, needs to be done
urgently to protect every child victim of conflict. The
era of application in international child-protection
standards must replace the era of rhetoric. The Council
must ensure that parties involved in a conflict respect
global standards of protection of children in conflict.
The specific needs and vulnerability of children,
particularly of the girl child, must be integrated into
peace processes and post-conflict disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, recovery and
reconstruction.

We strongly support the incorporation of child
protection advisers and related provisions into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The practice of zero tolerance for violations of codes of
conduct by United Nations peacekeepers and
associated personnel must continue. Children in post-
conflict societies must be ensured access to trauma
counselling, education and health services. The illicit
flow of small arms into conflict areas must be curbed.
The culture of impunity for violators of children must
also be brought to an end.

Bangladesh has always kept the question of the
protection and development of children high on its
national and international agendas. We were among the
first countries to have ratified the Convention on the
Rights of the Child as well as its two Optional
Protocols. The protection and promotion of children's
rights, particularity those of the girl child, and
allocations of the highest budgets for their education
and health have been the priority policy thrust of our
Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia. We have adopted a
national plan of action for children. The decade 2001 to
2010 is being observed in Bangladesh as the Decade of
the Rights of the Child.

Our civil societies and private sectors work
shoulder to shoulder with the Government to promote
the best interests of children. Our peacekeepers receive
special training on child protection as they carry the
message of peace to conflict-ridden societies across
continents. As Ms. Carol Bellamy stated, a leading
Bangladeshi non-governmental organization, the
Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee, is
contributing significantly to the rehabilitation of child
soldiers and girl children through involvement in non-
formal education in Afghanistan. Ironically,
Bangladesh, a developing nation itself, has done more
than its share in spreading stability and values to
conflict-ridden parts of the world, including Africa. We
believe that societal change must come from within or
from positive examples derived from comparable
milieus. Efforts to impose alien values will risk
evoking the same sentiments as those of the Trojan
priest Laocoon, who feared the Greeks even though
they came bearing gifts.

We must prevent today's victim from becoming
tomorrow's perpetrator by inculcating a culture of
peace and non-violence in the mind of every child.
Bangladesh calls upon the Council and the United
Nations system to lend support for the observance of
the International Decade for a Culture of Peace and
Non-Violence for the Children of the World through
concrete programmes on peace education and conflict
prevention. Robust pursuit of these goals will most
certainly alter the future of the child for the better. It
will also help usher in a new dawn of hope for
humanity.

