The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Let me begin by again thanking Under-Secretary-
General Ibrahim Gambari for his comprehensive and
lucid briefing on an issue of vital importance to peace
and stability in the southern African region. We also
welcome the contribution of the Minister of External
Relations of Angola, Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda,
and thank him for his important contribution to our
deliberations.

The Jamaican delegation continues to be deeply
disturbed by the precarious humanitarian situation in
Angola. We have noted very carefully the words of the
Minister of External Relations, and his appeal for
assistance from the international community. We have
noted that, despite progress made in stabilizing
populations in accessible areas, there has been a
marked deterioration. At the end of August, the number
of persons reportedly displaced since the resumption of
hostilities in December 1998 reached over 4 million.
We are particularly concerned about the very serious
condition of children, as reported by the United
Nations and other humanitarian agencies, and we wish
to stress the importance of guaranteeing the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel, as well as their
freedom of movement and ability to access vulnerable
populations.

We wish to stress that the continuing conflict in
Angola is the primary responsibility of UNITA. We
renew our demand that UNITA fulfil its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol and relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. It is time that the leaders of
UNITA accepted that a political solution is the only
route towards securing an end to Angola's intractable
and tragic civil war. The recent attacks by UNITA on
civilians must receive our condemnation. At the same
time, it is important that the Security Council and the
international community maintain the pressure on
UNITA through the sanctions. It is clear that the
sanctions have been having some effect through the
Monitoring Mechanism. But it is also clear that
Member States need to cooperate fully if the sanctions
are to have their desired effect: to cut off UNITA from
sources of funding for its military operations.
We are also encouraged by the re-emergence of
civil society in Angola. We are encouraged by reports
that some members of UNITA reacted positively to the
initiative of church leaders to mediate a negotiated
peace between UNITA and the Angolan Government. It
must be made clear, however, that UNITA cannot
continue to seek a solution outside of the Lusaka
Protocol. We are particularly encouraged by the
formation in early September of a peace network
comprising several church and civil society dignitaries.
We welcome the assistance which the Angolan
Government has offered to UNITA with a view to its
transformation into a political party in readiness to
contest the general elections scheduled for next year.

We welcome the continued affirmation of the
Government's commitment to peace within the
framework of the Lusaka Protocol and the steps taken
to establish the Fund for Peace and National
Reconciliation, as well the Government's approval of a
four-point peace plan.

Jamaica supports the Secretary-General's
response to the formal request of the Angolan
Government for the assistance of the United Nations.
The follow-up programme of action, which would be
prepared by the Secretariat following Under-Secretary-
General Gambari's next visit to the region, should
provide a basis for the Security Council to act in
furtherance of the peace process. We urge the
Government to do all it can to ensure that the necessary
political and security conditions are in place for the
scheduled elections. But should UNITA choose to
remain outside of the political process, it must not be
allowed to derail the elections by creating insecurity
and uncertainty, and in so doing, dictate the pace at
which important political changes occur.

In closing, I wish to emphasize our support for
Under-Secretary-General Gambari's visit to the region,
and we look forward to hearing from him on his return.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The next speaker is the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Malawi. I invite her to take a seat at the
Council table and to make her statement.

