Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Our thanks go to
Under-Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for his
briefing and update on the current situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We recall the last briefing on
developments there, given in an open meeting of the
Council by Special Representative Jacques Paul Klein
on 13 June. In May, we also had an occasion to hear
from High Representative Wolfgang Petritsch. We
found all these briefings very useful and worthwhile.

The Council has extended the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) until 21 June 2001, against the backdrop of
visible and encouraging signs of peace taking root in
that country. We note that the security situation has
stabilized, the return of refugees and displaced persons
is accelerating and political pluralism is gaining
strength. All this indicates steady progress towards
peace and stability. In this context, we would like to
focus on the following four points.

I turn first to the State Border Service. Following
the establishment ofthe first State Border Service entry
point, on 6 June at the Sarajevo airport, the State
Border Service has been established at a number of
other points. This is an appreciable sign of progress.
We believe this process will be further accelerated by
the adoption of the law on the border service by the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament. The authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina should, in coordination with
UNMIBH, work to further accelerate the deployment
ofthe State Border Service.

Secondly, with regard to an effective judiciary, an
independent and impartial judiciary is a prerequisite for
the establishment of the rule of law. Progress in the
area of judicial reform must be accelerated. In this
context, we consider the strengthening of the
Constitutional Court and the establishment of a State
court to be among the major priorities. The entity
institutions ofthe country should implement legislation
to remove all political influence from the judicial
branch. UNMIBH has a key role in the area of
consolidating the judicial system, as well as in police
restructuring. We are encouraged by the information
that Under-Secretary-General Miyet shared with us
today on progress in the area of police reform,
particularly as regards the involvement of minorities in
the police force.

Thirdly, the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons remains a real test of commitment to
the peace process. Some significant progress has been
made recently - and we have also heard from Mr.
Miyet about this - particularly in rural areas, although
the will of citizens to return to their pre-war homes has
not been matched by the actions of authorities at all
levels. The progress in urban return is slower. This
indicates a necessity to implement property legislation
and to enforce the legal rights of all citizens. We
encourage the Bosnian authorities to concentrate
further on these areas.

Fourthly, with regard to economic reconstruction,
some large-scale post-war reconstruction-particularly
in the infrastructural sector-has been taking place in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is expected to drive
economic growth. In order to achieve the objective of
self-sustaining growth, efforts should be concentrated
on encouraging private-sector-led development and on
creating conditions for a single economic space in the
country. The donors should continue their support for
achieving these objectives.

We note that some important initiatives have been
launched and that some gains have been achieved. But
much of the progress will depend on overcoming
obstruction and delays. We hope that with the
willingness and commitment of all parties concerned
and the continued efforts of UNMIBH, considerable
progress will be possible in achieving peace and
development objectives in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

