Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): My delegation
thanks High Commissioner Sadako Ogata for her brilliant
and comprehensive briefing on refugees and internally
displaced persons in Africa. We recognize the importance
of the issues she has raised and the usefulness of the
recommendations she has made. We commend the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and its dedicated staff for their remarkable
work.

As we take up the issue of the refugee situation in
Africa today, linked with Monday's discussion on
HIV/AIDS in Africa, the focus is on the protection and
security of every individual. Mrs. Ogata said, "Africa
will not be secure unless its people feel secure." (supra)
We fully agree with that statement.

During armed conflicts, it is often the innocent, the
weak and the vulnerable who are affected the most. We

 

believe that it is timely and significant that the Council is
registering strong concern about the difficult situation of
refugees and displaced persons and considering what we
can do to redress that situation.

We believe that the Council could address the
following matters:

First, internal displacement and the outflow of
refugees very often occur as a result of armed conflicts.
The root causes of conflict must be addressed in order to
prevent these. Obviously, the Council has an important role
to play. Mrs. Ogata's focus on a comprehensive mechanism
to protect people fleeing their homes and on comprehensive
regionally based solutions should get particular attention
from the Council. The Council should also address two
security priorities identified by her: both law enforcement
capacity and systematic support for regional peacekeeping
should be focused upon in our deliberations.

Secondly, there must be adequate protection and
assistance for both refugees and displaced persons. The
particular difficulties in the provision of humanitarian
assistance to displaced persons in situations of armed
conflicts need to be addressed.
T hirdly, the special protection needs of women and
children will have to be met, considering that they are the
majority among refugees and displaced persons and are
particularly vulnerable to violence, exploitation and disease.
Here, we welcome the UNHCR plan to launch a special
refugee education trust for the pursuit of post-primary
education, with particular attention to the needs of girls.

Fourthly, while it must be recognized that the
protection of displaced persons and the provision of
humanitarian assistance are the primary responsibility of the
States concerned, there have been attempts by the United
Nations to formulate guidelines to assist these people.
Further focused work needs to be done in this regard.

Fifthly, all parties in armed conflict should comply
fully with their obligations under international humanitarian,
human rights and refugee laws. There should be better
implementation of relevant norms with regard to internally
displaced persons.

Sixthly, humanitarian assistance must be allowed to
reach the people who are in need of it. Refugees and
displaced persons often face situations in which such
assistance does not reach them. This needs to be looked at
urgently.

Finally, the international community should do more
to ensure that necessary financial assistance is provided to
refugee and displaced persons programmes, particularly in
Africa, in order to make them effective. Like Mrs. Ogata,
we find it totally unacceptable that what is provided to
refugees in Africa is far less than what is provided in
other parts of the world.

