Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like
at the outset to thank Mr. Kamalesh Sharma, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the important information he has just given us and for
the outstanding work that the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) is doing under
his guidance.

Two and a half months after the attacks against
United Nations headquarters in Baghdad, we cannot
discuss UNMISET without recalling Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, who, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
built confidence in the United Nations Mission in that
country by laying the foundations of a viable State. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to him posthumously.

My delegation takes note of the report before us,
which gives a detailed description of the situation in
the field. It welcomes the favourable political
developments that have taken place in the country,
particularly those based on the idea of proximity - the
"open presidency" programme and the national
dialogue on open governance begun by President
Gusmao. We hope that these efforts will be successful.

Effective cooperation among the executive,
legislative and judicial branches in the management of
the country makes clear the determination and will of
the authorities to resolve problems by working
together. We are also encouraged by the contacts
established between the Timorese authorities and those
of neighbouring countries with a view to resolving
outstanding issues and to consolidating their relations.
We welcome also Timor's becoming a member of
United Nations organizations, institutions, bodies and
specialized agencies.

With respect to the contribution made by the
United Nations, my delegation welcomes the
considerable progress that has been made towards
achieving the objectives set out in UNMISET's
mandate. However, we believe that there are lessons to
be learned and that an exit strategy should be devised
that will enable the Timorese to take charge on a long-
term basis.

With regard to Programme I, on stability,
democracy and justice, my delegation appreciates the
support given to public administration, specifically
through the recruitment and training of civil servants,
with a view to the transfer of skills. We note that the
question of resources is indispensable in the
achievement of UNMISET's objectives, with a View to
addressing the needs of the Timorese Administration.

In this connection, we urge donors to honour their
commitments, so as to avoid any delay in the
deployment of advisers. This will make it possible to
fill posts in a timely fashion.

With regard to assistance in the conduct of
investigations of serious crimes, we encourage the
prosecution of such crimes and call on all actors
involved in the process to cooperate with the
competent judicial bodies. We welcome the extension
by the Parliament of the mandate of the Commission
for Truth, Reception and Reconciliation, whose
activities we deeply appreciate.

Programme II, on internal security and law
enforcement, remains an equally important aspect of
the work that must be accomplished. My delegation
appreciates the relative calm that has prevailed during
this period in question, which was due to the efforts
undertaken by the National Police of Timor-Leste and
its cooperation with UNMISET police. We encourage
the reinforcement of the institutional and operational
capacities of that police force, which will enable it to
shoulder its responsibilities in accordance with
international norms and to ensure security and order
throughout the territory on a long-term basis.

We urge both the Timorese and Indonesian
authorities to revitalize their cooperation in order to
ensure border security. Moreover, we would like to
point out the increased cooperation between the
military forces of UNMISET, international police and
the Timorese armed forces, as well as the National
Police of Timor-Leste, in implementing Programme III,
on external security and border control. Such
cooperation should continue.

We would suggest that the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
ensure that the transfer of defence-related
responsibilities to the Government of Timor-Leste,
scheduled for 20 May 2004, is accompanied by
measures that will enable it to take up its
responsibilities.

In another vein, my delegation notes with concern
the difficulties impeding the implementation of socio-
economic programmes in Timor-Leste. We consider
that the contraction in gross domestic product by at
least 3 per cent in 2002-2003, and a further contraction
of 2 per cent in the current fiscal year, can be attributed
to declining donor contributions, a reduction in the
United Nations presence, and the relative stagnation of
commercial activities. Indeed, these factors give rise to
some questions.

For that reason, we would like to ask Mr. Sharma
to be so kind as to give some additional explanations
about the support of the institutions, bodies and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system for
economic and social policies in Timor-Leste.

The international community made tremendous
sacrifices in the cause of peace, security and
development in Timor-Leste, which must continue so
that the Timorese can fully shoulder their
responsibilities when the United Nations Mission
comes to a conclusion. My delegation takes note of the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, which it
supports, and awaits with interest the additional
suggestions that the Secretariat intends to publish in a
report at the beginning of 2004.

