The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(Cete d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/886 containing a letter from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council condemns the attack
against French forces in Bouake on 6 November
2004 that resulted in fatalities and other
casualties, as well as the fatal air strikes in the
north by the national armed forces of Cote
d'Ivoire, as Violations of the ceasefire agreement
of 3 May 2003.

"The Security Council further condemns
any effort by any party to send forces through the
Zone of Confidence.

"The Security Council demands the
immediate cessation of all military operations by
all Ivoirian parties and full compliance with the
ceasefire agreement of 3 May 2003.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the action undertaken by French
the

forces and the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

"The Security Council confirms that French
forces and UNOCI are authorized to use all
necessary means to carry out fully their mandate
in accordance with its resolution 1528 (2004) of
27 February 2004. It confirms also that UNOCI,
within its capabilities and areas of deployment, is
authorized to prevent any hostile action, in
particular within the Zone of Confidence.

"The Security Council strongly recalls the
obligations of all Ivoirian parties, the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire as well as the
Forces Nouvelles, to refrain from any violence
against civilians and to cooperate fully with the
activities of UNOCI. The Security Council firmly
reminds all parties of the need to guarantee the
security and freedom of movement of all United
Nations personnel.

"The Security Council intends to examine
rapidly further actions, including individual
measures to be taken."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/42.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present state of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

