The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhcidi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Russian): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council congratulates the
people of Afghanistan on the confirmation of the
final results of the parliamentary and provincial
council elections. The successful holding of these
elections has demonstrated the broad commitment
of Afghan voters to democracy and freedom in
their country, and the Council welcomes that the
completion of the confirmation process has paved
the way toward the timely inauguration of the
new parliament and thus to the conclusion of the
Bonn political process.

"The Security Council commends all
Afghans for having taken this step and calls on
them, and, in particular, the representatives-elect
and other former candidates, to remain fully
committed to peace, the constitution, the rule of
law and democracy in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council, in this connection,
reiterates its appreciation to all those who
contributed to the electoral process, and extends
special appreciation to the Joint Electoral
Management Body and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for their
the

dedication. The Security Council also reiterates
its endorsement of the efforts of the Afghan
Security Forces, with the support of the
International Security Assistance Force and the
Operation Enduring Freedom coalition, within
their respective responsibilities, to improve the
safety and stability of the country.

"The Security Council hopes for the prompt
appointment of all members of the House of
Elders (Meshrano Jirga).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance for the international community to
maintain a high level of commitment to assisting
Afghanistan in addressing its remaining
challenges, in particular in the fields of security,
including fighting terrorist and narcotics threats,
governance and development.

"The Security Council supports the central
and impartial role the United Nations continues to
play for the consolidation of peace and stability
in Afghanistan and coordination of the relevant
international efforts and welcomes consultations
initiated by the Government of Afghanistan and
the United Nations on the post-Bonn process.

"Finally, the Security Council stresses that
violence in any form intended to disrupt the
democratic process in Afghanistan will not be
tolerated. The Council unequivocally condemns
all recent attacks in Afghanistan, including the
attacks against the International Security
Assistance Force, and expresses its deepest
sympathies to the victims, both Afghan and
international, and their families, as well as to the
troop-contributors of ISAF."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/56.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.

