Ms. Coleman (United States of America): I thank
you, Sir, for convening today's very important meeting
and I thank Senegal for its leadership in peacekeeping
in general. I also thank today's briefers - Assistant
Secretary-General Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Menkerios, High Representative
Mr. Kaberuka and Ambassador Antonio.

Today marks a significant milestone after many
months, in fact, many years, of discussions on ways
the United Nations and the African Union (AU) could
work together to build and even stronger partnership to
address collective threats to peace and security. While
the Charter of the United Nations has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the AU has been an indispensable partner
in responding to crises on the African Continent, often
deploying its troops and police in some of the most
challenging and urgent threat environments.

We recall the early days of the conflict in Mali,
in 2013, when African troops rapidly self-deployed
overland as part of the African-led International
Support Mission in Mali, in some cases with only the
most basic equipment; or the Central African Republic
in 2013, when despite lacking logistical support to
deploy outside of the capital, the African-led operation
contained the spread violence. Let us recall Somalia,
where brave AU-led forces have helped transform a
country, once associated with State failure, into one
where earnest State-building efforts are under way.
Together the AU and the United Nations have partnered
to try to address such crises, a reflection of shared
responsibilities for restoring peace and security. But, in
looking back on those past missions and, more broadly,
on the United Nations-AU partnership, I think we can
agree on two truths.

The first is that, unfortunately, such kinds of
operations are unlikely to dissipate any time soon.
To the contrary, more than a dozen sub-Saharan
countries are now confronting threats from violent
extremists, while civil war and unrest continue to
threaten civilians in places like South Sudan, Burundi
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second
truth, and what draft resolution contained in document
S/2016/977 affirms today, internationals the need to
strengthen the financial and operational underpinnings
of the United Nations-AU partnership to better support
African-led peace operations. Ad hoc arrangements,
cobbled together whenever crises arise, are not a recipe
for success or a good use of resources, which is why
President Obama pledged during his July 2015 visit to
AU headquarters in Addis Ababa, to help develop a new
partnership that would transform how we work together
to promote peace and security in Africa.

AU High Representative, Donald Kaberuka, has
spearheaded that strategic effort by advancing plans
to operationalize the AU peace fund and to fulfil the
AU commitment to self-finance 25 per cent of the
cost of AU-led peace operations by 2020. In July, at
the AU Summit in Kigali, AU Heads of State took a
historic decision, endorsing Mr. Kaberuka's plans. That
significant commitment not only builds up African
self-reliance in the AU's own words and ownership
over African operations but is integral to a broader AU
effort to ensure that the AU and its member States are
in charge of their own destiny, including the use of its
funds. The decision also sets an important cornerstone
for advancing the AU-United Nations partnership
by setting out operational, human rights and conduct
frameworks to strengthen AU policies and procedures.

We recognize that United Nations peacekeepers
are not always best positioned to respond to a crisis in
Africa, especially when there is no peace to keep or
armed groups threaten civilians, but we also recognize
that the AU does not have sufficient capacity, in part
because of insufficient and unreliable international
support to respond effectively on its own. A stronger
United Nations-AU partnership promises to leverage the
comparative advantages of each for the benefit of all in
the pursuit of peace and security across the continent.
To realize the full potential of that partnership, more
work needs to be done to build mutual trust, enhance
complementarity and put in place new ways of working.
I would like to focus on three factors that would be
critical to get right for this partnership to reach its
full potential.

The first factor is up-front mission planning,
which my colleague from New Zealand has already
highlighted. In cases where the Security Council
is considering authorizing support for an AU-led
operation under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations as the most effective way to respond
to a crisis, the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council must work closely together
from the outset. That requires consultations between
the AU Peace and Security Council and the Security
Council, the deployment of the joint United Nations-
AU assessment team to evaluate the political, security,
humanitarian and human rights situations on the ground
and joint planning, including on the strategic concept,
the concept of operations, forced generation and cost
implications. Success will be enhanced by making sure
that United Nations experts with critical experience
and know-how, including financial and procurement
expertise are fully integrated into those planning
stages. That will ensure that both councils are working
together to build the backbone of a mission that both
institutions can support.

The second success factor is a fully implemented
set of AU human rights and conduct and discipline
compliance policies. That includes putting in place
rigorous procedures for troop and police screening and
selection, training, monitoring, reporting, independent
investigations and holding perpetrators of violations
and misconduct accountable. Such measures are
critical for harmonizing AU policies and practices,
with international legal obligations and standards, so
that both the AU and the United Nations have clear
systems in order to prevent abuses and misconduct and
to promote accountability if and when allegations arise.

The third factor is ongoing mission evaluation and
reporting. Meaningful mission evaluation requires joint
evaluation and benchmarking exercises, throughout the
duration of a mission. In that way, the AU Peace and
Security Council and the Security Council would be
informed of the progress made towards achieving the
mission mandate and able to make recommendations for
adjusting the mandate as needed. It would also require
regular reporting by the AU to the AU Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council on its implementation
of the Mission's mandate, in compliance with AU
human rights and conduct and discipline policies. Such
reporting would include allegations of human rights
abuses, international humanitarian law transgressions
and conduct and discipline issues and actions taken by
the AU and troop- and police-contributing countries
in response to allegations. That transparency would
demonstrate the commitment of the AU in its troop-
and police-contributing countries to upholding human
rights and would serve as a critical step in achieving
accountability for actions that undermine the legitimacy
of peacekeeping and prey upon vulnerable populations.

Taken together, those three factors would form the
foundation for a future partnership that we all have a
strong, collective interest in seeing built. Such factors
should be addressed in the AU and United Nations
implementation details requested in the resolution to
be adopted today, along with specific benchmarks and
steps that would be taken to ensure that the AU Peace
Fund is consistent with member State World Trade
Organization obligations. Ultimately, to achieve those
three elements, we will need to shake ourselves out of
old biases and routines and work, hand in hand, to build
that foundation together. Otherwise we risk needlessly
losing more lives because the institutional status
quo prevailed. The stakes for the AU's courageous
peacekeepers and for the vulnerable civilians that they
protect are simply too high.

