Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to begin
by thanking High Commissioner Grandi and Assistant
Secretary-General Jenea for their important briefings
this morning. As their remarks made clear, six months
after the initial mass displacements from Rakhine, the
situation in Myanmar and Bangladesh continues to be
seriously worrying, and the crisis has clear implications
for regional peace and stability. We joined with other
colleagues on the Council in calling for this meeting
today because we believe it is important to ensure that
the Security Council remains seized of the matter and
that the United Nations continues its active engagement.

The decision to flee one's home and undertake
a dangerous journey to seek refuge in a foreign land
is driven by fear for oneself and one's family. It is a
decision taken when no other options remain. We have
heard first-hand from those who have fled about the
violence and abuse that drove them from their homes.
However, we also know that when it is safe to do
so, refugees want to return home. In that regard, we
welcome the bilateral arrangement on the voluntary
return of refugees reached between the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
with its global mandate as the international refugee
agency, must be fully associated with the process,
including by supporting verification, and should be
invited to join the joint working group.

As we heard this morning, Rohingya refugees are
still arriving in Bangladesh. The situation in Rakhine
is clearly not yet ripe for their voluntary return. For
that process to begin, it is critical to ensure conditions
that will enable their return to be voluntary, safe,
dignified and sustainable, in line with international
law and the principle of non-refoulement. UNHCR
must be given access to Rakhine in order to assess
conditions on the ground and support return operations
from inside the country. Particular attention should
be given to the special needs of survivors of sexual
and gender-based violence, including their need for
protection in the return process. Those who do decide
to return voluntarily should be able to go back to their
places of origin. The creation of new camps or camp-
like arrangements for internally displaced persons in
Rakhine must be avoided. Similarly, transition and
reception centres should be temporary, and UNHCR
and other organizations should have full access to them.

The Security Council presidential statement
adopted in November (S/PRST/2017/22) still has to be
implemented in full, including by ensuring full and
unimpeded humanitarian access. But it will not be
possible to restore peace and stability in Rakhine state
without also addressing the conditions that led to the
violence and displacement in the first place. There is an
urgent need for security, reconstruction and livelihood
programmes that can benefit all the communities in
Rakhine. Implementation of the Rakhine Advisory
Commission report's recommendations must now
be stepped up, in cooperation with international
and regional partners. That will be critical if we are
to address the root causes of the conflict, which are
underdevelopment and discrimination. Implementation
must include a genuine process towards citizenship for
the Rohingya. While re-establishing the rule of law is
urgent and a precondition for safe and voluntary returns,
reconciliation between the communities in Rakhine
will be essential for long-term peace and development.

The numerous reports of systematic, widespread
and coordinated acts of violence are a strong indication
that crimes against humanity have been committed in
Rakhine. We are deeply concerned about the recent
reports ofmass graves, which must be duly investigated.
Impunity for crimes against humanity in Rakhine
cannot be tolerated, and those responsible for them must
be held to account. The reports reinforce our awareness
of how urgent it is that all crimes be fully investigated.
In that regard, we urge Myanmar to cooperate with the
Human Rights Council's fact-finding mission in order
to help establish the facts of what has taken place in
Rakhine. We look forward to the fact-finding mission's
oral report to the Human Rights Council in March. If
the Myanmar authorities do not genuinely address the
issue of accountability, help should be sought from the
international community, including by considering a
referral to the International Criminal Court.

We want to pay tribute to the Government and
the people of Bangladesh for generously hosting such
a large number of refugees. While no effort should be
spared to create the conditions for voluntary return,
long-term planning and humanitarian support for the
refugees in Bangladesh must continue. The conditions
in the camps are dire, and with the monsoon rains
coming, there is a risk of a second humanitarian crisis
within the crisis. We welcome Bangladesh's efforts
and its commitment to avoiding such a humanitarian
disaster, and we encourage international partners to
provide additional humanitarian support. It will be
essential to ensure that the host communities that are
affected are also supported as part of those efforts.
There can be no doubt that the situation in Myanmar
continues to be very worrying and requires both short-
and long-term solutions. We call on the Government
of Myanmar to fully engage with the United Nations
and with other regional and international partners who
want to provide assistance and can do so. Sweden and
the international community stand ready to continue
supporting Myanmar on its path towards peace,
democracy and prosperity.

