Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Mr. President, I thank
you, Sir, and Cote d'Ivoire for organizing today's debate.
Since the beginning of Cote d'Ivoire's presidency last
week, this is the third debate you have organized and
the third time I am addressing the Council this month.
It is a testament both to your productive presidency and
to the vital pertinence to Rwanda of the issues you have
focused on.

I thank Judge Meron and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings. I also take this opportunity to thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for the cooperation between
his Office and the Office of the Prosecutor General of
Rwanda and other judicial authorities, particularly with
regard to recent judicial activities relating to cases of
contempt of court and incitement to commit contempt
of court in which five Rwandan nationals, including
a former investigator on one of the genocide convicts
defence team, have been charged with participating in
a joint criminal enterprise to overturn the conviction of
Augustin Ngirabatware, a genocide convict who was a
Minister in the Government that abetted the genocide
in 1994. Many others who have spoken before me have
referred to that case.

In another recent development in Rwanda, in
September more than 2,000 inmates convicted ofvarious
crimes, including genocide denial, were granted early
release. That is further evidence of Rwanda's choice
to pursue restorative justice rather than retributive
justice. These developments remind us that the pursuit
ofjustice for crimes of genocide requires a long-term
commitment - a commitment that necessitates resolve,
consistency and an understanding of the essential
contribution of justice to ending a culture of impunity.

As we mark the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide, let us all remember that
it is not for lack of legal frameworks that the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda was perpetrated.
Frameworks are only frameworks; they do not
implement themselves; institutions and people do. They
require consistent implementation and enforcement by
national institutions.

We also note that this is the final briefing by Judge
Theodor Meron. This is a time for us to look at what
has been achieved, but more importantly this is a point
of transition that provides us with an opportunity not
only to take stock of the work done by the Mechanism
but also offer the incoming President recommendations
that Rwanda believes can strengthen the work of
the Mechanism.

Of pivotal importance, we expect the next President
to improve the methods of work of the Mechanism
by making them more transparent, accountable and
inclusive of all stakeholders' views. The point we are
making here seems like very basic common sense;
however, recent years have shown us that common
sense has at times eluded the Mechanism, not least in
its treatment of early releases of genocide convicts. The
lack of consistency is the widest avenue to partiality.
We find it strange that our consistent demands
for consistency and accountability have at times
been considered as carrying political connotations.
Consistency and accountability have never undermined
the independence of judicial processes; if anything,
they actually protect it. As a Member State and
a stakeholder in the Mechanism, Rwanda cannot
overstate the importance of improved transparency and
accountability in the Mechanism.

I wish to make four simple recommendations, all of
which my Government has consistently articulated but
are yet to be implemented.

First, the force and effect of international
criminal law must be strengthened by instituting a
comprehensive provision for conditional early release
of genocide convicts who are deemed eligible for early
release. Secondly, we must combat genocide ideology
in all its manifestations and forms, including genocide
denial by those who have been convicted of genocide
and have benefited from early release. Thirdly, we must
step up our efforts and collaboration among States to
apprehend fugitives that remain at large. Fourthly, we
must send the genocide convicts still in the custody
of the Mechanism to serve out the remainder of their
sentences in Rwanda. Those are the four simple
recommendations that my Government wishes to make.

At this stage, we commend the leadership of the
Permanent Representative of Peru as the Chair of
the Informal Working Group on the International
Tribunals. My Government takes note that, as an
initial result of the implementation of resolution 2422
(2018), conditions for early release have been applied
by the Mechanism to one convict seeking early release.
That is encouraging, but, again, we note the lack of
consistency. What is the justification for this ad hoc
approach? Why only one? We urge the Mechanism to
put in place comprehensive, consistent and rigorous
provisions for all grants of conditional early release,
based on clear eligibility requirements. We once again
point to the Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone as
a best practice.

Having a comprehensive and rigorous approach to
conditional early release would ensure that the Court
grants conditional release only to those who have
demonstrated adequate rehabilitation, and avoid the
repeated occurrence of what has been reported by the
Prosecutor, that "those granted early release often deny
the crimes and their criminal responsibility immediately
upon release" (S/2018/1033, annex 11, para. 30).

The Mechanism should also step up its efforts
aimed at monitoring the activities of genocide convicts
who have benefited from early release, and who are
nevertheless indulging in activities that propagate
genocide ideology and genocide denial. We continue
to witness groups purporting to speak on behalf of
genocide convicts, sometimes involving individuals
who once worked with the Tribunal. We will gladly
share details with whomever is interested.

Sending genocide convicts to serve out the
remainder of their sentences in Rwanda would be
beneficial to the Mechanism, to Rwanda and to the
broader membership. It would help alleviate the
funding constraints faced by the Mechanism, but more
importantly, the rehabilitation of convicts would be
accelerated by serving out their sentences in Rwanda,
where they committed their crimes.

The success of Rwanda's restorative justice system
has been well documented. Our focus on restorative
justice, rather than retributive justice, has enhanced
our ability to reconcile and live together in unity, even
after the genocide and after such horrible crimes. In
addition, Rwanda's capacity to ensure high standards
ofjustice is seen in a number of cases from other States
being successfully referred to Rwanda for trial. It is now
evening in Kigali. As we speak, a Rwandan genocide
suspect, Mr. Wenceslas Twagirayezu, who sought
refuge in Denmark, is being extradited to Rwanda to
face justice. He is landing in Rwanda now, as we speak.

Finally, we take note of the Prosecutor's progress
in tracking genocide fugitives. We join him in calling
on Member States to cooperate with the Mechanism in
order to locate and apprehend the remaining fugitives.
These fugitives have not left for outer space; they are
living peacefully and quietly in host countries, many of
which are members of the Council, and some of which
are incoming members of the Council starting early
next year. We expect all Council members - current
and incoming - to lead by example by matching
their pronouncements of commitment to international
justice with tangible steps, either by prosecuting
fugitives themselves or by fulfilling their international
obligations through effective cooperation with the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.
