Mr. Bejer (Denmark): I wish to begin by associating
my delegation fully with the statement made by the
Ambassador of Finland on behalf of the European
Union (EU) - not least with the words of support and
appreciation she addressed to the Secretary-General and to
the devoted and courageous United Nations personnel.
Denmark very rarely speaks as a non-member in the
Security Council. We are anxious that the distinction of the
Security Council as a negotiating forum, and not a forum
for debate, should be maintained. Usually the EU
presidency speaks on behalf of all members of the
European Union and in this respect, too, my intervention is
a deviation from practice. There are two main reasons for
this. The first is the importance of the question we are
dealing with. The Government and the people of Denmark
are deeply shocked and appalled by the events unfolding in
East Timor. Law and order has completely broken down;
murder and violence against innocent civilians continue;
and hundreds of thousands of people have been forced out
of their homes. The Indonesian authorities cannot evade
responsibility for these events. They have not fulfilled their
obligation to maintain peace and security in East Timor as
laid out in the Agreement of 5 May. The international
community must respond to that.

Secondly, there is one major purpose of this debate
today to which my Government would like to add its moral
and political weight. The international community has made
an offer of assistance to the Indonesian authorities in
restoring law and order and re-establishing the conditions
which would allow the people of East Timor to return to
their homes in safety and the political process to which they
have so clearly committed themselves to proceed.

Like many others who have spoken here today,
Denmark urges the Government of Indonesia to accept this
offer of help without further delay. So I am making my
statement today at this late moment not to add new
substance but, on the contrary, to emphasize the unanimity
of the message we are sending to Indonesia.

Finally, let me say that Denmark, like the rest of the
international community, is longing for Indonesia to play
its part as a strong and respected member of the
international community, not to be isolated and rejected
through confrontation over East Timor. Necessary actions
must take place. Indonesia's Government must allow an
international security presence, as proposed by the
Secretary-General today and by the Security Council
team, to enter immediately in order to create conditions
necessary for the United Nations process to move
forward.

