Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): I would like to thank
you, Madame President, and the members of the
Security Council for allowing my delegation to speak
on today's agenda item. We are also very grateful for
the report (S/2011/32) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Timor-Leste. We are particularly
appreciative of the presence of His Excellency the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, whose words today
reaffirmed his commitment and dedication to moving
forward his young country in our part of the region and
the world. My delegation also deeply appreciates the
comprehensive and timely briefing of Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Since the Council's last debate on UNMIT (see S/PV.6405), we have seen major improvements in the
political and security situation in Timor-Leste, It is
satisfying to stress that among the country's 13
districts, 10 now are in the hands of the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), with the remaining
three, including Dili, scheduled to be turned over in
April. The vastly improved peace and order situation
has allowed UNMIT to downsize the number of its
police officers by 20 per cent. But at the same time, the
reduction will test the ability of the PNTL to take over
the role of United Nations police.

One immediate concern is to help the PNTL
strengthen its criminal investigation and forensics
capability. The major challenge over the long term will
be to ensure balance between the PNTL's capacity to
handle primary policing responsibilities and UNMIT's
support to institution and capacity-building, including
strengthening civilian oversight and management over
the Timorese security forces.

As an active member of the core group on Timor-
Leste, the Philippines welcomes these recent positive
developments. The Philippine contingent in UNMIT
and United Nations police, numbering 137 personnel,
including 14 women, is now preparing to scale down
its present force by around 30 per cent in the coming
months, in accordance with UNMIT's overall
drawdown plans and without sacrificing the
contingent's effectiveness and viability.

The Philippines is also pleased to note that the
overall crime rate in Timor-Leste has decreased.
However, some concerns remain on the local security
forces' ability to protect civilians. We are particularly
concerned by reports of the growing incidence of
violence against women. A solution must be found
quickly to address this problem, lest it negate Timor-
Leste's efforts to advance the cause of women at the
regional and global levels.

The report of the Secretary-General underscored
the great strides that Timor-Leste has made towards
sustained peace and order, political and economic
stability and the pursuit of justice and development.
This is indeed a tribute to Timor-Leste's determination,
notwithstanding the difficult challenges it continues to
face as a young nation. The parliamentary elections in
2012 will be a crucial test for the people of Timor-
Leste. Political stability is needed to deepen democracy
and the rule of law in order to buttress the foundations
of long-term peace and prosperity.

In that context, the Security Council will once
again renew the mandate of UNMIT for another year -
a decision that the Philippines strongly supports. As we
experienced in 2006, premature United Nations
disengagement can produce dire consequences.

The renewal of UNMIT's mandate must also be
seen as a window of opportunity for the Government
and people of Timor-Leste to show their readiness to
take responsibility for their own peace and security. All
agree that the transition to post-UNMIT must be well
managed. But concrete steps are necessary to make it
as smooth and seamless as possible. Coordination
among UNMIT, the Government of Timor-Leste and
other stakeholders must therefore be reinforced. In
view of the inevitable expiration of UNMIT's mandate,
all concerned partners must cooperate to come up with
an exit strategy that is realistic, transparent and
practical.

Like other States emerging from conflict, Timor-
Leste faces hardship and adversity. But the Philippines
believes that Timor-Leste, our good and close
neighbour, is in a good position to hurdle the
challenges ahead. I once again assure the Council and
all of our partners in the United Nations, especially the
core group on Timor-Leste, that the Philippines stands
ready to do its part to contribute to the success of
UNMIT and to help the people and Government of
Timor-Leste in their quest for peace and prosperity.

