Mrs. Espinosa Cantellano (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We wish at the outset to thank you,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
convene this meeting of the Security Council to debate
at the highest level the issue of strengthening of the
role of the Council in the maintenance of peace and
security. We also thank your delegation for its guidance
of the work of the Council.

The evolution of the international context
requires the Council to adapt its skills and mechanisms
to cope effectively and comprehensively with the new
international challenges and threats, recognizing the
clear interdependence between development, respect
for international law, human rights and security. Today,
we face threats - such as international terrorism and
transnational organized crime, including illicit
trafficking in drugs, arms and persons - that affect the
world in a transversal manner. No country remains
unaffected, and no one can face them on their own.

The Security Council, as the highest legitimate
body responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the prerogatives
conferred on it by the Charter of the United Nations,
should continue to strengthen its mechanisms and the
reach of its decisions in order more effectively to
address threats that affect contemporary global
stability, instead of being overtaken by reality.

Mexico believes that we live at a time when we
have the tools and opportunities to promote an
environment conducive to tangible improvements in
peace and security. As it has rarely done before, the
Council now works to reach consensus based on
negotiations within the framework of the international
law. There is also a positive and constructive
relationship among the permanent members, as well as
an exceptionally consistent group of non-permanent
members committed to international peace and
security.

These elements show us that it is possible to
strengthen the peacekeeping agenda, emphasizing
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, and providing
the political support necessary to ensure lasting peace.
Our work should seek to ensure that the Security
Council's efforts have a positive impact on the field as
part of a comprehensive and coherent long-term
strategy that builds and strengthens lasting peace and
promotes the safety of the civilian population,
particularly women and children. We must also
continue to encourage respect for the international
legal framework, ensuring compliance with the
Council's decisions and confronting impunity, in
particular for violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights.

We believe that there should be a greater
emphasis on conflict prevention. Dialogue and the
peaceful settlement of disputes are essential to
strengthening international cooperation in maintaining
peace and security, eradicating the structural causes of
conflict and encouraging the development and use of
resources in a more rational way. In the course of our
participation in the Council's work, we have
particularly emphasized the peaceful settlement of
disputes, preventive diplomacy, respect for the rule of
law, and transparency in the Council's working
methods, all of which are needed to promote the higher
efficiency of this organ's capacities.

Mexico has always promoted the peaceful
settlement of disputes and remains convinced that the
genuine strengthening of the role of the Organization
in the world depends on the validity of Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations. Throughout its
history, Mexico has been one of its most active
promoters, resorting to arbitration and international
courts and encouraging the peaceful settlement of
disputes through mediation in our region. To a large
extent, and thanks to mediation, for several decades
Latin America and the Caribbean has been one of the
most peaceful regions of the world. Mediation has led
to the resolution of political and ideological conflicts
and territorial and border disputes. Thus, in 2009 we
convened a debate of the Security Council on
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes.

Conflict prevention and post-conflict attention
must remain among the primary objectives of the
Organization, which must address the causes in a
comprehensive and long-term manner. Peacekeeping
and post-conflict capacity-building, in particular of
civilian capabilities, are key components of the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law.

We believe that, in 2010, important progress has
been made in maintaining the relevance of the topic on
the agenda of the Security Council. The debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security, held
in June, is one example of that. It is also important to
highlight the Council's resolutions urging the parties to
armed conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian law and to protect vulnerable groups.

With respect to international humanitarian law,
the Council has assumed the role of collective
guarantor under the Protocol Additional I to the
Geneva Conventions. With full conviction, we have
convened two meeting on child protection in conflict
situations aimed at protecting their rights and ensuring
their return to a safe environment with prospects for
growth and development. Also, with the support of the
members of the Security Council, in 2009 we have
strengthened the tools of this Council through
resolution 1882 (2009), among others.

As an elected member of the Security Council,
and also within the General Assembly, Mexico will
continue to contribute in creating conditions of
stability and lasting peace at the international level, as
we have done since the founding of the Organization,
acting under the principles of transparency,
democratization and accountability.

I conclude by expressing my delegation's support
for the draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
end of this meeting, which will undoubtedly strengthen
the work of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security.

