Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his comprehensive
and informative briefing, and to acknowledge with
appreciation the hard work and dedication of all
the staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) under his leadership. I
would also like to thank Ambassador Tanin for his
statement. Let me also express our sincere appreciation
to Ambassador Wittig of Germany and his team for
their leadership in guiding the debate on the situation
in Afghanistan, as the pen holder, in a most effective
manner for the past two years.

Japan is pleased to welcome the progress in the
Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process over
the past quarter. The visit of Mr. Rabbani, Chair
of Afghanistan's High Peace Council, to Pakistan
in November achieved substantial outcomes and
reinvigorated the momentum of stakeholders in
re-embarking upon the long and uneven path towards
the ultimate goal of the peace process. In the same
month, we also witnessed Chair Rabbani's active
interaction with the United Nations through dialogue
with the Security Council and its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011). These exchanges
gave us an opportunity to reflect on how the United
Nations and its organs could more efficiently serve the
peace and reconciliation process.

It is Japan's fervent hope that the Afghan
Government's strong political will and efforts, combined
with the profound engagement of its neighbouring
countries and the rest of the international community,
will succeed in propelling the peace process forward
and achieving further and more inclusive dialogue. In
this vein, it is also encouraging to see the continued
positive trend ofthe increasing number ofex-combatants
included in the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration
Programme.

Furthermore, Japan welcomes the Afghan
Government's intensive follow-up efforts over the past
four months, in close coordination with international
stakeholders, to realize the commitments made in the
context of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework,
which resulted in the holding of the first meeting of the
steering committee on 5 December.

Despite these recent positive developments,
challenges in the field of security, including the high
level of civilian casualties, continue to be one of the
predominant obstacles to the country's stability. Only
recently, we again witnessed another reprehensible
incident - an attack against the chief of the National
Directorate of Security. Japan calls for renewed
determination and actions by the Afghan Government
to ensure the safety of those Afghans and internationals
who devote themselves to creating a better future for
the country.

Looking back on the past year, Japan would also
like to call on all the stakeholders for their continued
attention and further efforts in addressing the persistent
humanitarian needs and the worrisome decline in
assistance. Without improving the severe humanitarian
situation of the more than 450,000 internally displaced
persons in the country, any gains achieved in
socioeconomic development or in the political process
will remain fragile and unsustainable.

The year 2013 must lay the foundation for 2014, the
critical year for the sustainable future of Afghanistan.
During this upcoming year oftruly decisive importance,
Japan would like to see the following three things in
particular: first, as we made clear at the beginning ofthis
statement, continuous efforts for further development
of the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process;
secondly, concrete evidence of the enhanced quality
and capability of the Afghan national security forces
in their efforts towards the successful completion
of the transition process; and last but not least,
commitments made in the context of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework, especially the holding of
fair and credible elections in 2014 and the completion
of the remaining six national priority programmes, in
order to provide further steady and tangible results
on the ground. In order to achieve a transparent and
inclusive election, results-oriented measures must be
taken in a timely manner to meet both the technical and
the political challenges, such as building the capacities
of the Independent Election Commission, establishing
a unified and functioning voter registration system and
accelerating electoral law reforms.

In conclusion, Japan believes that the year 2013
should be the year that gives the people of Afghanistan
a sense of security and future prospects.

