The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Denmark.

Along with speakers before me, I would also like
to thank Jan Egeland for his clear briefing on the
current situation of civilians in armed conflict.
Furthermore, I would like to fully associate my
delegation with the statement to be delivered later by
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

Our efforts to implement the established
framework for the protection of civilians do not start in
a vacuum. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has developed the ten-
point platform with priorities for action and provided
the Council with an aide memoire to assist in the
development of protection mandates. It is time for us
once again to evaluate the effectiveness of those tools.
They might need to be updated, but in particular we
need to make better use of them in the daily work of
the Council.

Allow me to make a few comments on the way
ahead as we see it.

The continued targeting of civilians in current
situations of conflict is unacceptable. If States are
unable or unwilling to provide protection for all - be
it children, women, humanitarian workers or
representatives of the free press - the international
community must react to stop the pattern of violence.
Local authorities clearly have an obligation to provide
their full cooperation to facilitate those efforts.
Physical protection, the restoration of law and order
and the fight against impunity must be key priorities in
bringing the violence to an end.

Humanitarian access is essential. Assistance and
protection activities must be provided as promptly as
practically possible. Consequently, the Security
Council must take all steps to ensure full, safe and
unhindered access for United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. Denial of, and attacks on, humanitarian
operations are unacceptable and must be met with the
appropriate response.

Efforts to protect civilians in situations of conflict
must be more predictable, timely and systematic. In
emerging conflict situations, the Security Council
should establish an effective peacekeeping presence as
early as possible. Peacekeepers should be provided
with a realistic, clear and robust mandate to protect
civilians and to provide a secure environment. That
includes providing security in and around camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons.

To improve our efforts to protect civilians, all
actors must continue to deepen their cooperation.
Within the United Nations system we encourage
further cooperation among the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and other relevant actors to follow up on the decisions
of the Security Council. In that regard, we believe that
the establishment of the cluster approach will improve
the humanitarian response and the protection of
civilians.

Finally, we must improve our ability to engage
with non-State actors to make it clear that all those
engaged in armed conflicts have an obligation to
refrain from attacks on civilians. In this effort, it is
important that not only representatives of the United
Nations system, but also members of civil society, be
actively involved. The International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) has its own distinct role in that
regard. We are hopeful that the introduction of the new
ICRC emblem, the Red Crystal, will enhance the
protection of the civilian population during armed
conflicts. We also welcome the very useful guidelines
just issued by OCHA on humanitarian negotiations
with armed groups.

The protection of civilians is a multifaceted
challenge, and the Security Council has the tools to
solve only parts of the problem. But we must make the
best use of those tools and not shy away, even if the
situation calls for more difficult measures, such as
sanctions, the referral of violators to international
courts or the stronger enforcement of protection
mandates.

It is our hope that today's debate will enforce
steps already taken to implement Security Council
resolution 1674 (2006) and that it will inspire new
initiatives to find ways to ensure the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Austria.

