Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to welcome the analyses shared by the
Secretary-General and all our briefers this morning. I
also join others in paying tribute to you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in bringing this vital issue to the
Council. An important part of our responsibilities
as the Security Council in delivering Goal 16 of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is having a
broad enough definition of the threats to international
peace and security - not so as to encroach on the
responsibilities of other parts of the United Nations
system, but tojoin up with them. And on that, Senegal is
providing leadership and putting it into practice through
the Senegal River Basin Development Organization.
I commend the cooperation that Senegal has fostered
with Mali, Mauritania and Guinea on flood defences
and hydropower, in a welcome example of managing
transboundary water challenges through cooperation
rather than conflict.

Sadly, however, we are in need of more examples
of best practices. The statistics speak for themselves.
In less than 10 years' time, unless we take action, up to
2.5 billion people, a third of today's global population,
could be vulnerable to water insecurity. Unless we
take action, by 2030 - the year we are supposed to
achieve the global goals, including SDG 6, on water
and sanitation - the global demand for fresh water will
outstrip the supply by 40 per cent.
That is a problem not just for tomorrow but for
today. Every year, water insecurity costs the global
economy $500 billion. That is $500 billion lost to
inadequate water and sanitation, urban flood damage
and agricultural wastage through droughts and floods.
For the people affected by the issue today, it is about
much more than money. It is about life and death. Take
the villagers of Kiangwe, in Lamu county in Kenya.
Water scarcity there means that inhabitants spend
sleepless nights walking to dried-up wells in the hope
of securing just a few bottles of water. It means that
they are choosing to risk their lives by walking through
territory full of Al-Shabaab fighters. It means leaving
their children at home, alone, hungry and thirsty. And
from that village in Kenya, we can extrapolate to see
the risk that this issue poses to international peace
and security. A scarcity of water affects food and
energy production, damaging economic growth. It
increases local tensions, causing conflicts over access
to water within States and regions. And as demand
increases, it is possible that such conflicts will broaden
to include Member States themselves, or even lead
to the targeting of water infrastructure. I therefore
fully endorse the comments the briefers made about
respecting international humanitarian law and about
the importance of protecting water infrastructure. I
also like the idea that we heard earlier about water-
related ceasefires in conflicts.

So what more can be done? The United Kingdom is
already active in helping to tackle this set of problems.
Over the next four years, we will be contributing
$43 million to improving the management of shared
waters in southern Africa. We will be doing so in
partnership with Germany's Ministry of Economic
Cooperation and the Climate Resilient Infrastructure
Development Facility, a private-sector organization
that designs and finances water infrastructure. In an
increasingly water-scarce region, the programme will
help the countries of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) build water infrastructure such
as storage reservoirs and irrigation and water-supply
systems. It will enable countries to share data on water
levels with their neighbours and to issue timely flood
and drought warnings, and it will build the capacity
of institutions such as river basin organizations to
help them manage water resources in shared basins. In
doing so, it will help countries in the region use those
resources to grow their economies and reduce poverty.
Most importantly, perhaps, we expect the programme
to help as many as 3 million of the poorest people in
the region, so that they can cope better with the effects
of climate variability and climate change, particularly
floods and drought.

We will notbe doing this alone. Through this project,
we hope to raise nearly $500 million from the private
sector, including companies with a high dependency
on water, as well as from national Governments and
development banks, so that together we can plan and
construct water infrastructure for communities within
SADC member States. Ultimately, tackling water
insecurity at a global level will need joint efforts and
investments that require regional cooperation. Today's
Security Council meeting is an important step towards
that collective, cooperative effort. We should not
underestimate the scale of the challenge ahead. The
global investment deficit for water governance and
infrastructure alone is $198 billion a year. Together,
however, we can make a difference if we invest in the
information, institutions and infrastructure required to
deliver water security. And when combined with the
right political interventions, including by the Security
Council, together we can reduce the impact of water
problems at the local, national and regional levels.

