Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to thank
the Special Representative Carlos Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing and to extend a very warm welcome to
His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia.

Germany is in full agreement with the thrust of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/780). I would
therefore like to limit my remarks today to a few
aspects of the overall picture of the implementation of
the peace agreement and some more specific issues.

I think it is important to note at the start that the
implementation ofthe peace agreement is still a success
story, albeit not without setbacks. We strongly condemn
the decision by a group of former commanders from
the Fuerza Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to take up arms
again, but we welcome the immediate rejection
of their announcement by the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) party and the
widespread expressions of commitment to the peace
process from former combatants across the country.
We also very much welcome President Duque's
reaffirmation of his commitment to reintegrating the
vast majority of former combatants who laid down
their weapons in good faith and remain part of the
reintegration process. It is now even more important to
redouble our efforts and accelerate the implementation
of the peace accord in a comprehensive way to prove
the FARC-EP dissidents wrong.

Council unity and engagement on Colombia remain
equally important and must be preserved, particularly
if and when the peace process is faced with obstacles.
The support of the international community has helped
Colombians realize their aspirations for a more peaceful
future. In that regard, let me commend the key role
that is being played by the United Nations Verification
Mission and agencies working in Colombia. Let me also
underline that Germany will also continue to strongly
support Colombia on its way to sustainable peace.

Among several other specific aspects relating
to the implementation of the peace agreement, one
is obviously the reintegration of former FARC-EP
members. Following the expiration of the legal status
of the territorial areas for training and reintegration, we
commend the Government for its responsible handling
of the transition and the FARC for its constructive
role. We welcome in particular their joint visits to the
territorial areas.

However, we also call on all actors to pay more
attention to the situation of the more than 8,000 former
combatants who reside outside the former territorial
areas for training and reintegration and face even
greater challenges in terms of security, basic services
and productive opportunities. In the context of the
reintegration of former FARC-EP members, we are also
convinced that even more attention needs to be paid
to the implementation of the gender provisions of the
peace agreement, and the same applies to young people.
In that regard, we would like to commend the Mission
for its youth, peace and security strategy and regular
reporting on the issue.

A second more specific point concerns providing
support for the institutions of the peace agreement.
The extremely valuable work of the Truth Commission,
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, and the Unit for the
Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of
and Due to the Armed Conflict gives hope that Colombia
will be able to overcome the deeply entrenched legacy
of conflict and achieve true reconciliation. The
independence and proper functioning of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace and the other components of the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition are of crucial importance. Reforms that
may lead to a growing sense of uncertainty about their
legal status among former fighters could be seriously
detrimental to the consolidation of the peace process.

With regard to the relevant institutions and the issue
offunding, which other colleagues have also mentioned,
it is important to ensure that all Ministries and entities
entrusted with the implementation of the peace process
receive adequate funding. Therefore, we very much
welcome the fact that the proposed budget includes a
15-per cent increase for the Comprehensive System of
Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition.

In connection with the security situation, which
remains concerning, especially in rural areas, social
leaders and human rights defenders who support the
peace agreement and the resulting policies, such as land
restitution, continue to be at particular risk. We are also
worried that indigenous leaders, women leaders and
women's rights defenders are facing additional security
threats. The elevated number of killings that Mr. Ruiz
Massieu mentioned in his briefing obviously remains
alarming, especially within the context of the upcoming
holding of local and regional elections, which might
lead to further tensions. Therefore, we also welcome
the signing of the National Pact for Political Culture
and Non-Violence during the Electoral Campaign by
12 political parties.

Lastly, we encourage the Government to extend the
presence of State institutions to remote and conflict-
affected areas in order to create a secure and stable
environment for all Colombians.

