Mr. Viinanen (Finland): On behalf of the Nordic
countries, let me start by thanking the delegation of
Brazil for convening today's important debate.

The Millennium Declaration (General Assembly resolution 55/2) and World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) specifically
address the interlinkages between peace and security,
human rights and development. One pillar is not
sustainable without the two others. We need an
approach that places the security of people before
institutions and mandates.

Human rights violations are at the root of many
conflicts. The protection and promotion of all human
rights must remain at the core of our responses. The
Council itself has recognized the importance of human
rights to peace and security. As efforts are made to
strengthen the linkages between security and
development, it is crucial to ensure that all actors
integrate human rights into their efforts.

National ownership needs to be emphasized.
Lasting peace and long-term development cannot be
imposed. National capacities for setting development
priorities following an armed conflict are often weak.
War-torn societies need assistance in restoring trust and
in addressing key concerns, such as building credible
security, strengthening the rule of law and facilitating
economic recovery.

Engaging women in all efforts is essential.
Despite women's involvement in peace initiatives, they
are too often excluded from peace negotiations. That
undermines efforts to achieve long-term peace. The
empowerment of women is a precondition for long-
term development and peace.

The peacebuilding architecture of the United
Nations was set up to address the gap between
stabilization and long-term development. Too often,
however, the lack of synchronization between
peacekeeping operations and development programmes
leads to a failure to deliver. I would like to point out
three challenges in that respect.

First, as the mandates of United Nations bodies
are not likely to change significantly, we should ask
ourselves how the United Nations can work better
using the existing tools and deal with the shortcomings.
In that regard, we look forward to the
recommendations of the review of civilian capacities
and their swift implementation. For the United Nations
system as a whole, we must do more to advance
integration, coordination and delivering as one. The
current structure is often a disincentive to coordination.
Human resources management policies, financial
regulations and audit and investigation rules are some
of the issues that we need to address. We must engage
the Bretton Woods institutions more closely and
strategically. We believe that the 2011 World
Development Report will provide good insight in our
ongoing discussions. Coherence can be achieved only
if we, as donors and Member States, practice what we
preach. We must ensure that mandated tasks are
properly funded to allow for their full implementation.

Secondly, Council mandates should not be
overloaded. That includes an honest assessment of the
role of the mission and of which tasks would be better
undertaken by other United Nations entities or
partners. Mandates must be matched by resources.
Peacekeeping missions have become integrated and
multifunctional. They have broader mandates and last
longer than in the past. A telling example in that regard
are elections, which were an exit point in the earliest
missions and have now become a benchmark for most.
Peacekeeping today includes peacebuilding. There is a
limit to what peacekeepers can and should do, and to
the role of other actors. Nevertheless, it is in the
interest of the Council that a mission be sufficiently
equipped to support efforts for achieving the level of
stability necessary for a handover to peacebuilding and
development actors.

Thirdly, there should be room for closer
interaction between the Council and development
partners. The Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration should be invited to the
Council when a country on the Council's agenda is also
on the agenda of the Commission. One should also
consider other options for engaging non-members of
the Council beyond consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries.

We need an approach that is centred on the
security and safety of individuals. Our success or
failure is measured by how much we manage to reduce
vulnerabilities and increase the opportunities for
people affected by conflict. The conflict in South
Sudan will serve as an important test case. We hope
that the United Nations can deliver a coordinated,
cohesive and efficient response in support of a people
that has suffered from decades of armed violence and
poverty.

