Mr. Lowcock: A fortnight ago in Yemen, I got
a glimpse of what life is like in the world's worst
humanitarian crisis. I talked to families that had fled
violence raging in their communities, some of them had
been living for years under a plastic sheet. I met young
mothers who had rushed desperately malnourished
children to hospitals. For some, it was their second,
third or even fourth visit, because their families could
not afford the food or medicine to keep them well once
they had been discharged.

So, I can confirm again what humanitarian
agencies have known for a long time. A terrible tragedy
is unfolding in Yemen and it is getting worse. Millions
of people are starving, sick and desperate. They have
one message for the world - this war needs to stop.

Council members have just heard Martin Griffiths
describe the progress made this week in Sweden. For the
first time in a long time, we can see a sign that perhaps
things might start to get a bit better, but the people I
met see no tangible improvement yet. This week's
success must not lead to complacency; in fact; it must
do the opposite. Commitments must be implemented.
Working towards peace must be accelerated. In the
meantime, millions of Yemenis still desperately need
assistance and protection.

We have recently had further confirmation of
just how bad the situation has become. Last week,
a consortium of agencies published the Integrated
Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) analysis for
Yemen. Their report is the most detailed, rigorous food
security survey ever conducted in the country. Data was
collected in 330 of Yemen's 333 districts, analysed and
scrutinized by multiple organizations and reviewed by
independent Headquarters experts before publication.
The results decisively confirm Yemen's descent toward
famine. Even for experienced aid workers, the numbers
are shocking. More than 20 million Yemenis - two-
thirds of the population - are now food insecure. Ten
million of them are severely food insecure - more than
twice the number of four years ago. More than half the
districts across the country have slipped into emergency
conditions - nearly 60 per cent more than last year.

For the first time, the IPC document refers to what
are called "Phase 5" conditions in Yemen. The technical
term for Phase 5 is "catastrophe". It is characterized
by extreme food gaps, very high malnutrition rates and
excess mortality. Nearly a quarter of a million Yemenis
are literally on the brink of starvation. The IPC is also
clear that the war is the primary cause of this crisis. It
is no coincidence that two-thirds of the people most at
risk of starvation live in Hajjah, Al-Hudaydah, Sa'ada
and Taiz. They are the places where the violence has
been most intense this year.

As we have told the Council before, the economic
crisis is also playing a major role. Yemenis' livelihoods
and access to income have been decimated, and
agricultural production has fallen by nearly a third.
Those developments have left millions of more Yemenis
unable to afford food and other essential goods, and
food prices are 150 per cent higher than they were
before the crisis.

If there is any good news in the IPC report, it is
that humanitarian assistance - especially food aid
or money to buy food - is having a major impact. It
shows that millions of Yemenis are less hungry than
they would be without aid. The IPC also tells us what
areas and which people are worst affected. The United
Nations and partners are rushing now to reach those
people and prevent the catastrophe from spreading. We
will also do more survey work on an ongoing basis so
we can spot the most vulnerable before it is too late.

Since October, I have been seeking the Council's
support for five measures to prevent famine from
taking hold. Those five steps are more urgent than ever.
So where do we stand on them today?

The first is a cessation of hostilities. Up to now, we
have seen only a reduction in fighting in some areas, not
a full cessation. In the past week, nearly 450 conflict
incidents were reported across Yemen, about a third of
them in Al-Hudaydah. The agreement on Al-Hudaydah
that Martin just described brings us closer to a real
cessation. As the details are being worked out, we
continue to call for a full cessation of hostilities across
the country.
The second point is to protect the supply of food
and essential goods and to facilitate aid operations.
That means keeping all the ports open, easing entry
and movement restrictions, protecting humanitarian
supplies and facilitating aid workers in doing their
jobs. Restrictions on humanitarian access are a serious
and growing problem. I had a useful discussion in
Aden with the Prime Minister on imports. Last month,
the Government of Yemen lifted restrictions on food
imports introduced through Decree 75. In November,
food imports through the ports of Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, where most food enters the country, rose by
15 per cent, although the total quantity remained below
what was needed.

We also call on the Government to lift restrictions
on fuel imports, which are needed to power hospital
generators and keep water networks running and for
other critical tasks across the country. Those restrictions
are currently blocking over 70,000 tons of fuel from
entering Al-Hudaydah port. I had a constructive
discussion with the Prime Minister on that, and I hope
to see positive action soon.

Operations at Aden port, where congestion has been
a severe problem, have also started to improve after the
Government instructed port authorities to accelerate
processing times following my discussions with the
Prime Minster. We hope that trend continues. As an
immediate step, we want to see the release ofsome 1,400
containers belonging to the World Food Programme
that have been stuck at Aden port for months.

The Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, which I have
talked about repeatedly over the past three months, are
an instructive example. Access to the mills has been
impossible since fighting escalated around them in
September. Fighters have regularly impinged upon the
compound, and the site has been repeatedly struck by
mortar fire. Early last month, the mills came under the
control of Government-backed forces, but access since
then has been hampered by difficulties in moving across
front lines and concerns that the area - potentially
including the entrance to the mills - may have

been mined.

Because of all that, enough food to feed nearly
3.5 million people for a month has now sat useless in
a warehouse for more than three months. I discussed
the issue both with the operators of the mills in Sana'a
and with coalition authorities in Riyadh, but as of today
we have no idea if the Red Sea Mills can still operate
or how much of the donor-funded grain inside has been
damaged or spoiled.
The Red Sea Mills are just one site among a very
large number of mills, silos and warehouses located
in and around Al-Hudaydah. If those sites are hit or
damaged, aid operations could very quickly grind to
a halt. That is one reason why the progress Martin has
described concerning Al-Hudaydah is so important,
and why we must all do everything we can to make sure
that it translates into action.

In Sana'a, I raised my serious concerns about
the restrictions and bureaucratic impediments
that humanitarian organizations face, including
delays in visas, customs and the registration of
non-governmental organizations and unacceptable
interference with humanitarian operations. I raised
those issues with senior representatives of the de facto
authorities, including the President of the Supreme
Political Council. Those were constructive discussions,
but I have since heard worrying reports that a raft of
new restrictions has been introduced, especially for
protection activities. Some of those restrictions have
come from local authorities and not from the Sana'a
level. Based on the firm assurances I received during
my visit, I hope that de facto authorities in Sana'a will
move quickly to lift those and other restrictions. I am
following up on the assurances that I was given.

In all my conversations in Yemen, I also sought
commitments from all parties to ensure that fighters
stay away from hospitals and other civilian sites and that
no armed forces recruit children. Greater commitment
is needed on all sides for the protection of civilians,
especially women and girls, in this crisis.

The third area is stabilizing the economy. Foreign
currency injections over the past two months from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
have been effective in stabilizing the exchange rate,
financing imports of essential goods and starting to
pay pensions and civil servant salaries. At present, the
Yemeni rial is trading at just over 500 to the dollar,
which represents a marked appreciation compared to a
few weeks ago. But a dollar still costs more than twice
as many rials as it did before the current conflict, and
research indicates that the exchange rate needs to come
down to about 440 rial to the dollar before it will have
a wider impact on people's ability to afford food and
other essential goods.

To achieve that, as well as to finance imports, pay
salaries and pensions and meet minimum costs reliably,
the Government of Yemen is going to need billions
of dollars in external support for its budget in 2019.
Again, I had constructive discussions with the Prime
Minister on that. We are seeing some progress in paying
pensions and payment of some civil servant salaries on
both sides. However, as yesterday's statement of the
International Monetary Fund made clear, we need more
decisions and more sustained action in a similar vein.
Otherwise, what we will see is that recent progress,
which is improving some people's ability to buy food
and other essential goods, will simply be lost again.

The fourth area is funding for the United Nations
response plan. Agencies are moving now to expand
operations. We believe that next year we will need
to feed 12 million people every month, including
10 million severely food-insecure people and 2 million
displaced people in acute need. That figure of
12 million is a 50 per cent increase over this year. In
total, we plan to assist 15 million people - that is half
the population. That includes programmes to roll back
cholera and water-borne diseases, address malnutrition
and improve living conditions for the most vulnerable
displaced people.

To ensure that all the food, medicine, household
items and other supplies, as well as the aid workers,
reach their destinations quickly and safely, our
logistics programme must also be financed to expand
significantly. That will all require a lot more money.
The 2019 United Nations humanitarian response
plan is costed ay $4 billion; about half of that is for
emergency food assistance. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates recently pledged
to provide another $500 million for humanitarian aid
in Yemen. That is on top of their joint contribution of
$930 million to the United Nations appeal this year.
Our understanding is that most of this new money
will be channelled through next year's United Nations
coordinated humanitarian response plan. That would
be a boost to our fund raising, and we hope that it
will jump-start contributions from other countries.
On 26 February, the Secretary-General will convene
a high-level pledging conference in Geneva, co-hosted
by the Governments of Switzerland and Sweden.

The fifth area is the most important, and that is for
the parties to continue to engage seriously with Martin's
process, including implementing the agreements
reached in Sweden.

The five points I have been emphasizing are, to
remind the Council, a package and not a menu. We need
more action on all of them. Notwithstanding the good
news from Sweden, there is a long way to go. Earlier
today, I chaired another detailed discussion on Yemen
with the heads of all the key United Nations and other
operational humanitarian agencies. Our collective
assessment is that the good news we heard this week
has not yet had any material impact on the millions
of people who need assistance. Access, the economy
and resources are major priorities. The lesson is
twofold - progress is absolutely possible but we need
much more of it right now. So, I again ask for practical
and political support from the Council in the five areas
I have outlined.

