Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I would like to welcome
both Prime Minister Dacie and Prime Minister Thaci
back to the Council and to thank them for sharing their
perspectives with us.

I would also like to express again our appreciation
to the European Union (EU), NATO, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
organizations that, alongside the United Nations, are
supporting the international community's work in
Kosovo. I would like to congratulate Kosovo on the
fifth anniversary of its independence on 17 February.

The United States commends Kosovo and Serbia
for their efforts in the ongoing EU-facilitated dialogue
towards a normalization of their relations. Prime
Ministers Thaci and Daeic' have shown courage in
working to resolve long-standing issues through a
pragmatic approach that will improve the lives of their
citizens, bring greater stability to the region and allow
both countries to move forward on their respective
paths to European integration.

The United States very much welcomes the
progress made in the seven rounds of the dialogue,
and we understand that the Prime Ministers are close
to concluding an agreement on northern Kosovo. We
encourage them to do so at the next dialogue session
on 2 April. Both parties, with the assistance of the
international community, should quickly and fully
implement any agreement ultimately reached. Those
efforts will continue to require much cooperation and
hard work.

Further, we applaud the continued implementation
of the arrangements under the integrated management
of crossing points agreement, and look forward to the
exchange of liaison officers to serve in the respective
capitals. Such agreements are proof that the dialogue is
producing results. We call on both Kosovo and Serbia
to sustain the momentum towards normalization that
their leaders have built in recent months.

We also commend the significant progress Kosovo
has made in modernizing the justice sector. The new
court structure, criminal code and criminal procedure
code are major steps forward. We encourage the
Government of Kosovo, in coordination with its partner
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), to continue to prioritize reforms in that sector
and to increase efforts to address corruption, strengthen
judicial independence and remedy inefficiencies, which
would contribute to increased public confidence in the
legal system and improvedjustice.

Kosovo's recent adoption of laws to increase
the transparency and accountability of financial
transactions will, once fully implemented, help Kosovo
to combat corruption and organized crime, promote the
country's growth and help to ensure the independence
of its institutions more broadly. Further, we continue to
support the Special Investigative Task Force in its work
to investigate allegations of organ trafficking and other
wrongdoing. We reaffirm our belief in the Task Force's
capacity and commitment to operating consistently with
established investigative and prosecutorial practices
and in the interest ofjustice.

While the progress at the political level has been
significant, the United States remains concerned
about continuing security incidents, especially in the
north. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2013/72), the overall number of recorded incidents
affecting minority communities declined in 2012. Still,
we are disturbed by the uptick of violent acts in recent
months, much of which appears intended to harass
and threaten those who are cooperating with Kosovo
authorities to normalize relations. Those acts represent
a serious threat to peace and security. They must not
be tolerated. Of great concern is a string of grenade
attacks in northern Kosovo that has targeted EULEX
staff, officials at the borders and Kosovo Serbs.

In addition, an ongoing pattern of violence in
northern Mitrovica against personnel employed by
Kosovo institutions and their families, particularly
against Kosovo Serb employees of the northern
Mitrovica administrative office undermines safety,
security and the rule of law, and hurts the ordinary
citizens of the north, whom that administrative office
is trying to help. The United States continues to support
the office's work to improve the delivery of services
to the citizens of northern Mitrovica, and hopes that
UNMIK will support those efforts.

We also insist on zero tolerance for vandalism, the
desecration of religious sites, intimidation and targeted
violence, and condemn the desecration of grave sites in
Kosovo that occurred in reaction to the removal by the
Serbian Government of a monument in southern Serbia.
The United States welcomed the prompt condemnation
and assurances by Kosovo authorities that those criminal
acts would be investigated fully and the perpetrators
prosecuted, as well as the Government's commitment
to restore the grave sites at Government expense.

As the Prime Ministers continue talks under the
auspices of High Representative Ashton in less than two
weeks, it will be important to seize the opportunities
presented by the dialogue to move beyond the past
and look toward their common European futures. The
United States will continue to support them and the EU
facilitation efforts towards that end.
