The President: At the outset of the meeting, I
should like, on behalf of the Security Council, to
extend our heartfelt sympathy to the Government and
the people of China in connection with the earthquake
which occurred in the Xinjiang region, resulting in
considerable destruction and loss of life. I would
request the representative of China to convey to his
Government and people our grief and sincere
condolence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

General issues relating to sanctions

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sweden, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Hans Dahlgren, State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dahlgren
(Sweden), took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Danilo Tiirk, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Tiirk to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by His Excellency Mr. Hans Dahlgren, State
Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Sweden. I now give
him the floor.


