Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would like to thank Germany
for hosting this open debate on children and armed
conflict. Germany has made significant contributions
on the issue of children and armed conflict, which
include efforts that led to the adoption of the resolution
1998 (2011), and we strongly commend its efforts. The
issue is important, not only from the humanitarian
perspective of protecting children, but also in terms of
peace and security, as the use of child soldiers has tragic
consequences. This is why it is extremely important to
address the issue at the Security Council.

The Government of Japan warmly welcomes
the appointment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui as the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We also thank the
Special Representative; UNICEF Executive Director,
Mr. Anthony Lake; Under Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Mr. Herve Ladsous; and
President of the International Center for Transitional
Justice, Mr. David Tolbert, for their briefings.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/261) includes attacks on schools and hospitals
as a listing criterion for the annex I and II lists, and
the Government of Japan welcomes this development.
Attacks on and unjust occupation of these facilities not
only invite the killing and maiming of children, but
also deprive children of their right to an education and
prevent them from accessing health services, which
can have long-term repercussions on society. Such acts
must cease immediately.

I would like to focus on the issue of persistent
perpetrators and the fight against impunity. It is
our grave concern that the number of persistent
perpetrators has increased drastically according to
the latest Security-General report. Currently, some,
though not all, sanctions committees have designation
criteria for grave violations against children; however,
the De La Sabliere report presents various in-depth
options to address the issue, including the creation of
a thematic sanctions committee. The Security Council
should assess the viability of those options and exercise
practical measures against persistent perpetrators;
otherwise, the annex lists will be at risk of losing
substance.

The role of judicial organizations is also very
critical. This year, the Special Court for Sierra
Leone found Charles Taylor guilty for such crimes
as the recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is a
significant advancement in the fight against impunity.
Also, the International Criminal Court (ICC) found
Thomas Lubanga guilty ofthe war crime of conscripting
and enlisting children or using them to participate
actively in hostilities during domestic conflicts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a milestone
sentence in strengthening the rule of law, given that
it is the first sentence since the establishment of the
ICC 10 years ago.Furthermore, let me underscore that
the Security Council, which is authorized to refer
a case to the ICC, and the ICC, which conducts the
investigation, prosecution and trial, need to deepen
substantive dialogue between each other, collaborate
more constructively and build a relationship where
each is accountable to the other.

More than a decade has passed since the issue of
children and armed conflict was included in the Security
Council agenda in 1998. From those discussions we saw
emerge a series of structural developments, including
the creation of the annex lists and action plans. It is now
necessary that we implement those mechanisms.

In that regard, the Government of Japan welcomes
the signing, in June, of an action plan for the release
and reintegration of children associated with the
Government forces in Myanmar, as well as the signing,
in July, of an action plan by the Somali Transitional
Federal Government to end the recruitment and use of
children. We also highly commend the efforts of former
Special Representative Radhika Coomaraswamy in
conducting a number of field trips to hold dialogues
with various parties and bring about tangible results.

Japan was a sponsor of resolution 2068 (2012), and
we welcome its adoption.

