Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretationfrom French):
I would like at the outset to extend to you. Mr. President.
the congratulations of the Kingdom of Morocco on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. 1 also
take this opportunity to extend to your predecessor my
country's compliments for the wise manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council last month.

I would also like to offer you my sincere
congratulations for having dealt expeditiously with the
problem that has brought us together today: the decision of
the Israeli Govemment to establish new settlements south-
east of the Holy City of Al-Quds, the third Holy Place of
the Muslim religion and the cradle of the three revealed
religions.

We have once again been unpleasantly surprised by
the decision of the Israeli Government to establish a new
settlement on the Jabal Abu Ghneim hill. also known as
Har Homa, We can readily imagine the negative effects that
such a decision might have on a peace process that is
already fragile but which we had dared think to be well
under way.

There is no doubt that this decision is a flagrant
violation of international law and of the various Security
Council resolutions on Al-Quds, which prohibit any
decision tending to alter its legal status. demographic
composition and cultural nature.

From the standpoint of international law. everyone is
aware that the status of East Jerusalem is exactly the same
as that of the West Bank. This is an occupied territory to
which applies the Fourth Geneva Convention. which
prohibits the occupying Power. in this case israel, from
making permanent changes in the territory it occupies or
from settling any part of its population on it.

Any intention of using this action to launch a new
annexation campaign should be denounced by the entire
international community, because it is a violation not only
of a State's agreements, but also of its word, It represents
a deliberate attempt time and time again to call into
question the peace process and the protocols signed in

td
JIQJUI lllCClulE \1\UD\JLLLIJLLU11 4.1

6 March 1997

 

Washington in full view of the entire international
community.

As members know, the Arab Group at the United
Nations, of which we are a part, unanimously condemned
this decision and detailed in its letter its concerns and
position in this regard. As they also know, the view of the
Arab countries is dictated by legal and political reasons
alike. We believe that the recent Israeli decision must be
seen as a new defiance of the international community,
since it threatens the fragile trust that we took so many
years to build.

The Arab Inter-Parliamentary Union, which is
headed by Morocco, also took the opportunity last
Thursday to ask the Council to intervene immediately to
prohibit Israel from implementing its settlement plan.

Furthermore, at a meeting held on 3 March, the
Islamic Group of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference expressed its deep concern about the unlawful
measures taken by Israel and called upon the international
community and the Security Council to take urgent steps
to persuade the Israeli Government to rescind its decision
and renounce all settlement activities in all the occupied
Arab territories, particularly East Jerusalem.

Must I remind the lsraeli authorities of the great
effort that was necessary from countries of good will,
such as my own, to stitch together this policy based on
trust? Casablanca, Amman and Cairo were not mere
conferences or simple meetings; they were truly giant
steps that were taken following the signing of the
Washington agreement. What the Israeli authorities seem
to forget is that the capital that has been wasted will,
unfortunately. be the most difficult to regenerate. Indeed,
all those countries that had been hesitant are now telling
us that they were right to hesitate. We told them that the
Washington and Oslo momentum was under way and they
eventually believed us. The international community
hoped to see peace achieved with Syria and Lebanon.
However, for equally inexplicable reasons, this peace has
not yet come about.

The Israeli decision to establish new settlements,
thereby seriously modifying the demographic composition
of that area, came on the heels of the tunnel incident but
before the recent Israeli decision to close four Palestinian
offices in Jerusalem. It took endless cajoling and
interventions for Israel finally to agree to sign the Hebron
agreements. Arabs now remember this, too, as proof of
bad faith.
Security Council 3745tl1 meeting (Resumption Z)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

My country deplores this blind attitude, just as it
profoundly regrets the fact that the Israeli authorities are
taking no account of either the impact of their own
unfortunate actions nor of the harmful consequences these
will have on the hopes we had so cherished.

The peace process was launched in a climate of
confidence. However, we will now need several miracles,
not just one, in order to convince all the parties concerned
to embark once again on the path of genuine peace, as this
peace is dailybeing called into question. We fear not only
confrontations between Palestinians and Israelis, but also
the doubts now being sown in the minds of Arabs with
regard to the peace process for which all of us here have
fought.

Israel, which once made communication its basic
weapon, should today realize that international opinion is
growing familiar with this new face of Israel, which
through its reckless acts is now bringing to nought all the
efforts made to achieve what was hailed as the event of the '
century.

The international community today cautions Israel and
calls on it to show wisdom and respect for the
commitments it has undertaken.

The Kingdom of Morocco, host country of the A1-
Quds Committee, which is chaired by His Majesty King
Hassan II, remains convinced that the Security Council,
charged with the maintenance of international peace and
security and the rule of law, is duty-bound to impose its
will by compelling Israel to rescind its decision.

Let me quote His Majesty King Hassan II, who on the
national holiday marking the anniversary of his coronation,
on 3 March, said that

"Peace cannot be built where feelings of frustration,
hatred and fear remain".

Let us - let the Security Council - ensure that the
decisions that the Council adopts remind Israel that no one
can defy the international community, and that no one can
enter into commitments one day and go back on them the
next. Let us give our peoples the genuine peace for which
so many generations have hoped. We must not play with
fire: let us not foment hatred and fear among ourselves, for
these are our worst enemies.

