Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Canada should be
commended for introducing this issue on the agenda of
the Security Council and, in particular, for its
contribution to the work on this issue during its
presidency of the Security Council in April 2000. We
would like to commend you, Mr. President, for
organizing this follow-up meeting one year later. We
would also like to thank Ms. Frechette and Mrs.
Robinson for their valuable contributions this morning.

As usual, the Secretary-General has produced a
good report; we hope that it will be read widely. It is a
thoughtful analysis of the political and legal context in
which efforts to develop a culture of protection should
be made. We would like to highlight for special
attention the emphasis placed by the Secretary-General
on the fact that primary responsibility for the
protection of civilians rests with Governments, and
that, where Governments do not have the resources and
capacity to shoulder that responsibility unaided, it is
incumbent on them to invoke the support of the
international system.

We also recommend that positive consideration
be given to the Secretary-General's practical and
action-oriented recommendations, in particular those
that are targeted at enhancing the capacity of national
Governments and the international community to
prosecute violations of international humanitarian law;
improving engagement by the Security Council and
others with a View to obtaining access to vulnerable
populations for humanitarian operations; and
developing clear criteria and procedures for the
identification and separation of armed elements in
situations of massive population displacement.

Even if Member States do not have the time to
read the full report (S/2001/33l), we hope that they
will at least read paragraph 67, which describes the
bottom line. It states,

"Some 18 months have passed since I submitted
my first report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I regret to note that only a few of
its 40 recommendations are so far being
implemented".

Clearly, the Council will not get a good report card for
its work in this area.

You have asked us to be brief and specific,
Mr. President. Since we fully support your efforts to
make our Council meetings more interactive and
constructive, we will be brief and make three points,
which hopefully will be quick and punchy.

First, the Council will not be judged on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict by the words it
produces - many words have already been produced.
It will be judged by its deeds. In some areas we have
done reasonably well: Kosovo and East Timor. In some
areas, we have done badly: Rwanda, Srebrenica and the
Middle East. In other areas, the record is mixed: the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone.
The first specific suggestion that we would like to offer
is a simple one. At the end of each year, the Council
should do an objective and impartial audit. In how
many conflicts did the Council intervene effectively to
save civilians? In how many did it not? The purpose of
such an objective audit would be simple: it would
remove some of the growing cynicism - cynicism
which, I am afraid, is very real - about the value of
such open debates on the protection of civilians when
the Council fails to respond to specific situations which
cry out for effective responses.

Secondly, having just returned from a truly
illuminating visit to West Africa - a region which, I
note, is referred to several times in the Secretary-
General's current report, I have become more acutely
aware of the practical difficulties of protecting civilians
in many contemporary conflict situations. The
Secretary-General's report reminded us that
international instruments require not only
Governments, but also armed groups, to behave
responsibly in conflict situations and to take measures
to ensure the basic needs and protection of civilian
populations.

Singapore therefore supports efforts by the
Secretariat and by other organizations to disseminate
information on international humanitarian and human
rights law to armed groups, as described in
recommendation 10 of the report. But we suspect that
there will be great difficulties in bringing such a
message to groups that may understand little of the
language of logic and reason. When I visited the West
African region I was told several times that the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) was led by a group
of illiterate, barely educated and often barely sober
young men who have had little contact with the
civilized world. We need to understand the world as
they see it. No rational human being would amputate
the hands of innocent civilians, but that is what the
RUF did with wild abandon. Why? What drove them to
it? Until we understand how their minds work we will
not be in a position to deal with them.

Therefore, our second specific recommendation is
that we develop a different sub-set of ideas and
principles to deal with such groups. Our fear is that, as
inter-State conflicts are increasingly replaced by intra-
State conflicts, there will be more and not fewer groups
like the RUF. In that regard, I am glad that the
Secretary-General will be asking the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee to develop a manual of best
practices for engagement with armed groups, as he
notes in paragraph 50 of his report. We look forward to
seeing the outcome of such efforts, and we are pleased
that the representative of Ukraine also referred to the
importance of this issue.

Thirdly, protection of civilians cannot be done
with words only. As the then-Foreign Minister of
Canada, Lloyd Axworthy, told the Council last year,

"the protection of civilians requires strengthening
our disposition to intervene with force if
necessary." (S/PV4127, p. 24)

Fortunately, the international community has
demonstrated a willingness to intervene with force, for
example in Kosovo and in East Timor. The latter was
mandated by the Security Council, the former was not.
Clearly, we need to work out clear and definite criteria
for such intervention. That will not be easy, as the
debate on the question of humanitarian intervention has
shown. But the Council cannot avoid dealing with this
issue if it is to protect civilians effectively. That is our
third specific suggestion.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my delegation's
positive reaction to the recommendations in the
Secretary-General's report. We look forward to
working with you, Mr. President, to find the best and
most effective means of putting those
recommendations into effect.

