Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Madam, on your presidency of the
Security Council and on your delegation's initiative of
considering the role of civil society in post-conflict
peace-building.

The nature of conflicts has changed significantly
in the past decade. They are no longer conflicts
between nation-States, but rather armed conflicts
within States. These conflicts are true struggles of
national self-depredation in which there is often no
difference between civil war and crime. Since the
Berlin Wall fell, more than 33 civil conflicts have
broken out or resumed, leaving behind nearly 5 million
deaths and 17 million refugees. Today, those domestic
armed conflicts form a large part of the Council's
agenda and result in the deployment of complex
peacekeeping operations.

For Peru, the role of civil society - organized
non-governmental social actors, such as non-
governmental organizations, labour unions, business
associations and academic, student and religious
groups - is essential to prevent armed domestic
conflicts and to contribute to peacemaking and national
reconstruction.

As we are considering only post-conflict
situations at this meeting, I wish to refer to two central
aspects in which civil society contributes to peace-
building. First, I shall discuss its contribution to the
reconciliation process; secondly, I shall mention its
contribution to the nation-building process.

National reconciliation in post-conflict situations
is a very complex national process that depends on the
social and political conditions in each nation and on the
conflict's nature and intensity. However, three essential
prerequisites have been identified for national
reconciliation: truth, reparation and justice.

In the search for truth and reparation in particular,
civil society has an important role. Owing to the need
for truth as an element of reconciliation, so-called truth
commissions have been established in many post-
conflict situations. The merit of such commissions is,
or should be, to bring to light what has been hidden
during a period of violence and what has not been
widely perceived or acknowledged in a nation's daily
political discourse following a conflict. That
clarification is indispensable to provide collective
moral support to the national social reconstruction
process. A second precondition for the reconciliation
process to be consistent is the compensation of
innocent victims and the rehabilitation of areas affected
by conflict. Included in that also are former
combatants, who should benefit from programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration into
policy and society. Experience until now has indicated
that compensation, which is one of the most important
points, is an area where resources are most needed, but
for which they are the scarcest. There is a scarcity of
resources at the national level as well as at the
international level.

Local and global non-governmental organizations
have an active role to play in assisting the mobilization
of these resources, to use them for victims'
compensation, the reconstruction of affected areas and
the reintegration of former combatants, thereby
transcending the important efforts of humanitarian
assistance alone that characterize their action during
conflict. Non-governmental organizations and civil
society can help direct the best use of international
assistance and resources of the United Nations
Development Programme, as they are part of the
national society. They can also advocate for flexibility
in the policies of the International Monetary Fund and
the World Bank, particularly where highly indebted
poor countries are concerned.

With regard to justice, the third precondition for
reconciliation, it is not necessary to recall the
importance for civil society particularly not to leave
unpunished violations of human rights, ethnic
cleansing and genocide.

Civil society is also a factor in building a bridge
between the reconciliation process, to which I referred
earlier, and the future reconstruction of a collapsed
State, which has been referred to as nation-building
activity. In other words, civil society is relevant to
creating conditions of governance and the building of
democracy, achieving situations that promote dialogue
and consensus in these post-violent societies. As a
whole, national non-governmental organizations, by
virtue of being part of the same society that has been
traumatized by violence, are the most appropriate ones
to cooperate with complex United Nations
peacekeeping operations in restoring the social and
political fabric of a collapsed State.

National reconstruction and post-conflict peace-
building is therefore a concerted and complex effort
that requires the efforts of the United Nations, the
Security Council, regional organizations and the
flexibility of international financial institutions, but,
above all, the commitment of civil society and local
non-governmental organizations. We believe efforts
must be made to ensure that the Security Council is not
only familiar with peacekeeping operations through
reports made by United Nations officials themselves or
by Member States, but also with how civil society and
national non-governmental organizations think and
respond to the tasks of complex peacekeeping
operations being carried out by the United Nations in
their countries.

The Security Council cannot assume its
peacekeeping responsibility of ending conflict and
establishing the foundation for national reconstruction
of collapsed States without having contacts with civil
society. Those contacts should be with prestigious,
global non-governmental organizations such as Doctors
Without Borders, CARE International, Amnesty
International or the International Centre for
Transitional Justice. However, above all, contacts must
be established with national civil society, with the non-
governmental organizations that are part of the society
that have experienced conflict. To that end, the
respective special representatives of the Secretary-
General or the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme could be made responsible
for systematically reporting and communicating the
opinion of local civil society, of local non-
governmental organizations, on peace processes under
way. For example, in the case of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where important members of
Congolese civil society appear not to have a favourable
opinion of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it would be
interesting to know the opinion of those elements of
Congolese society.

The relationship between the Council and civil
society should be basically practical, in keeping with
the Arria formula. To that end, extending that practice
to include civil society and local non-governmental
organizations of societies in conflict should serve to
bring the actions of peacekeeping missions more in line
with national realities. We therefore welcome the
current visit by a Security Council delegation to West
Africa, where members of the delegation will certainly
have the opportunity to meet with the local civil
society of the countries they are visiting.

In conclusion, allow me to recommend that the
Security Council be aware, through reports of special
representatives of the Secretary-General or in the
manner the Council considers most appropriate, of the
viewpoint regarding and the reaction of local civil
society to current peacekeeping operations, and
particularly that such a practice be made systematic in
order to assess the renewal of peacekeeping operation
missions, particularly complex ones. Without knowing
what civil society thinks, we cannot be realistic about
the mandates of such missions and, lacking this
knowledge, we cannot carry out national reconstruction
and consolidate peace.

