Ms. Vogt: It is an honour for me to present the
sixth report of the Secretary-General (8/2011/739) on
the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). The report before the Council builds on the
Secretary-General's previous report (8/2011/311) of
16 May 2011, and provides an update on political,
security, socio-economic, humanitarian and human
rights developments in the Central African Republic. It
also describes the salient activities of BINUCA in
support of the Government's peace consolidation
efforts, in accordance with the mandate entrusted to it
by the Security Council.

In the first half of the year, BINUCA focused on
elections, as well as on the aftermath of a contested
electoral process that began on 23 January with the
presidential and legislative elections. In my last
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6575), I highlighted
four priority areas on which BINUCA will accord
particular focus in the following months. These include
working with the Government and the political class to
manage the tension and dissension that followed the
January elections; seeking ways of creating a
rapprochement between the Government and the
opposition; and getting all parties around the table to
discuss the future political dispensation and national
reconciliation.

I also highlighted the importance of the
commencement of the disarmament and demobilization
process after several months of blockage, starting in
the north-east, as well as the signature of ceasefire
agreements between the Government and the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix
(CPJP), as well as between the Chadian Government
and the Front populaire pour le redressement (FPR),
led by the Chadian dissident Baba Ladde. At that time,
I signaled that the commencement of the disarmament
process and the conclusion of these peace agreements
constituted major steps towards the stabilization of the
security environment in the Central African Republic.
11-63696

The difficult social, humanitarian and human

rights context in which the people of the Central

African Republic exist was also highlighted, and I

undertook to pay particular attention to issues relating

to the protection of civilians, especially women and
children.

The last briefing also highlighted the complex
regional security environment in which the Central
African Republic is situated and the potential
destabilizing impact on the Central African Republic of
development in the region, and how a degeneration of
security in the Central African Republic would equally
impact on the region. I put a particular accent on the
activities of foreign elements, such as the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and the FPR, operating in that
country.

The report before the Council provides an
analysis of developments on these various fronts and
the efforts undertaken by BINUCA and the rest of the
United Nations family to address these challenges.

On the political front, I am pleased to report that,
in spite of the divisions within the political, the
situation today has greatly improved. Following
extensive consultations that I had with the
Government, the political parties, representatives of
civil society and other partners, we identified the
importance of discussion of the reform of the electoral
code and the establishment of a permanent electoral
body as possible entry points to bring all stakeholders
around the table and to gradually help build confidence
that could lead to broader discussion of other difficult
issues.

The commencement of the first workshop of the
consultation committee on the revision of the electoral
code, held in Bangui from 28 to 30 November -
which brought together the Government, the political
parties, civil society, religious leaders, and
representatives of the international community as
observers - signified a major political breakthrough
that could lead to the creation of a framework for
continuing discussion between the Government and the
political class. The Government undertook to adopt a
consensual approach to electoral reforms.

Following a study tour of a number of countries,
undertaken by the Minister for Territorial
Administration and Decentralization to learn from their
experiences in managing electoral processes, the
Ministry presented a proposal of a framework of a
11-63696

permanent body to manage elections and referendums.
The proposal calls for the establishment of an
independent body - the national agency for
elections - that would supervise and control electoral
activities to be carried out by the Ministry. A
consultative committee composed of political and civil
society actors would monitor the electoral process as
an observer. The Constitutional Court would retain its
adjudication role in all electoral disputes. The High
Council for Communication would continue to monitor
candidates' access to national and private media.

During the discussion that took place at the first
consultation, representatives of the political parties and
of civil society expressed a preference for the
establishment of an authority for elections that would
be independent of the Ministry and would administer
the entire electoral process.

The Government's agreement to engage in this
consultation was an unexpected and major
breakthrough. The Government and opposition parties
have re-established contacts that had been halted since
late 2010. A second round of discussion is scheduled
for January 2012 to discuss, among other issues, the
opposition's counter-proposal to the Government's plan
on the electoral management body. It is crucial to the
political stability of the Central African Republic that
this discussion continue and that the parties arrive at
consensus on these matters.

The report suggests that despite its near
unicameral nature, the legislature has exercised an
impressive independence and has taken the
Government to task on major issues.

In my last briefing, I informed the Council of the
determination of President Bozize' and leaders of the
politico-military groups to pursue the nationwide
disarmament process that they began last June. As of
today, 4,800 ex-combatants of the Armee populaire
pour la restauration de la de'mocratie (APRD) have
been disarmed and demobilized. Nevertheless, the
majority of ex-combatants are in their villages awaiting
plans for their reintegration. It is evident that the
disarmament in the north-east has had a positive
impact on the overall security environment in that part
of the country. The movement of people and goods has
been facilitated and, based on an evaluation mission to
the region from 22 to 30 November, security remains
stable, if tense, as the ex-combatants are now in high
expectation of the reinsertion and reintegration
3
exercise. Unfortunately, provision has not been made
to fund the reintegration strategy, and adequate funding
is inadequate to complete disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) in the rest of the country.

We are now at a highly precarious juncture in the
Central African Republic. Failure to find the resources
to conclude disarmament in the north and north-east,
where all the politico-military parties are anxiously
awaiting the disarmament of their forces, may lead to a
major resurgence of violence and further undermine
security in a region where, even in normal
circumstances, movement is highly impacted by
insecurity. At the same time, the temporary gain made
in securing the north-west could be lost.

The Government requires about $3 million to
complete the disarmament process through the country,
and about $19 million for the reintegration exercise.
The completion of the DDR process is strongly linked
to an effective security sector reform (SSR) if the
Government is to regain control of its territory.
Strongly encouraged by BINUCA to define a national
strategy, and by our partners - especially the
indomitable advocate Ambassador Grauls - we have
been pressing the Government to work on the SSR
strategy. Just before I left, we received a request from
the Ministry of Defence for support to undertake that
exercise. The success of the DDR and SSR processes
will depend heavily on the ability of the international
community to provide necessary resources for their
timely completion.

As a next step to the signing of the ceasefire
agreement between the CPJP and the UFDR, following
the outbreak of conflict in the north-east a peace and
reconciliation caravan visited the conflict-affected
cities in the north-east to promote reconciliation and
peaceful coexistence among local communities. During
that important gathering, both CPJP and UFDR leaders,
as well as local communities, pleaded for a speedy
DDR process to enable them to live in peace.

We need to move beyond the peace and
reconciliation caravan to ensure that the results that
have been achieved thus far are not reversed by the
outbreak of violence in the future. The establishment of
processes through which local communities would be
involved in conflict prevention and resolution in the
affected areas is critical. The Government has
expressed its willingness to work in that direction, and
there, again, additional resources will be required.
The signing of action plans for the release and
reintegration of children associated with the APRD and
the CPJP, in October and November, constitutes
another major step forward. We were delighted that the
signing of the latest action plan was witnessed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, who was visiting the
Central African Republic at the time.

Two foreign armed groups continue to pose a
serious threat to the peace process and to overall
security in the Central African Republic. Those are the
Front populaire pour le redressement (FPR), led by the
self-proclaimed Chadian "General" Baba Ladde, and
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), led by Joseph
Kony. Baba Ladde has become a nuisance and a threat
to the Central African Republic and the region.

Rather than leaving the country as expected in
June, he is recruiting and re-arming. During my last
visit to Bambari and Kaga Bandoro, people complained
about his multiple exactions on the population. His
elements have been accused of rape and forced
collection of cattle from herders as protection fees,
including from the Fulani population, whom he claims
to protect. Just a week ago, his elements carried out
attacks just 60 kilometres outside of Bangui and forced
a restriction of international movement along many
axes.

It is important that the Council send an
unequivocal message condemning the FPR's illegal
activities and that it urge Baba Ladde to stop harassing
the population, lay down his arms and return to Chad.
He should be held accountable for the violations
perpetrated against the civilian population in those
regions. The Council may also wish to encourage Chad
and the Central African Republic to collaborate with
other affected countries in the region to find a peaceful
solution to the Baba Ladde issue.

Concerning the LRA, BINUCA has initiated steps
to support national and international efforts aimed at
curbing the impact of the LRA on the security of the
Central African Republic and to work closely with the
African Union. In that regard, a local coordination cell
chaired by BINUCA has been established - with the
participation of the United States of America, France,
the African Union, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Government of the
Central African Republic - to share information on
the ground. The deployment of United States military
advisers in the subregion to strengthen the capacity of
affected countries has also been deeply welcomed in
the Central African Republic.

Since my last briefing to the Council, simmering
tensions and a climate of growing anger have
characterized the social environment in the Central
African Republic from August to October, threatening
social cohesion. However, the Government has since
taken bold measures to negotiate with labour unions
and has so far ensured the regular payment of salaries.

The Government, with contributions from the
National Assembly, community leaders across the
country, including civil society, and international
partners, has finalized its second poverty reduction
strategy paper. It will now be important for the Central
African Republic to follow up with its bilateral and
multilateral partners on the required assistance and
support.

The cooperation between the European Union
(EU) and the Central African Republic deserves to be
highlighted. The EU has now started to implement its
€50 million development hubs programme, whose goal
is to alleviate poverty, restore social and economic
stability and enhance peace. Although not especially
aimed at ex-combatants, they may qualify, along with
community members, for the high-intensity labour
works, as part of their reintegration process. We intend
to ensure that we try to couple that initiative by the
European Union with the reintegration process.

The humanitarian situation remains highly
precarious and is seriously impacted by the security
situation on the ground, which has rendered access
difficult. Reports have it that the HIV/AIDS pandemic
in the Central African Republic is on the increase,
especially in Bangui and in conflict-affected areas.
Women are more affected than men, and boys more
than girls. A report just published by Medecins Sans
Frontieres entitled "A Silent Crisis" concludes that the
Central African Republic faces a chronic medical
emergency, with mortality rates above the level of
medical emergencies in other countries and with life
expectancy that stands at 48 years. At the same time,
the consolidated appeals process remains grossly
underfunded, with the latest figure being 45 per cent.
Apart from the issue of security, the problem on the
humanitarian front, as in many other areas, is both a
structural and developmental one.
11-63696

The report before the Council points to
continuing human rights challenges in the Central
African Republic, including irregular or arbitrary
detention by armed forces and non-State actors,
witchcraft accusations, gender-based violence, et
cetera. BINUCA has focused its activities on
monitoring, technical cooperation and advisory
services in the administration of justice, including the
penitentiary and child protection activities. I intend to
undertake a review of those activities in the next few
months to see how best we can improve our delivery
and effectiveness.

In the area of child protection, the country task
force on monitoring and reporting on grave violations
committed against children affected by the armed
conflict in the Central African Republic was
established on 27 July, in accordance with resolution
1612 (2005). Since its establishment, the task force has
played a major advocacy role with the Government and
armed groups to end and prevent grave violations
committed against children.

In conclusion, I am pleased to report that the
dynamic of peace initiated between the Government
and politico-military groups has become a reality and
offers a real chance for peace in the country. However,
several obstacles risk blocking that process, and could
ultimately undermine those efforts. The Government is
listening and responding to advice from national
stakeholders and the international community.
However, the lack of funding to complete the DDR
process and to initiate the second phase of SSR could
put the Central African Republic on the brink of
disaster. We need to act quickly to prevent a situation
that may lead the country to disintegrate into another
cycle of generalized conflict; that would have serious
repercussions throughout the subregion. Failure to
consolidate security in the Central African Republic
would increase its attractiveness as a safe haven for
regional brigands and rebel groups operating in the
region. That factor explains the Secretary-General's
urgent appeal to the international community to
mobilize the appropriate funds to complete the DDR
process, without which there will be no peace in the
country. The total budget to complete disarmament and
demobilization operations is $2,617,475. The total
budget required for reinsertion and reintegration is
$19,363,328. The success of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process will depend
5
on the will of the international community to support
it.

