Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by welcoming the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nigel
Fisher, and thanking him for his informative briefing
and presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2013/139). At a time when we are focusing on his
work at the helm of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), we also hope to see
the appointment of a new Special Representative who
can continue working with the Haitian Government to
coordinate the ongoing efforts to establish security,
ensure peace, restore justice and respect for human
rights, and achieve sustainable development in this
beloved country. It would be an honour for Latin
America for that responsibility to go to a representative
of the region.

I would also like to emphasize that my delegation
fully subscribes to the statement to be delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti.

I would like to reaffirm Argentina's firm
commitment to Haiti's institutional reconstruction,
democratic stability and development. While Argentina
has a long tradition of support for Haiti's democratic
Governments, 2004 was a turning point. That year,
the social, institutional and infrastructure challenges
posed by the structural poverty from which the country
suffered culminated in the political and institutional
crisis resulting from President Aristide's expulsion.
That led the international community to launch
MINUSTAH - a mission made up entirely, for the
first time, by the countries of our region. Argentina
contributes 573 military personnel and 14 police
officers to the Mission.

Similarly, since the first South-South cooperation

activities began at the regional level, aimed at stabilizing
Haiti within the framework of MINUSTAH, the
countries of the region have put together wide-ranging
initiatives in the area of technical cooperation in various
fields of activity. Between 2005 and 2012, Argentina,
along with other countries of the region and the regional
organization the Union of South American Nations, was
involved in more than 172 projects promoting the social
dimensions of cooperation. The majority of these were
aimed at improving food security and access to basic
rights in the areas of education, health care, water and
sanitation, the political and social arena, housing, and
the rights of children, young people and the disabled.

Economic cooperation has also been significant,
with projects supporting technology and production,
mainly in the agricultural sector, and in strengthening
the socioeconomic infrastructure. In the wake of the
devastation caused by the 2010 earthquake, South-
South cooperation in the region expanded, not only
in terms of increased funding for Haiti but also in
addressing the coordination challenges posed by the
Latin American presence there. Argentina agrees
with the Secretary-General when he says in his report
that MINUSTAH continues to be a decisive factor in
establishing a secure and stable environment in Haiti
that is conducive to a definitive momentum towards
development. For that reason, we support the Mission's
continuing presence on the basis of its mandate from
the Security Council, as long as that presence is still
desired by the Government of Haiti.

I would like to address some major issues.
First, we wish to highlight the efforts of Haitian
society and Government in tackling the effects of
the 2010 earthquake. That unprecedented disaster
added new and unique problems to the country's
existing challenges. The earthquake and its human,
economic and environmental consequences affected
more than 3.5 million people - one third of the
population - of whom 222,570 died, 350,000 were
injured and 2.3 million were left homeless, including
more than 300,000 children and young people, leaving
thousands in camps for the internally displaced and
massive destruction of administrative, education and
health facilities. Since then, Haiti has had to deal with
the destructive effects of Hurricane Sandy and Tropical
Storm Isaac, which have caused considerable damage
to the country, especially in the farming sector, and
continue to pose enormous challenges.

Nonetheless, despite these adversities, affirmed by
the United Nations Development Programme in its most
recent report, Haiti continues to make progress. Some
examples of this can be seen in construction; some
80 per cent of the 10 million cubic metres of rubble has
been cleared from houses and 20 per cent of it recycled.

In two years, 1 million people have returned to their
homes and 400,000 jobs have been created, 40 per cent
of them for women. Many students and community
leaders have been trained in natural disaster mitigation
and reduction activities. Environmental protection
efforts have been channeled through programmes,
particularly in vulnerable regions, an area in which
women continue to play a key role in that they are
directly involved in reforestation projects.

However, as the former Head of MINUSTAH,
Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, said in his
briefings, democracy and good governance continue
to be serious issues in Haiti. The current political
situation in Haiti is in the process of being stabilized;
while still fragile, it is promising, but it must be
strengthened. Political capacity must be strengthened,
State institutions rebuilt, socioeconomic development
promoted and investment attracted. In that context,
holding credible, fair and transparent elections this
year, in 2013, is vital to rebuilding State capacity and
restoring the rule of law, at the local level as well as
nationally.

There is no doubt that progress has been made in
standards for protecting the most vulnerable groups,
for example through a law to integrate people with
disabilities, which has been enacted in Parliament and
approved by the President. Draft legislation agreed
to by all the political parties aimed at eliminating
violence against women is pending before the
Government, which has also ratified the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. An
inter-ministerial committee on human rights has been
created and has presented a report to the Committee on
the Rights of the Child in Geneva.

However, the Haitian National Police, while
gradually continuing to consolidate, does not yet
have the capacity to assume full responsibility for
providing and ensuring internal security throughout
the country. In that context, MINUSTAH, its military
and police personnel play a vital role in maintaining
security and stability in the country. The United
Nations, working with the international community in
Haiti, must continue to provide the financial, technical
and logistical capacity needed to allow Haiti to make
progress towards definitive stabilization. As the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
reported, beyond the progress made in recent years,
Haiti continues to grapple with a critical number
of needs and with the importance of building State
capacity, without which the people's needs cannot be
met. To cite only one figure, a seriously important issue
is the deterioration in food security, affecting at least
2.1 million people, who will be at genuinely severe
nutritional risk if steps are not taken to address the
problem in time.

We understand that the time has come to
consolidate progress in the area of resettlement. To that
end, we believe that the international community must
renew its efforts to support the Haitian Government
in ensuring decent living conditions for those who are
still living in camps and in promoting programmes of
return. According to the Secretary-General's report,
however, the 2012 consolidated appeal finished the year
at 46 per cent of its funding level, with the number of
international non-governmental organizations present
in Haiti declining by 57 per cent since 2010. Those
figures are truly in contradiction with our regional and
international responsibility to promote social, economic
and institutional development in Haiti.

In recent days, we have heard the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights welcome the
initiative in Port-au-Prince to try the ex-dictator of
Haiti, Jean-Claude Duvalier. Duvalier, who was also
known as "Baby Doc", has been indicted for crimes
against humanity, including the murder or exile of more
than 30,000 people during his reign. Furthermore, in his
report to the Human Rights Council, the Independent
Expert Mr. Michel Forst identified, among the factors
threatening the establishment of effective democracy in
Haiti, political or partisan considerations in appointing
magistrates, the weakness of the judiciary and the reign
of impunity. In that respect, he reported that prison
conditions have not improved and that the treatment
of prisoners continues to be inhumane, degrading and
cruel. The Expert noted that incidents ofpolice brutality
and harassment occur frequently, and he expressed
his belief that the impunity of human rights violators
indicated a return of fear among the population and that
the authorities needed to act decisively to resolve this
problem.

Moreover, we are concerned that the financing
available for the development of the Haitian National
Police remains insufficient. The Police is a key
institution for progress in the area of stabilization, as it
is responsible for maintaining security. Similarly, it is
important to strengthen Haitian institutions with a view
to improving the process of formulating policies and
relations between the State and citizens, which have
been undermined in recent months.

With regard to the future and the social and political
situation in Haiti, we understand the complexity and the
difficulty of the issues at hand. We are concerned about
the reduction in financing available for humanitarian
assistance, because it puts all that has been achieved
at risk. However, we also have encouraging news. One
million displaced persons were able to leave the camps
between 2010 and early 2013, which reflects a general
reduction of 77 per cent. According to the report,
that reduction can be attributed largely to the return
programmes undertaken by the Government with the
support of the United Nations. However, it is alarming
to note that 84 per cent of the population remaining
in the camps are people who were displaced by the
earthquake, a great number of whom remain dependent
on assistance for basic survival.

We underscore the commitment that should
be undertaken by all Haitian political and social
actors to a frank dialogue to lay the foundations
for an agreement that will allow the transition from
transitional to permanent electoral council to be
completed and elections to be held this year. In parallel
to the agreement on the appointment of members to
the legislative and judiciary branches, it is important
to designate representatives of the executive branch
as soon as possible. The commitment of Haitians to
their own legislative mandates can only encourage
the international community to continue supporting
the strengthening of the country. In that regard, we
welcome the Haitian Government's commitment to
contributing almost half of its electoral budget and
the decision of the United Nations to provide support
for the upcoming elections and to help the Haitian
authorities over the next three years to progressively
assume full responsibility for managing the electoral
process in 2016.

We believe that progress in the area of stabilization
should be accompanied by growth and development in
the country based on priorities set by the Government
and people of Haiti. With regard to the Mission's
activities, we welcome the presentation of the first
draft of MINUSTAH's consolidation plan and the fact
that the plan enjoys the support of the Government of
Haiti. We understand that the plan must be developed
within the framework of the Mission's mandate on
the basis of the evolution of conditions on the ground.
In that connection, we believe that actions related to
governance should contribute to consensus-building
without overstepping the functions of Haitian
institutions. We hope that the plan will continue to be
developed in close coordination with the Government
and people of Haiti, pursuant to their own priorities.

I conclude by reaffirming Argentina's unshakeable
commitment to the people of Haiti, democracy, human
rights and the country's development. That commitment
will continue to be manifest within the Security Council,
to which Argentina has belonged as a non-permanent
member since January 2013. We have been supported
by the Group of Latin American and Caribbean States
in promoting the interests of our region. In that context,
promoting human rights, democracy and development
in Haiti are all priorities.

I would like to honour the work of the peacekeepers
in Haiti, and especially the Argentine peacekeepers,
whose conduct has been impeccable. We are proud
that our country has not received a single complaint of
misconduct or the commission of crimes.

