Allow me to thank our briefers - Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga - for their interventions. Despite the fragility of the security situation in Abyei, peacekeeping efforts contributed to making the Area more stable. We commend the activities of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) in maintaining good relations with local communities. The measures taken by the Blue Helmets to prevent intercommunal conflicts and ensure cooperation on law enforcement and economic activities in the area of the Amiet common market are also commendable. The 19 February meeting of the Joint Political and Security Mechanism and the 16 March traditional leaders conference helped promote much-needed dialogue among all the parties. The Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM) is an integral element of the system for preventing incidents between the parties. UNISFA's support for the Mechanism significantly contributes to stabilizing Abyei. We would like to highlight the professionalism and courage demonstrated by the Ethiopian peacekeepers, who serve in one of the most difficult and logistically complex peacekeeping operations in the world. The joint efforts of all parties are required in order to successfully promote a long-lasting settlement between the Sudan and South Sudan. There is an international legal basis for that - well-known resolutions of the Security Council and the African Union, as well as a package of bilateral agreements concluded between the two countries in September 2012 in Addis Ababa. In that regard, we expect the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to continue its valuable work with the Sudanese and South Sudanese parties. We note steady normalization in relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. The participation of Khartoum, together with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan made a significant contribution to the settlement process in that country. We also highlight President Salva Kiir Mayardit's mediation efforts to promote negotiations between the Sudanese authorities and armed groups. The accumulated positive momentum in bilateral relations should be used to resolve the Abyei issue. We understand that in current conditions there are objective factors that prevent Khartoum and Juba from accelerating the settlement of the final status of Abyei. In such circumstances, maintaining the presence of UNISFA is still very important. In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's proposal to extend UNISFA's mandate, including its support for the JBVMM, for six months.
