Mr. Muita (Kenya): I have the honour to
participate in today's debate. At the outset, let me
express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important gathering. I also wish to
thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his comprehensive briefing this
morning.

The Security Council's continued consideration
of this agenda item is an indication of its commitment
to protect civilians in conflict situations. It is civilians
who are always severely and negatively impacted by
war and other conflicts. That has become a constant
problem - for instance, in the Horn of Africa and the
Great Lakes region, where hundreds of thousands of
civilians have been uprooted from their normal daily
lives by the effects of conflict. I believe that we must
continue to make concrete and specific efforts to
ensure the dignity of those distressed by war. That need
is echoed in the words of former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan, who said:

"As human beings we cannot be neutral, or at
least have no right to be, when other human
beings are suffering. Each of us . . . must do what
he or she can to help those in need, even though it
would be much safer and comfortable to do
nothing".

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is a
humanitarian as well as a human rights issue and is in
conformity with international humanitarian law. There
have been some achievements in that area during the
past decade. Those include increased engagement by
the Council through the adoption of resolutions,
especially resolutions 1738 (2006) and 1674 (2006),
combating impunity at the national and international
levels and prioritizing the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping mandates. However, there still remain
considerable challenges ahead. I wish to highlight just
two of them, first humanitarian access.

Humanitarian access during conflict is life-
saving, and thus the importance of providing a secure
environment for humanitarian workers to access
civilians in need, including displaced persons. We
support current efforts to enhance the capacity of
peacekeeping missions to provide protection to
humanitarian providers, but there are still significant
challenges at the operational level, where peacekeepers
lack capacity to reach the entirety of a threatened
population. There is therefore an urgent need to
address and streamline that aspect to avert large-scale
population displacements and widespread human rights
violations in future conflicts.

Secondly, gender-based violence has been used as
a calculated tactic of war, apparently to dehumanize
and instil fear in civilian populations. The adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), which
concern civilians in conflict zones, was a step in the
right direction, but much is required to enhance their
implementation. We need to move from words to deeds
to ensure the protection of the sexually vulnerable in
armed conflict, as those acts destroy individuals,
families and communities.

As the Council may recall, early last year was a
particularly difficult period for my country, with the
violence following the December 2007 election.
Civilians were the primary target of attack. Many were
displaced from their homes and denied access to life-
saving nourishment, medicine and shelter. As the State
has the primary responsibility for the protection of
civilians in conflict, the Government of Kenya, with
strong support from international and regional partners,
stepped in to avert a further worsening of the crisis and
provided protection to its civilians. The displaced were
provided with accommodation in camps for the
internally displaced in the affected areas. Government
security forces were used to open up supply routes and
highways to enable the continued flow of humanitarian
support to affected areas. That ensured that civilians in
conflict areas were afforded basic human dignity
throughout the crisis.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms my
country's commitment to the protection of civilians in
situations of armed conflict. Together, we need to
address the root causes of conflicts in order to reduce
their occurrence.

