The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I would
like, first of all, to thank the Minister Foreign Affairs of
France, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, for the organization of
this debate of Vital importance concerning the question
of children and armed conflict. The report (8/2017/821)
before the Security Council today indicates that in
2016 children continued to be affected by decisions
and actions of political and military leaders in
different ways.

(spoke in English)

Children around the world are suffering enormously
and unacceptably by conflict. This is a source of global
shame. The period covered by my report revealed an
alarming level of violations. We see armed groups
forcing girls and boys to act as suicide bombers. We
see children stigmatized for having been recruited and
used by armed groups. We see children held criminally
responsible for acts they were forced to commit. And
we see parties to conflict often obstructing lifesaving
aid for children. Over the period covered by the report,
we witnessed the most child casualties ever recorded
by the United Nations in Afghanistan; a doubling of
verified cases of recruitment and use of children in
Syria and Somalia; and widespread sexual violence
against children in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan and elsewhere. Tens of
millions of children across the globe were also uprooted
from their homes by fighting - their families often
split apart, their childhoods disrupted, their futures put
at risk.

Despite that bleak picture, some progress has
been made. Changes to the reporting process this year
allowed for deeper engagement with parties to conflict
to encourage the implementation of measures to better
protect children. Many entities are now undertaking
such measures, as my report outlines. I have my asked
my Special Representative to work closely with those
parties to improve their efforts to spare children from
the horrors of war. Measures to better protect children
were put in place by five Government security forces
and four armed groups during 2016. They ranged from
specific steps such as the release of children held in
prison in Somalia, to substantive measures affecting
complex operations such as those undertaken by the
Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in the Yemen, led by
Saudi Arabia.

While there is progress, the scale and intensity
of some of today's crises require us to redouble our
efforts and take innovative approaches. The cross-
border elements of conflict are increasing year by year.
To address that we need to strengthen our engagement
with regional and subregional actors. We should also
encourage additional legal and political commitments
to protect children, as well as other measures that
my Special Representative is developing. I appeal
to Member States to provide resources to support
those initiatives.

In 2016 thousands of children were released
from armed groups and armed forces, yet only half
were successfully reintegrated into their families
and communities, most notably by UNICEF and its
partners. We must do more to provide funding and
capacity for programmes that offer education, job
training, counselling and family reunification. The
legal framework to protect children in armed conflict
is in place. I call on all parties to conflict to respect the
framework in all conflict situations. We also must pursue
accountability for abhorrent crimes and violations of
human rights and humanitarian law. If we leave the
next generation traumatized, seething with grievances,
we betray those we serve and ourselves. I call on all
parties to conflict to work with the United Nations,
both on the ground and in New York, to ensure that we
protect the most vulnerable of members' populations
and the most precious resource of their countries, their
children. And I urge the Security Council to strongly
support this work as we strive together to build long-
term peace, stability and development.

