Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I join
other speakers in conveying our condolences to the
Government of France and the families of the soldiers
who died yesterday in Mali, in the framework of the
combat that we all are waging against the Islamic State.

We also wish to thank the Head of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) for his briefing, and we
commend the valuable and strong testimony provided
to us by Mr. Kachi.

Peru acknowledges the crucial work done by
the Investigative Team, which makes it possible to
not only ensure the necessary accountability for the
heinous terrorist acts committed by Da'esh but also to
contribute to national reconciliation. We reaffirm our
support for the vital role that it plays and welcome the
fact that it is now fully operational, which has enabled
it to add capacity in key areas such as investigation,
forensic analysis, the excavation of graves, including
the identification of missing persons, and witness
protection. Particularly important also are the
establishment of special units dealing with gender-
based violence and child abuse.

We also acknowledge the positive synergies in
the cooperation and complementarity between the
Investigative Team and the Government of Iraq, which
we commend for its important contributions to these
efforts. Also particularly significant are the efforts
undertaken to provide technical and capacity-building
support in various priority areas, including investigative
activities and the analysis and preservation of evidence.
This has also contributed to the elaboration of the
legislation necessary for the prosecution of such crimes
and the use of evidentiary and informational material,
which can be made available to any States that require it.

We also stress the support that the Investigative
Team has been receiving from other States in the region
and beyond as well as from international, academic and
non-governmental organizations. We stress the special
assistance and cooperation provided by the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the need to
ensure that the Investigative team has the resources it
requires to discharge its mandate.

We would conclude by saying that while progress
has been made in the fight against the Islamic State,
we cannot play down the threat that it continues to
pose in new areas. It is clear that the success of the
work of the Investigative Team, while contributing to
the fight against impunity and ensuring the rule of law
with respect to atrocity crimes, has the potential to
contribute to deterrence with respect to fresh crimes.

