Mr. Guan Jian (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, allow me, like the speaker before me, to
express my condolences over the tragedy of United
Nations and other personnel killed in the crash in
Sierra Leone.

We have listened with great interest to the
briefings of Presidents Meron and Mose and
Prosecutors Del Ponte and Jallow on the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We thank them for the
work of the Tribunals. We appreciate the positive
measures adopted by the Tribunals to implement the
completion strategy. We believe that they are rightly
focused on the prosecution and trial of the senior
accused. Furthermore, the measures taken by the
Tribunals to encourage suspects to turn themselves in
and to plead guilty are also effective means of
accelerating the trial process.

We believe that the two priorities in the work of
the Tribunals are to transfer cases to the domestic
courts of the countries concerned as soon as possible
and to ensure the continuity of the trial process. We
note the fact that the War Crimes Chamber of Bosnia
and Herzegovina is expected to be operational in 2005.
We hope that the countries of the former Yugoslavia
and those under the jurisdiction of the Rwandan
Tribunal will be able to assume responsibility for the
trials of the relevant cases. The two Tribunals and
interested countries should provide those that have
agreed to take those cases with the legal, technical,
financial and personnel support so as to enhance their
legal capacities and allow them to attain the standards
of a fair trial as soon as possible. After the two
Tribunals have confirmed that appropriate conditions
exist, the cases of intermediate- and lower-rank
accused should be handed over to the domestic courts
of those countries for trial.

We believe that the current situation shows that
the smooth implementation of the completion strategy
requires cooperation between the countries of the
regions involved. The Security Council, the countries
concerned and the two Tribunals can also play a role in
exploring how to establish domestic courts and to
ensure the continuity of the Tribunals' work. We
believe that certain technical issues must be addressed,
but we maintain that appropriate measures should be
taken to permit experienced judges to concentrate on
completing the trials. We are open to any proposal that
will contribute to the continuity of the work of the two
Tribunals.

