Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
President Touadera for briefing us this afternoon here
in the Security Council and for his tireless efforts to
advance peace and development in the Central African
Republic. We know the challenges he faces are many,
but we know also that he has already consolidated gains.
We stand ready to work with him to rebuild the Central
African Republic. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous and Ambassador Hilale for their
briefings. We welcome the many commitments made
by the Central African Republic's friends and partners
at the November donors conference. Together, we must
sustain our focus and deliver on those commitments
and pledges.

President Touadera's Government is the lynchpin
and the guide. We look forward to his leadership and
his vision as he works to extend State authority, build
institutions, fight impunity, promote reconciliation and
disarm armed groups, with support from his friends and
partners. The United States has committed to helping
him rebuild and professionalize the armed forces,
police and gendarmerie, consistent with his national
security policy and with the five-year Recovery
and Peacebuilding Plan. We believe that a genuine
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation process can be accomplished and sustained
only alongside genuine security sector reform.

With reference to the demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation process, we agree that the Government
of the Central African Republic must be able to exercise
authority over its entire territory. Armed actors must
understand that their future lies not in being militants
on the margins of society but in being productive
contributing citizens of the Central African Republic.
Their future, security and livelihoods are intertwined
with the stabilization and long-term recovery of the
Central African Republic.

This process is not easy. It does not happen quickly,
and it does not involve overlooking crimes by allowing
for blanket amnesty. But we also need to acknowledge
that members of armed groups are often unwilling to
disarm until they know that they will have a role and
a voice in their Government, including in the security
sector. We will continue to urge that security services
be fully vetted, ethnically representative and regionally
balanced, in order to achieve an equitable distribution.
There cannot be parts of the Central African Republic
that citizens are afraid to travel to or enclaves they are
afraid to leave. We envision a day in which diverse,

professional, well-trained Central African Republic
security forces are composed of citizens of different
religions and backgrounds and can ably protect the
entirety of the country.

We commend the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) for its efforts to work hand in
hand with the Central African Republic Government to
rebuild its security services in a way that mentors and
truly builds the capacity of the police, gendarmerie and
military. MINUSCA's early programmes that preceded
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process in some of the Central African Republic's
most fragile areas and its innovative community
violence-reduction programmes have laid the foundation
for a stronger partnership between the Central African
Republic and the international community on more
robust strategic planning and reforms.

When we see violence like the recent confrontations
in Bambari, we are reminded that we still have much
work to do. We commend MINUSCA for its willingness
to take risks for its support for the Government, for its
protection of civilians and for the provision of security
in the Central African Republic. I would also like to
take a moment to note that this week marked one year
since the passage of resolution 2272 (2016) on sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. MINUSCA
has taken steps in the right direction but we have not
yet wiped out the problem. We must remain dedicated
to preventing acts of sexual exploitation and abuse,
holding perpetrators to account and helping victims
receive the assistance that they need.

In closing, we look forward to working to make
MINUSCA an even more efficient and more effective
peacekeeping mission.

