Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia expresses
its appreciation to the Polish presidency of the
Security Council for initiating today's debate and
providing us with an interesting and targeted concept
note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex). The presence of His
Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic
of Poland, and his presiding over the Council's debate
earlier today underscore the high importance of the
agenda item under discussion. We also thank the Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General and the Judges of
the International Court of Justice and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
comprehensive briefings.

Today's meeting is also an invitation to discuss how
to advance the peaceful settlement of conflicts based
on the tenets of international law, while addressing
complex challenges resulting from violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Armenia believes that the norms and principles of
international law should be upheld in their entirety
and that they remain relevant and crucial for the
preservation of international peace and security. The
essence, root causes and principles of resolution of
each conflict and crisis are unique. Attempts to create
one-size-fits-all approaches ignore the specificities of
particular conflicts and are counterproductive.

Equal rights and self-determination for peoples are
fundamental principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. The right to self-determination by freely
determining one's political status and freely pursuing
one's economic, social and cultural development
belongs to all peoples and is also embedded in both
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,

Social and Cultural Rights. Adherence to international
humanitarian law and human rights law should be
consistently promoted in the context of the prevention
of conflict and massive and serious violations that
result in war crimes, crimes against humanity or the
heinous crime of genocide.

Prevention requires both early warning and early
action. The denial ofpast crimes, including the crime of
genocide, impunity, discrimination against particularly
vulnerable groups and the prevalence and expression of
hate speech are among the precipitating factors that lead
to massive crimes and conflict and represent explicit
and detectable early warning signs. The international
community should be sufficiently equipped to detect
and address such early warning signs.

We are well aware that crimes that go unpunished
are prone to recurrence. It is therefore imperative that
the international community vigorously pursue the
fight against impunity and denialism. Within the United
Nations, Armenia has been leading the campaign to
reinforce the implementation of the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
Genocide Convention, which is yet another milestone
that reaffirms our collective determination to fight
impunity for the crime of genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity and to recommit to cooperation
among nations, thereby contributing to the promotion
of international peace and security. The International
Day of Commemoration and Dignity of the Victims of
the Crime of Genocide and of the Prevention of this
Crime, on 9 December, continues to be an important
platform for supporting such deliberations and taking
the conversation forward.

As a supporter of the concept of regional
engagement, Armenia has consistently promoted the
efficiency and role of regional mechanisms, including
for the maintenance ofpeace and security. We resolutely
reject various deflecting attempts at forum shopping
and arbitrary interpretations of international law. We
emphasize that there can be no hierarchy in international
law, and the very right to self-determination may not be
restricted, suspended or turned into an issue ofterritorial
dispute. The principle of the right of peoples to self-
determination is a binding and universally recognized
fundamental norm of international law for all States,
with no exceptions, and its implementation derives
from international obligations assumed by States.

Armenia greatly appreciates the continued support
ofthe United Nations system and the Secretary-General
for the internationally agreed format of negotiations
for the peaceful resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict, under the auspices of the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) co-Chairs. The approach of the international
community vis-a-vis the Nagorno Karabakh conflict
is well reflected in the statements and proposals of
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair countries. A failure
to commit to a peaceful resolution of the conflict, on
the basis of the norms and principles of international
law and within internationally agreed mandates,
represents a deliberate attempt to obstruct and derail
the peace process. Armenia will continue to deliver on
its commitment to uphold the norms and principles of
international law and, together with the Minsk Group
co-Chairs, will continue working for the peaceful
resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

