Mr. Yang Tao (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let me
begin by thanking Mr. Zachary Muburi-Muita, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, for his briefing. I appreciate his hard work in
promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. I wish to take this opportunity to
make four comments.

The first pertains to strengthening the United
Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU). The
Office, after integrating the components of the relevant
United Nations agencies, has saved resources,
increased efficiency and promoted cooperation
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. We hope that UNOAU will continue to
strengthen capacity-building and provide better
guidance and coordination to the other United Nations
offices in African countries, as well as to regional
organizations.

My second comment concerns defending the
United Nations-African Union strategic partnership.
We hope that the Security Council and the AU Peace
and Security Council will stay in close touch through
the current dialogue mechanism. We also hope that the
United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on
Peace and Security will play a more positive role in
promoting the strategic partnership. We call on the
Secretary-General, at the request of the Council, to
submit a report at an early date so as to provide his
thoughts on how to further advance the strategic
partnership between the two organizations.

Thirdly, we call for respect and support for the
African Union's mediation efforts on some hotspot
issues. The AU has an in-depth understanding of the
issues in Africa and has achieved positive results in
promoting the settlement of such issues as Somalia and
the Sudan. It is also working hard on a political
settlement for Libya. While considering issues relating
to peace and security in Africa, the Council should give
priority to the opinions and advice of the AU and
facilitate its mediation efforts.

The fourth concern has to do with strengthening
support to the African Union's peacekeeping
operations. The United Nations should assist the AU to
secure financial support for such operations. At
present, AMISOM. is facing a severe shortage of
financial resources. We call on the United Nations to
help the AU to establish a predictable and sustainable
financing mechanism. In addition, we hope that the
United Nations will strictly implement the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the AU so as to
further support it in building capacity for its
peacekeeping operations.

