Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ghassam Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for the quality of his briefing and reiterates its support
for his efforts to promote peace and reconciliation
in Libya. My country reiterates its appreciation to
Ambassador Olof Skoog for presenting his report and
the outstanding conduct of the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya.

Despite the hope raised by the Paris conference of
29 May, which called for parliamentary and presidential
elections to be held on 10 December, the current
situation remains worrisome, owing to the delay in
establishing the legal framework for those elections
and the fragile security environment. My delegation
welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General that led to the ceasefire observed
since 4 September, and stresses the urgent need for
all stakeholders to do more to improve the security
situation, which is an essential condition for the holding
of inclusive and credible elections. The elections should
undoubtedly encourage the establishment of republican
institutions and strengthen the security tools essential
for reconquering the areas controlled by armed groups
and trafficking networks, as well as for exercising State
authority throughout the national territory.

My delegation notes with regret the serious threats
posed by terrorist groups. We urge the international
community to support the Government of National
Accord in putting an end to the clashes and suffering
of thousands of Libyans. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire
welcomes the adoption by the Government of National
Accord of the greater Tripoli security plan, developed
with the support of UNSMIL, which aims to establish
professional security forces. We also welcome the
actions taken by Mr. Faiez Serraj, President of the
Presidency Council, to combat insecurity.

Peace in Libya will be the result of a compromise
among all the protagonists in the current crisis and
strong national ownership of the political process to
resolve the crisis, which, it must be stressed, must be
inclusive and promote the emergence of a stable Libya.
Regional actors play a significant role in that process,
which is why my delegation welcomes the initiative
of the African Union (AU) to very soon organize a
national reconciliation conference in Addis Ababa,
following the meeting of 2 November between the AU
Commissioner for Peace and Security and a high-level
delegation of the Libyan National Army. My country
sincerely hopes that the conference will lead to national
consensus among all Libyan forces, including tribes,
women and youth, whose contribution to the national
reconciliation process is crucial.

With regard to the humanitarian situation and
human rights issues, my country calls on all actors to
uphold international standards in that regard, while
ensuring the protection of civilians. C6te d'Ivoire
strongly condemns the attack on Al-Jalaa Hospital
on 6 November and recalls that attacks on hospital
infrastructure constitute violations of international law
and must tried before the competent courts.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the spirit
of compromise among Member States of the Security
Council that enabled the renewal of the mandate of
the Panel of Experts to oversee the sanctions on illicit
exports of crude oil and refined products from Libya.
We urge the Libyan authorities to continue their efforts,
despite the many challenges ahead, to achieve lasting
peace and stability in Libya.

