Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): Mr. President, at the outset
I wish to thank you and the Turkish presidency for
organizing this debate on the protection of civilians
during armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
John Holmes for his important briefing.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later by the
representative of the Czech Republic. I should like here
to make some specific points.

Battles of the past were largely conducted on
battle fields. The middle of the last century marked a
turning point in the nature of contemporary conflict,
especially as it relates to civilians. The last century
witnessed such distressing phenomena as ethnic
cleansing, crimes against humanity and genocide, for
which we unfortunately have too many examples.
These abhorrent practices, this new manner of waging
war, are something that the international community
must continue to address, for complacency in tackling
this challenge may well equal complicity.

As a point of departure we would like to highlight
once again the Geneva Conventions, which lie at the
core of international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. This Council has on numerous
occasions reaffirmed its commitment to protect those
most vulnerable in armed conflict and has repeatedly
condemned systematic and widespread violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law, most
recently in our January debate on this very issue. The
revised aide-memoire adopted at that time
(S/PRST/2009/l, annex) provides valuable guidance
for Council action, integrating the many different
aspects of the protection of civilians.

There continues to be a humanitarian imperative
that all States be bound by the very real need to reduce
human costs in armed conflict, in particular the
imperative to uphold the rights of civilians. The
Council can and has pronounced itself on these issues
and can impose targeted measures and individual
sanctions against individuals responsible for grievous
violations of humanitarian law and human rights.

Recent normative and methodological
advancements have allowed us to increasingly bring to
light the plight of women and children, especially
young girls, in armed conflict, as well as to address
certain types of weapons. Yet despite the advances
made in implementing international humanitarian law
and the work being done by a plethora of actors on
these issues, Croatia is concerned by the heavy toll that
civilians in many conflict areas around the world
civilians continue to bear. This year alone, our
discussions on this subject have been held against the
distressing backdrop of the suffering of civilians in
such places as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Gaza and the Sudan.

In situations where prevention has failed, national
Governments need to be held accountable for arresting
and prosecuting those who have committed grave
crimes, as the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with the parties to an armed conflict. If
Governments fail to investigate, prosecute and
adequately punish violations of international
humanitarian law committed by members of their own
armed forces or committed on their territory, recourse
to the International Criminal Court (ICC) can and
should be considered. That is where the Security
Council can play an important role, as it did by
referring the situation in Darfur to the ICC.

Last year, at the open debate on the protection of
civilians, Croatia called for more consistent attention
from the Security Council on this issue. We have been
pleased to find that, over the past year, important
progress has been made. The Council agreed to
negotiate the expansion of triggers in the area of
children in armed conflicts and adopted resolution
1820 (2008) on sexual violence in armed conflict.

We look forward to the upcoming report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
1820 (2008). We also look forward to the issuance of
the study undertaken by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on how United Nations
missions can contribute more to the protection of
civilians. While we acknowledge that many
peacekeeping operations have strong provisions in
their mandates on the protection of civilians - which
we salute - and often act in close cooperation with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, UNICEF and the Office of the High
Commissioner on Human Rights on the ground, more
attention needs to be given to the implementation of
these provisions, including to possible lessons learned
from a variety of situations.

Croatia is concerned about reported cases where
Governments or armed groups are denying access to
humanitarian assistance. Preventing food and other
supplies from reaching civilians, especially children,
desperately waiting for assistance has in many cases
developed into another deplorable method of war. We
strongly condemn attacks on humanitarian personnel
and we urge all parties to conflict to ensure their safety.

When we talk about civilians in armed conflict,
let us not forget that many of them have ended up with
disabilities, both physical and psychological. We
should intensify our efforts to help them live a
dignified life, especially during the delicate time of
post-conflict peacebuilding.

We are on a good path towards addressing the
many challenges that still lie ahead of us. We have a
good basis and practice on which we can build,
including on how to be more systematic in our
approaches to protection issues. When we make
decisions and adopt resolutions in this Council, we
should therefore also ask ourselves what impact they
will have on civilians on the ground. Let us use the
power we have in order to be advocates for those who
have no voice. In the end, that is the best legacy we can
leave both for them and ourselves.

