Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to associate myself with previous
speakers and congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, and to thank the delegation of Mexico for its
presidency last month.

I should also like to welcome President Boris
Tadie of Serbia and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lamberto Zannier and General De Kermabon of the
European Union for their briefings, and Mr. Skender
Hyseni for his statement.

On 17 May, we heard a briefing from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo (see S/PV.6314) on the latest developments in the province.
He informed us that the situation remained fragile,
given the interruption in the dialogue and
reconciliation process and the absence of solutions to a
number of sensitive issues, notably missing persons,
property, public services and the economy. We had
hoped for positive developments and the resumption of
dialogue to reduce tensions in northern Kosovo.

However, the bombing that took place in North
Mitrovica on Friday, which killed one person and
injured 10, has dashed those hopes. We are further
concerned about the armed attack that took place
yesterday against Mr. Petar Miletic', a member of
Parliament. Lebanon strongly condemns these attacks
and all acts of Violence in Kosovo. We reiterate our call
for calm and for all parties to act responsibly and to
refrain from any act that could lead to the escalation of
tension and violence.

In that context, we stress the importance of the
role of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in facilitating national
reconciliation and consolidating security. Lebanon also
stresses the need to promote conditions conducive to
reducing tensions and invites Belgrade and Pristina to
resume constructive and direct dialogue to prevent any
deterioration of the security situation. We urge all
influential parties in northern Kosovo to assist and
encourage local communities to resume dialogue
towards resolving sensitive issues, given their
detrimental impact on the security of Kosovo and the
Balkan region.

