Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I want to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her report and briefing.
I commend her for the candor of her remarks and for
the challenge that she has made to the Security Council.

New Zealand has long supported the need for an
effective international accountability framework. Our
experience on the Council over the past two years
has reinforced our view that, without an effective
accountability mechanism, too many of the conflicts
that wind up on the Council's agenda will never be
adequately resolved. Rather, they will flare up as
people will react to the unaddressed injustices that they
will have suffered.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role in that framework. It provides the
international community with an important tool for
ensuring that serious international crimes do not go
unpunished. The Council's ability to refer situations to
the International Criminal Court plays a vital role. At
the same time, the Council needs to be very careful that
it is not using referrals as a political tool or as the only
possible resource in an otherwise intractable situation.
Such actions risk politicizing the Court, and can prolong
both the conflicts concerned and the process of seeking
accountability. Moreover, when referrals are made,
they need to be accompanied by a clear commitment to
providing the Court with the support, cooperation and
resources it needs to discharge its mandate.

The need for sustained follow-up is particularly
evident in the case of the Council's referral of the
situation in Darfur. The Prosecutor's twenty-fourth
report on this issue makes for depressing reading.
The Prosecutor's briefing today has underlined the
bleakness of the situation. Little has improved in the
past six months. All five ICC indictees remain at
large. Civilians in Darfur continue to suffer from the
shocking consequences of conflict. If confirmed, the
recent reports of the use of chemical weapons would
represent yet another crime against the people of
Darfur. We know that the environment for the ICC in
taking forward the Council's Darfur referral remains
extremely challenging.

Resolution 1593 (2005) requires the Government
of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor and to provide them with the necessary
assistance. It also urges Member States to cooperate
with such efforts. Those obligations are being ignored.
There has also not been any meaningful accountability
at the national or regional levels. The Government of
the Sudan's continued non-cooperation with the Court
amounts to non-compliance with Council resolutions
and with its obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations. And yet the Council has not responded to any
of the 13 findings of non-compliance referred to it in
any meaningful way.

Not every member of this Council is a party to
the International Criminal Court. But we all share
a common interest - and indeed a responsibility
for - in ensuring compliance with the Council's
decisions. When that is absent, the credibility and
effectiveness of this institution are undermined, and the
message is sent that Council decisions can be ignored
with impunity. That should be of concern to all those
who value the role, legitimacy and authority of this
organ. As the Prosecutor reminded us this morning,
last year New Zealand made two proposals for action to
address this situation.
First, we called for the Council to take a more
structured approach in considering findings of
non-cooperation. There is currently no consistent
practice. In our view, the Council should, at a
minimum, discuss any finding of non-cooperation
with a view to determining which of the tools that it
has at its disposal, if any, offers the most appropriate
response. As Ms. Bensouda recalled, those options
include the adoption of a formal draft resolution or
statement, the dispatch of a letter or a meeting with the
country concerned. To continue ignoring ongoing acts
of non-compliance is neither productive nor credible.
We urge Council members to take a more active and
consistent approach in response to future reports of
non-compliance, and we look forward to working with
other Council members in the coming days on how to
address to this most recent report.

Secondly, we also need to find a way through the
current impasse in the Council's relations with the
Government of the Sudan. While we recognize the
challenges involved in doing so, there is a clear need for
the Council to build a new relationship with Khartoum.
We hope Council members will give serious thought as
to how that might be achieved in the coming year.

There is no escaping the fact that referrals made
by the Council have contributed to current tensions
between the International Criminal Court and some
of its African members. New Zealand recognizes
the unique role of the ICC and the fundamental
importance of preserving its judicial and prosecutorial
independence. Equally, we know that we all stand to
gain from more frank and robust engagement aimed at
resolving key challenges facing the Court. That means
honestly acknowledging concerns that have been raised
by African State parties. It means fostering greater
mutual understanding on those and other issues. It
means identifying ways in which we can collectively
address and strengthen the Court and end impunity.
The Council needs to play its part in supporting such a
dialogue. However, it goes without saying that dialogue
does not mean forgetting our search for justice and
ensuring accountability.

We hope that we will see emerge from these
current tensions a strengthened and more productive
relationship between the Council and African States
on matters relating to the International Criminal Court
that are of mutual interest and importance.

