Mrs. Albright (United States of America): In the
past few weeks we have been able to stress the positive
in the former Yugoslavia.

After the initialling of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Council unanimously passed resolutions suspending
sanctions and beginning a phased lifting of the arms
embargo. Just last week, we authorized a military force
led by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
that will help implement the Peace Agreement. We expect
soon to consider steps to assist in implementing the
Agreement in Eastern Slavonia. We are all hopeful that,
with the good will and firm commitment of the parties, an
enduring peace in the former Yugoslavia can be
established.

The draft resolution we are considering today serves
as a reminder of the urgency and necessity of that peace.
The killings that occurred in Srebrenica, Zepa, Sanski
Most, Banja Luka and other locations occupied by the
Bosnian Serbs this past summer will prove to be - we
hope - the last horrific chapters in a brutal and savage
war. But, as we focus our aspirations and efforts on
building peace, we cannot excuse, minimize or accept a
distorted version of what happened in these places.

The recent letter received by this Council from
Mr. Jovanovie, in which it is claimed that the Bosnian
Serbs are innocent of killing unarmed men from
Srebrenica, is an insult to the intelligence of every
member here. It is not only a "big" lie, it is a profoundly
insulting lie. And it is a remarkably peculiar document
coming from a Government that is seeking to regain the
respect and acceptance of the international community.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear, the
responsibility for the atrocities committed in eastern
Bosnia this past summer is not in doubt. It rests with the
Bosnian Serbs. According to United Nations estimates,
between 3,500 and 5,500 Muslim men forced to flee
Srebrenica remain unaccounted for.

 

Reports of survivors and of United Nations peace-
keepers agree that the missing men were captured, held in
fields or small buildings, summarily executed, and buried
in mass graves. Photographs provided to the war crimes
Tribunal by the United States show two locations where
there was an empty field one day, then hundreds of men
apparently under guard shortly after Srebrenica was seized,
and, a few days later, nearby fields scarred by mounds of
disturbed earth. The war crimes Tribunal has since charged
Radovan Karadzie and Ratko Mladie with genocide for the
killings.

The Secretary-General's report underlines the
importance of support for the work of the Tribunal, and the
necessity for parties to the Peace Agreement to meet their
obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal in every way. The
Tribunal's investigators must have full and unfettered
access to information, witnesses and evidence, including
suspected grave sites, throughout the region.

In this connection, I note that the Bosnian Serbs have
claimed that reporters had free access to investigate the
Srebrenica atrocities. That is plainly untrue. The American
journalist David Rohde was taken captive by the Pale
authorities when he returned to the area of the mass graves
in October. The truth is that, although the Bosnian Serbs
have promised access to the area, they have not yet lived
up to their word, either with respect to the press or with
respect to the war crimes Tribunal.

This draft resolution also condemns the burning and
looting of houses and territory which, under the Dayton
Agreement, are to be returned to Bosnian Serb control.
Although the nature and extent of these violations of human
rights cannot be equated to, or "balanced against", those
committed by the Bosnian Serbs, my Government deplores
them and joins the Council in urging an end to all such
practices. If peace is to last, the parties must concentrate on
actions that will build peace, not make it more difficult to
achieve.

For four years, this Council has been confronted by
massive violations of law and human dignity in the former
Yugoslavia. That is why measures to protect human rights
are a central part of the Dayton Agreement. My
Government takes those measures very seriously and we
expect the parties to meet, in full, their obligation to assist
in the implementation process. We remind the parties that
there will be consequences if they fail to do so.

The draft resolution we approve today should
strengthen our resolve to do everything within our power to
assist the parties in building a durable peace so that the
events in Srebrenica and elsewhere are not replicated.
And it should strengthen as well our determination to
enhance the prospects for peace by seeing that the full
truth about these events is known, and that those
responsible are held accountable for their crimes.

