Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): On behalf of the delegation of the Syrian
Arab Republic, I would like to extend to you our sincere
congratulations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also like to
take this opportunity to extend to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of Argentina, thanks for his efforts during his
presidency of the Council last month.
 

Syria has already stated that the Oslo agreement was
concluded in isolation from the peace process and outside
the framework of the talks and their terms of reference.
However, Israeli officials insisted on promoting that
agreement as if it were the promised one that would
finally take the region to the threshold of peace and
stability.

Israel launched an unprecedented campaign to
convince international public opinion that the conflict in
the Middle East was over and that peace had been
restored to the region. The Israeli mass media targeted
Arab consciousness in order to delude the Arabs into
believing that the question of Palestine had been resolved,
that there was no longer any reason to continue the Arab-
Israeli conflict and that therefore the Arab boycott of
Israel should be immediately halted and relations between
Arabs and Israel should be normalized.

Syria has also stated that the Oslo agreement would
not achieve the desired, just solution to the question of
Palestine and that it would provide the Palestinians with
only a vague, limited self-rule, which, in the interests of
Israel, would be wide open to interpretation in the future.

This agreement made the Palestinian future the
subject of a vague expression - "final status". It did not
touch upon the most critical issues in the Israeli-Arab
conflict, such as borders, the right of return, Jerusalem
and the future of the settlements. In spite of the
agreement's drawbacks, Syria did not oppose it. Rather,
we left to the Palestinian people and their institutions the
responsibility for judging it and for choosing what they
deemed fit. Our position stemmed from our interest in the
peace process and its objective of the establishment of a
comprehensive and just peace, in addition to our keen
interest in achieving solutions that are self-sustaining and
in steering away from those solutions and agreements that
bear the seeds of future conflicts.

Our expectations have proved to be correct. Ever
since the signing of the Oslo agreement, Israel has tried
to strip this modest instrument of its content. It refused to
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories and to
allow democratic Palestinian elections, insisting that
elections should be conducted at the point of Israeli
bayonets. Israel resumed the building of settlements in the
occupied Arab territories, in contravention of resolution
465 (1980) and despite the assurances by the Government
of Mr. Rabin that such building would be ceased.
 

The main equation on which the Madrid peace process
was based was "land for peace". It is only natural to say
that by resuming the building of settlements Israel indicates
that it does not want to give up the occupied Arab
territories. This leads us to state that Israel does not want
peace for land; rather, it wants peace while keeping the
land, under the pretext of its security and so-called Arab
terrorism, disregarding Israel's terrorism and its daily cruel
practices in the West Bank and Southern Lebanon, to such
an extent that it recently imposed a military siege on the
Lebanese ports of Sidon and Tyre and, today, on Al-
Darnour.

Israel is trying to thwart the peace process, which is
based on the principles of international legitimacy and
United Nations resolutions. Hence it tries to deal separately
with each Arab party, with the aim of weakening the Arab
position and bringing about incomplete settlements that do
not achieve peace or justice but, rather, circumvent the
objectives of the peace process in order to avoid genuine
peace.

On Sunday 26 February The New York Times
published an article about the appointment of Mr. Avraham
Burg, the well-known Labour Member of the Israeli
Parliament, as the Acting Chairman of the Jewish Agency,
which oversees Jewish immigration to Israel. The
newspaper published excerpts from Mr. Burg' s statement to
the board of directors of the Jewish Agency, reporting:

"And if real peace does come to Israel, he added,
'The question will be asked: can we, and how do we,
survive without an external enemy?"

The major question now is: does Israel, in fact, want
genuine peace with the Arabs, or did it simply bow its head
before the storm and agree to participate under pressure
from the United States of America and international public
opinion? We in Syria still hope for, and seek to achieve, a
comprehensive and just peace between Arabs and Israel.
Syria has declared at the highest levels its determination to
establish normal relations with Israel, in return for full
withdrawal from the Golan Heights, Southern Lebanon and
the other occupied Arab territories. However, during three
years of negotiations Israel has been stalling. It has not yet
announced its intention to effect a full withdrawal from the
Golan Heights.

A few days ago, at a meeting with the delegation of
the European group, headed by the Foreign Minister of
France, His Excellency President Hafez Al-Assad said:
 

"Although Israel's conduct does not give rise to
optimism, Syria will not give up the objective of
peace."

