Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): I too
wish to thank the Presidents of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), and their respective Prosecutors, for their
briefings to the Council.

The assessment reports (S/2006/353 and S/2006/358) before us give us an opportunity to
underscore the Security Council's active contribution
in the development of ICTY and the ICTR, as well as
the major role that the two Tribunals continue to play
in the fight against impunity. We are particularly
pleased to note that progress since the previous report
continues steadily towards achievement of the goals set
forth in the framework of the completion strategies of
the two courts, as reflected in the noteworthy evolution
of the Tribunals' rules of procedure, of which we take
note. Moreover, we may call this a success for
international law.

In general terms, the reports enable us to
appreciate the ongoing concern of the judges to seek
out effectiveness in their procedures without harming
the need to protect the rights of the defence and respect
for human rights.

The recommendations adopted by the working
group on speeding up trials, the use of ad litem judges
and the referral of certain cases to competent national
courts make it possible to put in context the judgement
that it would be improbable that all trials could be
completed prior to 2009.

In the view of my delegation, all solutions aimed
at speeding up trials and appeals - such as changing
the number of cases dealt with by the Tribunal, setting
up mechanisms for tracking fugitives, ensuring
conditions of detention that will minimize the risk of
physical failure, removing all material or procedural
constraints in all trial phases - can make it possible to
achieve the goals that have been set and meet the
deadlines that have been established. To that end, we
encourage the working group to continue its efforts.
We also encourage the judges to work together more
closely in order to find concrete and achievable
solutions. We know how useful it is to ensure this
necessary interaction among individuals who deal with
the same types of activities.
Today's reports also highlight the paramount role
played, first and foremost, by regional cooperation, as
well as by international cooperation as important
elements in the completion strategy. Such cooperation
has brought about further improvements because it has
made it possible to transfer a large number of indictees
who were at large. However, in many other areas, we
must observe that cooperation continues to be
insufficient. The Prosecutors have been very clear on
that point.

It is clear that the cause of justice would not be
served if the primary perpetrators of heinous crimes
who have affected many innocent victims were not
brought before the Tribunals established for that
purpose. Moreover, the delays in arresting the principal
fugitives further lengthens, uselessly, the timetables for
the work of the Tribunals.

To respond appropriately to the major need for
national reconciliation, which should be seen only in
terms of truth, the effective administration of justice
continues to be the only parameter to ensure a solid
basis to restore the fabric of nations that have
particularly suffered due to the crimes of which we are
all aware.

We also share the View that the Council needs to
demonstrate greater resolve and call for cooperation
from States in apprehending and transferring the
indictees who are being sought. The responsibility of
these States, like that of the Council and of the
international community, is great in this respect: all
with the ability to use force must use it here for a cause
that is transcendent, because we are talking about cause
of truth.

There are certainly other elements that need to be
taken into account because of their impact on the
completion strategies. These elements include the
availability of judges, whose role clearly needs to be
strengthened, but also training based on needs. On the
regional level - here I am particularly referring to the
African region - and in the context of referrals of
certain cases to national jurisdictions, it is just as
important to strengthen national capacities. That
remains the best guarantee against overwhelming the
Tribunals and is also important in terms of time
management, given that time in these cases is crucial.

Since these factors have a decisive role in the
completion of trials, we should also underscore the
need to ensure that financial resources are made
available by the international community, without
overlooking the need for increased Security Council
involvement insofar as uncertainties with respect to
cooperation from certain Administrations, as has been
stated, can seriously undermine the Tribunals'
completion of their missions.

At this juncture, my delegation would like
additional information about the way in which
cooperation takes place between the Tribunals and the
States that are called upon to cooperate with them.
Judge Erik Mose, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, referred to his
comments at the 2005 meeting and to the fact that the
acquittal of a number of individuals in the Cyangagu
trial four months ago, in February 2006, did not lead to
their being subsequently relocated in certain host
countries. Our colleague from Qatar referred to the
case of Charles Taylor. A little while ago it was being
said that it was difficult to find a country that would
receive him following his trial - if, indeed, there is a
trial.

What is the situation with respect to Rwanda at
this time? Is it Rwanda itself - the country from
which the accused persons originate - that is
impeding their return, or are there third countries that
are not cooperating satisfactorily in terms of receiving
those persons whose trials have been completed?

