Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too am grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to thank Ambassador
Mansour and Ambassador Shalev for their respective
statements.

As all of us agree, the only way to achieve
durable peace in the Middle East is through sincere
negotiations in good faith between the parties
concerned. We support the effort by the United States
to pursue proximity talks between the parties with a
view to starting direct negotiations. We hope that these
efforts will produce progress as early as possible.

The negotiations should achieve a two-State
solution by ending the 1967 occupation of territories,
including East Jerusalem. Japan supports the plan of
the Palestinian Authority to build a Palestinian State
within 24 months. Japan will continue to extend
assistance and help build capacity for the Palestinian
people and institutions for the Palestinian State.

Both parties must carry out their obligations and
commitments under the Road Map. We reiterate the
call on the Israeli Government to freeze all settlement
activities in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
We deplore the recent razing of Palestinian houses in
East Jerusalem by the Israeli authorities. Any act that
could prejudge the final status negotiations should not
be taken.

At the same time, we call upon the Palestinian
Authority to continue its efforts to improve security
and fulfil its commitment to cease violence and work
against incitement. Both sides need to build mutual
trust, to move from proximity talks to direct
negotiations and to refrain from taking any action that
undermines trust, which is essential for such a
transition. Neither the parties, nor the peoples, nor the
international community can afford to turn away from
serious confidence-building efforts.
On Gaza, the announcement by the Israeli
Government on easing restrictions on civilian goods in
Gaza is a very positive step. We hope that the Israeli
authorities will make further efforts to improve the
lives of people in Gaza.
We call for the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), including preventing illicit trafficking in
arms and stopping rockets from being fired into Israel.
We support efforts facilitating intra-Palestinian
reconciliation.

Regarding the investigation into the Gaza flotilla
incident, we support the efforts of the Secretary-
General, which we strongly hope will contribute to
making the investigation consistent with the principles
contained in the presidential statement adopted by the
Security Council on 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9).

Japan will make every effort to help the parties
achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

