Mr. Tsymbaliuk (Ukraine): My delegation aligns
itself with the statement that will be delivered on
behalf of the European Union. On behalf of the
delegation of Ukraine, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for holding this important meeting and for having
invited Ukraine to participate.

Our appreciation also goes to the Secretary-
General for the presentation of his report on possible
options to further the aim of prosecuting and
imprisoning persons responsible for acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia
(S/20lO/394).

Ukraine welcomes the actions that have been
consistently taken by the Security Council to counter
maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia. The
document before the Security Council today details
possible options for effectively prosecuting and
imprisoning persons responsible for acts of piracy and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia. As a
participant in the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, my country attaches high importance
to the fact that the work of the Group has been taken
into account in the report of the Secretary-General.

Ukraine supports the idea of enhancing United
Nations assistance to build the capacity of regional
States to prosecute and imprison persons responsible
for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea and
commends the efforts which have been undertaken by
Member States and relevant United Nations agencies to
that end.

At the same time, my country stands ready to
actively participate in further discussion on possible
establishment of an international or a regional-national
mechanism with an international element aimed at
bringing pirates to justice and providing sufficient
imprisonment arrangements.

During the general debate of the General
Assembly at its sixty-fourth session, Ukraine urged the
international community to redouble practical efforts to
fight piracy at sea (see A/64/PV.4). A number of
proposals have been put forward by my country to this
end, some of which, like the one addressing the
problem of piracy in a broader manner in the
framework of the General Assembly, have already been
successfully implemented.

It should be recalled that the informal plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on maritime piracy
held on 14 May 2010 showed the value of such
comprehensive discussions and made a solid
contribution to international efforts to combat piracy
and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia in a
holistic manner, covering the political, security,
governance and humanitarian needs of the country.

Pirate attacks have become a huge problem for
the entire world. Gaps in international law are making
it even more difficult to tackle this issue. In most
cases, foreign navies disarm and release pirates. It is
obvious that the need for an effective legal framework
applicable to combating piracy and armed robbery at
sea remains significant. Ukraine commends those
States that have amended their domestic law to
criminalize piracy and facilitate the prosecution of
suspected pirates in their national courts, consistent
with applicable international law, including human
rights aspects.

At the same time, the domestic law of a number
of States lacks provisions criminalizing piracy and
lacks procedural provisions for effective criminal
prosecution of suspected pirates. In our view, the lack
of an international legal agreement on how to
prosecute Somali pirates undermines the effort to
eradicate piracy in the region. Our country therefore
intends, at the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, a draft comprehensive convention on
combating piracy and armed robbery at sea. We hope
that in doing so we will contribute to the process of
fighting impunity at sea.

