Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing.

I thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
Mr. Ivica Dacic', for his statement and take note of the
statement delivered by Ms. Vlora Citaku.

As we have said on previous occasions, Uruguay
advocates for strict respect for the principle of
territorial integrity and for compliance with resolution
1244 (1999) as the legal basis for resovling the situation
in Kosovo.
I should like to begin by recognizing the importance
ofthe high-level official meeting convened on 3 July by
the European Union High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
and the commitment of both leaders, which constitutes
a first step towards relaunching the dialogue process
between Pristina and Belgrade following the pause
imposed by the holding of elections in Serbia and
Kosovo. We encourage Kosovar leaders to work
constructively and advance in the appointment of
their authorities. We also highlight the importance of
the process of normalizing relations between Pristina
and Belgrade and compliance with the commitments
already assumed at the international level.

In relation to the tensions and incidents that took
place early in the period covered by the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/640), we reaffirm once
again the rejection of all belligerent rhetoric, incitement
to hatred, destabilization and ultranationalist
sentiments. On another order, we note with interest the
internal dialogue launched by President Aleksandar
Vueie on Kosovo. The work of regional leaders in
search of beneficial agreements can be helpful to
both communities.

Uruguay considers it critical to advance towards
reconciliation, respect for minorities and their due
integration into society. In that connection, we are
concerned by the limitation of freedom of movement
of Serb-Kosovar citizens due to the non-recognition of
the passports issued by Coordination Directorate of the
Ministry of the Interior of Serbia and the difficulties
they encounter in obtaining documents in Kosovo.

Moreover, we welcome the establishment in Pristina
of a missing persons resource centre - an initiative
that benefits Albanians and Serbians alike - and we
commend the event held under the auspices of UNMIK
and the Office of the High Commissioner to raise
awareness of this urgent question. We urge collaboration
in the return process for internally displaced persons,
the maintenance of policies of reconciliation and
respect for cultural and religious heritage, in particular
holy sites.

UNMIK is doing important work in the area by
promoting safety, stability and respect for human
rights. We commend the efforts to that end of United
Nations personnel, the European Union (EU), the EU
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo
Force, which, inter alia, have been working with
UNMIK for some time. We highlight their work with
young people, in compliance with resolution 2250
(2015), the conduct of the first Kosovo Youth Assembly,
which promoted reconciliation and a vision of the
future, as well as the general projects carried out with
UN-Women and UNICEF, among other entities. We
also appreciate the work of the various organizations
on the ground, working for the progress of Kosovo and
the normalization of relations among the communities
of the region.

Finally, we recognize the statements of the
Secretary-General expressing the deep sorrow of the
United Nations for the suffering of the inhabitants of the
internally displaced camps who have fallen victim lead
poisoning, and we welcome the establishment of a trust
fund that will implement community-based assistance
projects, primarily in North and South Mitrovica and
Leposavie/Leposaviq, which will benefit the Roma,
Ashkali and Egyptian communities.

