Mr. Tarrisse da Fontoura (Brazil): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this timely
briefing. I also express my appreciation to Mr. James
Morris, Executive Director of the World Food
Programme (WFP), for the information he has provided
us.

As we observed in the recent debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, the number
and the scope of humanitarian disasters provoked by
post-cold-war conflicts are staggering. Civilians have
been increasingly victimized in armed conflict through
ethnic cleansing, displacement, deliberate targeting
and, with devastating consequences, starvation.

The Security Council has paid due consideration
to the issue of humanitarian crises resulting from
conflicts, and we welcome this opportunity to examine
the correlation of famine and armed conflict and how
the international community can coordinate its action
in order to best address that issue.

The World Food Programme is the United
Nations agency with the greatest logistical capacity for
providing urgently needed foodstuffs to people in
emergency situations, both those related to natural
causes and those derived from conflicts, which is our
primary concern in this forum.

Given Brazil's involvement in action against
hunger and poverty, it will come as no surprise that we
attach a great deal of importance to the concept of food
security, one of the pillars of the work of the World
Food Programme. Ensuring food security is a moral
imperative, both in emergency situations and on a
permanent basis.

We fully endorse the WFP's twin-track approach,
which addresses those two challenges through the
implementation of both emergency and more
structurally oriented development operations. The
twin-track approach is needed to address the
correlation between famine and conflict, because
achieving food security is indispensable for creating
conditions in which conflict-ridden societies may
emerge from conflict. It is also true that the failure to
achieve food security makes peaceful societies more
vulnerable to conflict.

The international community needs to tackle the
deep-rooted socio-economic causes of conflicts and
humanitarian crises in order to prevent the emergence,
spread and recurrence of conflicts. It is in that context
that WFP efforts to ensure long-term food security
must be placed.

Lastly, we would like to point out that in order
for the World Food Programme to fulfil its role of
ensuring food security, it is necessary that it be
provided with reliable technical resources, without
which, in the definition of priorities, certain
emergencies tend to be forgotten. It is therefore
essential to improve the financial mechanisms at our
disposal while underlining that humanitarian assistance
must be provided on the basis of existing needs and
allocated in a non-discriminatory, balanced and
proportionate manner.

