Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
impacts of climate change are keenly felt around the
world. Today, we are discussing the implications of
climate change for international peace and security. We
are grateful to the German presidency for bringing this
important question to the Council. The number of
countries speaking in this debate is a graphic
demonstration of its significance, and I particularly
want to thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Achim
Steiner for their powerful contributions to our
discussion.

Scientific evidence suggests that the effects of
climate change will include more droughts, shorter
growing seasons and more frequent extreme weather
events. Those will be felt most keenly in areas of the
world already experiencing stress from shortages of
food, water and energy. It is just those areas where
Governments do not always have the capacity to
respond. It is in that context that climate change must
be seen as a threat multiplier, exacerbating existing
tensions and increasing the likelihood of conflict.

As a result of climate change, crop yields are
predicted to fall in the long term. This will have
serious repercussions for communities dependent on
agriculture. At the same time, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations has estimated that
global demand for food will increase by up to 70 per
cent by 2050. Weaker production coupled with greater
demand will affect all countries. In areas where food
security is already a source of instability, this impact of
climate change has the obvious potential to fuel
tension.

We have also heard this morning about the
impacts of the rise of sea levels caused by climate
change. These will be felt most acutely in low-lying
and small island developing States. I welcome the fact
that representatives of so many of those countries
affected in the Pacific will participate in today's
debate.

Resource scarcity, flooding and drought all are
likely to result in significant movements of people, in
some cases across national boundaries, as we are
seeing today in the Horn of Africa. Where people move
to areas that do not themselves have sufficient
resources or infrastructure to accommodate them, the
risk of tension and conflict is increased.

Some delegations have voiced concerns over the
Council's mandate to discuss this issue. We agree that
it is important that the different roles, functions and
mandates of the various United Nations bodies dealing
with climate change are fully respected. But like the
Secretary-General and Mr. Steiner, we do not believe
that this debate in any way undermines them.

The Council is tasked with the maintenance of
international peace and security. It can and indeed
should, therefore, consider emerging threats. Conflict
prevention is a key element in the Council's work. The
United Kingdom believes that it is through discussion
and better awareness of new and cross-cutting security
challenges, including the effects of climate change, that
the Council can best fulfill its responsibility to prevent
future conflict.

We therefore hope that even at this late stage we
can reach agreement on the presidential statement
drafted by the German presidency. This would send a
powerful signal of the importance that the Security
Council places on mitigating the security risks posed
by climate change. History will not judge us kindly if,
through complacency or ideology, we duck this
important responsibility.
There are three key areas on which we should
focus if we are to be effective in mitigating the security
implications of climate change.

First, and pre-eminently, the United Nations must
continue to work to achieve a comprehensive, globally

binding agreement on climate change. Ongoing efforts
under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change are crucial. The United Kingdom will
do everything in our power to support preparations for
the 17th Conference of the Parties in Durban, to be
held later this year, including by supporting the South
African presidency.

Secondly, we need to build up a deeper
understanding of the interface between the impacts of
climate change on the one hand and conflict drivers on
the other. We then need to capture this understanding
as we build the tools and take the action necessary to
prevent conflict.

Finally, we need better sharing of analysis and
experience among the various United Nations agencies,
bodies and programmes that are already considering
these issues. As food, water, energy and climate
security are interlinked, they demand a coordinated
response.

Left unchecked, climate change increases the
likelihood of instability, resource conflict and poverty.
That is why the United Kingdom first brought this
issue to the Council for debate in 2007. It is ever more
relevant and valuable for the Council to consider these
impacts, and I thank Germany once again for having
convened this debate today.

