Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation would like to express its
deep concern at the serious events in eastern Zaire, which
have caused more than a million Burundian and
Rwandese refugees to abandon their camps, thereby
threatening peace and security in the Great Lakes region.

My delegation considers it necessary for the
international community to take urgent measures to avoid
the loss of thousands of human lives by hunger and
disease. This means that ways and means must be found
to stabilize the situation and to create conditions of
security enabling humanitarian assistance to reach the
region's refugees and displaced persons, whose situation
results from armed conflict.

Accordingly, my delegation has sponsored and will
vote in favour of the draft resolution before us, which
authorizes a multinational humanitarian force to facilitate
the delivery of humanitarian aid to displaced persons,
refugees and civilians at risk in eastern Zaire, and to
facilitate the repatriation of refugees and the voluntary
return of displaced persons, coordinated by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR).

My delegation considers that for this to occur the
parties to the conflict must declare a ceasefire, and we
appeal to them to cease all hostilities forthwith and to
initiate, as soon as possible, the necessary political
dialogue with a view to resolving the present situation.

My delegation would like to reiterate its support for
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy to the region and
for the efforts of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), the European Union, the States concerned and the

 

results of the Regional Summit of African countries held at
Nairobi on 5 November of this year. At the same time, we
would also like to welcome the offer made by the
Government of Canada and other Governments to provide
personnel and equipment to set up the multinational force
described in the draft resolution.

My delegation also wishes to emphasize the urgent
need to convene an international conference on peace,
security and development in the Great Lakes region under
the auspices of the United Nations and the OAU to address
and find lasting solutions to the problems of the Great
Lakes region.

In conclusion, my delegation considers that this draft
resolution sets forth suitable objectives, since it is focused
on meeting the humanitarian needs of the refugees by
deploying a neutral force and favours the establishment of
a plan of action that will reduce tension in the region and
ensure the voluntary repatriation of refugees.

