Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the delegation of France for organizing today's open
debate and the briefers for their input.

Terrorism is a real threat, and the recent terrorist
attacks in New Zealand have shown once again that no
country is immune to this pervasive evil. Combating
it requires a comprehensive preventive approach,
which means that the root causes of terrorism should
be addressed first and foremost. From this perspective,
it is extremely important to prevent and combat the
financing of terrorism.
As a victim of terrorism and as a country that has
lost more than 17,000 of its citizens to terrorist attacks,
Iran is determined to continue combating terrorism in
all its aspects, including financing. To that end, Iran has
enacted a national strategy for countering terrorist acts
and a number of laws that include preventive measures
on the financing of terrorism. The latter is addressed
in several bilateral agreements as well. Iran also has an
active financial-intelligence unit.

Preventing and combating the financing of terrorism
requires the genuine political will of all States as well
as efficient international standards. For several years,
Da'esh received large amounts of petrodollars and other
financial donations. It also derived considerable revenue
through the looting and sale of Iraq and Syria's cultural
properties as well as by exporting their oil. Even now,
terrorist groups such as the Al-Nusra Front in Syria, in
addition to enjoying the political and military support
of certain countries, are receiving significant financial
contributions. These facts alone show not only that the
existing standards are not efficient enough, but also
that many countries have not implemented them at all,
as one of the briefers pointed out earlier. Interestingly,
however, for clear political reasons, those countries
have never been listed by the institutions that set the
standards. If they are not held accountable, they will be
emboldened to continue financing terrorists. The fact
is that counter-terrorism activities are effective only
when double standards and selective approaches are
avoided and all States cooperate fully and responsibly.

Some countries use both counter-terrorism and

terrorism as a foreign-policy tool, for example by
designating adversaries as State sponsors of terrorism,
which is done exclusively for political motives and
therefore has no legitimacy. That is also the case with
regard to the unilateral labelling of certain popular
political parties in other States as terrorists. The irony
is that those who have adopted such policies are those
who have created certain terrorist groups and, based on
their own short-sighted national interest, have delisted
known terrorist groups and given them safe haven.
They even continue to support groups that the Security
Council itself has designated as terrorists.

Finally, we must not forget that foreign invasion
and occupation are the main factors in creating grounds
conducive to terrorism. While a country's inherent
right to resist foreign invasion and occupation must
not be equated with terrorism, it is clear that in order
to uproot terrorism, occupation and invasion must
come to an end. If unchecked, terrorists and occupiers
will evolve into a coalition. In fact, that has already
happened: Israel supports terrorists in Syria in various
ways, including by healing the injuries of their terrorist
sisters and brothers.

