Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset, Sir, to welcome you and to thank
you for coming to New York to preside over today's
meeting. We are grateful also to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his presence at our meeting. I wish
further to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Executive
Secretary of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for their briefings.

In recent years, the Security Council has actively
considered various conflict situations and cross-border
issues in the West African region. The majority of the
countries in the region, such as Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea-Bissau, have attained basic stability and
embarked on the right track, that of post-conflict
reconstruction. Cote d'Ivoire is actively engaged in
preparing for the general election planned for October
of this year, which will mark a critical juncture in its
peace process. The improvement of the internal
situations of those countries provides favourable
conditions for resolving the intricate issues of West
Africa and will have a positive impact on the overall
stability and development of the region. We commend
the United Nations system, ECOWAS, the African
Union and other relevant international organizations
for playing an important role in that regard.

In spite of the achievements I have described, the
current stability in those conflict situations is still
extremely fragile, and numerous examples show that
they could relapse into turmoil. Serious problems
remain, such as the proliferation of illicit small arms
and the use of child soldiers and mercenaries.
Programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into society, as well as security-sector
reform, are facing funding shortages. Meanwhile,
depressed economic prospects, high youth
unemployment and the existence of large numbers of
refugees continue to be serious social problems. In
addition, the humanitarian situation in some areas
provides no cause for optimism. The West African
region still faces numerous challenges on the way to
genuinely sustainable development. The top priority at

06-4607]
present is to continue consolidating the hard-won peace
and to prevent the achievements already gained from
being squandered, while at the same time steadily
exploring effective ways for West African countries to
achieve development. I would like to emphasize the
following points in that regard.

First, we support the formulation of a
comprehensive strategy for peace consolidation in West
African countries, starting from the perspective of the
region itself. Post-war reconstruction is a tremendous
endeavour, and the countries concerned should develop
systematic plans, including in the areas of national
reconciliation, institution-building, security-sector
reform, the resettlement of ex-combatants, economic
recovery and youth employment, while making every
effort to maintain internal stability. Post-war
reconstruction should be carried out with both short-
term and long-term objectives in View, so that the vast
majority of the population can benefit from the peace
dividend as peace is further consolidated through a
process of development. While the international
community can provide assistance and support, the key
issue here remains the efforts of the Governments of
the countries concerned, which should act with a sense
of ownership in the process. Assistance from the
international community should not replace their work.
Efforts should also be made to avoid rigid application
of external models. Countries concerned should also
fully cooperate with one another to address cross-
border and other issues of common concern.

Secondly, agencies of the United Nations system,
including international financial institutions, as well as
regional and subregional organizations, have much to
do in consolidating peace in the West African region.
They should assist the countries concerned with their
reconstruction by doing what they do best, such as
providing financial assistance or professional support.
The unique roles played in recent years by
organizations such as the African Union and ECOWAS
show an admirable attempt at united self-reliance by
African countries. China supports further efforts on
their part and hopes that they can build their capacity
in order to play a more significant role in promoting
peace and development in the West African region. In
considering various situations in West Africa, the
Security Council should probe the root causes of
turmoil and conflict and should avoid addressing those
problems in an isolated and fragmented manner.
Meanwhile, the Security Council should take into
account the special concerns of our African brethren
and should exercise caution when applying sanctions in
order to avoid a negative impact on the peace process.

Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission, which
has attracted mounting interest and expectations from
all sides since its establishment, has opened a new
forum for discussing and responding to the peaceful
reconstruction of West Africa. As an event of historic
significance to West Africa and to the entire African
continent, the establishment of the Commission
provides an important opportunity for the systematic
formulation of policies for peace consolidation in West
Africa. The question of Sierra Leone has already been
put on the agenda of the Commission. We hope that the
Commission will make a good start in its work and that
it will accumulate successful experiences so as to play
a bigger role in the future. Members of the
Commission representing various sides can put forward
practicable comprehensive proposals in the areas of
security, the economy, the social sector and the rule of
law, based on their own perspectives and in the light of
the actual situation of the countries concerned and the
needs of their peoples. All of this will help the
Commission to gradually carry out its work in an
orderly manner.

The issues of West Africa, like other issues facing
the African continent, boil down to development. No
peace can be genuinely guaranteed without
development. Realizing durable peace in West Africa
not only requires addressing regional hot-spot issues,
but also making substantial efforts to help countries of
the region to tackle the root causes of the problems and
to resolve issues in the area of development.

Peace and development in this region bear
favourably on peace and development on the whole of
the African continent and that of the entire world.
Therefore, the United Nations should, in active
cooperation with the countries in this region, make
greater efforts to promote sustainable development so
as to actively implement the important outcomes on
African development from last year's World Summit.
Meanwhile, greater attention should be given to the
African factor in various follow-up measures.

China supports strengthened coordination among
the various United Nations missions in this region and
hopes that the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa will facilitate such
coordination. China is ready to join the international
community in contributing to resolving the cross-
border issues of West Africa and consolidating peace in
that region.

