Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this very important debate
on protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. We also thank the briefers for their
respective statements.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of Thailand
on behalf of Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The role of United Nations peacekeeping operations
in protecting civilians cannot be overemphasized, and
as peacekeepers are increasingly mandated to carry
out complex responsibilities in dangerous situations,
protecting civilians is indeed one ofthe most challenging
tasks for United Nations peacekeeping missions.

As rightly mentioned in the concept note
(S/2016/503, annex), various progress has been made
over the past two decades in strengthening international
protection frameworks, in particular by the Council.
However, the progress and related guidance, concepts
and advocacy have not yet been translated into effective
action in the field, where the actual improvement is
need. It is important that all peacekeeping stakeholders
be aware of the gap between the mandate of protecting
civilians given by the Council and what the missions
can actually deliver with their existing resources. An
enhanced role of the Security Council in this regard,
along with its regular and meaningful consultation with
other peacekeeping actors, are indeed critical. Positive
results will be attained when common directions,
cooperation and collaboration are well established
among the Council, the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and host countries.

There must be a well-coordinated whole-of-mission
strategy as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his
latest report on the protection of civilians (S/2016/447).
We also fully agree with him that the sustainable
protection of civilians will ultimately require political
solutions. It is therefore imperative to ensure that
peacekeeping mandates are well defined, realistic and
linked to a wider political process, and that missions
are provided with all the resources necessary to the
implementation of their respective mandates.

My delegation wishes to re-emphasize that the
protection of civilians is the primary responsibility of
the host country and, in this context, it shares the View of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
with regard to the supporting role of United Nations
peacekeeping missions to relevant Governments in
executing that responsibility.

Promoting respect for human rights and international
law is a long-term effort, which needs to be nationally
owned and supported by the United Nations and the
international community. Furthermore, as mentioned
in the draft 2016 report of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, we wish to re-emphasize the
significance of unarmed strategies to protect civilians
by United Nations peacekeeping missions as political
instruments that can effectively protect civilians by
helping to bring an end to violent conflicts, thereby
maintaining the confidence of parties in peaceful
solutions. It is also in this context that we wish to
acknowledge the important role of the United Nations
police components, including female police officers, in
protecting the civilian population and creating a stable
environment, consistent with their mandates.

It would be remiss if we did not include the notion
of conflict prevention in this debate. Prevention and
peaceful resolution should be given higher priority in
peacekeeping missions, and we should ensure that the
United Nations is more people-centred and impactful
and harnesses the strengths of existing regional entities.

For the safety and security of the threatened
populations, as well as of the peacekeepers, it is
also essential that the three basic United Nations
peacekeeping principles of consent of the parties,
impartiality and the non-use of force except in self-
defence and defence of the mandate continue to be
adhered to. We therefore underline that the use of force
in United Nations peacekeeping operations should only
be the last resort.

We also emphasize that the development and
updates of guiding materials and training on how
to protect civilians should be widely discussed with
Member States. The United Nations system should
intensify its efforts to help enable a comprehensive
approach to protect civilians.

Human life is indeed the most precious. And the
deplorable fact of the increasing deaths of civilians in
armed conflict situations deserves our full attention,
commitment and action.

Indonesia, with its current participation in 10 United
Nations peacekeeping operations, will continue to
support and contribute to United Nations efforts to lay
down the foundations for sustainable peace. We will
also continue to ensure that, before deployment, our
peacekeepers receive the most adequate training on
civilians' protection.

