Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I would like to take
this opportunity once again to thank you, Madam
President, and your delegation for having organized
this important debate. We thank the representatives of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission for
their respective briefings. The briefings allowed us to
have a better and deeper appreciation of the nature and
implications of piracy in the region. Effective action to
combat piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has been
hampered partly by a lack of information regarding the
extent of the problem. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks today.

While international focus has been principally on
piracy off the coast of Somalia, it should not be
forgotten that piracy affects other regions of the world,
including waters off the coast of West Africa, in
particular the Gulf of Guinea. Like others, we remain
concerned at the risk to the region's security posed by
piracy. The increase in the number of attacks in the
past year and the violent nature of those attacks has
brought greater attention to the growing problem of
piracy off the coast of West Africa. South Africa is
concerned that those attacks pose a threat to
navigation, security and the economic development of
States in that region. We commend the efforts already
undertaken by the African States, including the joint
patrols by Nigeria and Benin, in the region.
Nonetheless, more needs to be done, and the
international community's collective support is
required.

In the search for a tailor-made solution that fits
the threats specific to the Gulf of Guinea, it has to be
acknowledged that the countries of the region will need
adequate resources and technical capacities to address
the scourge of piracy. We stand ready to assist to the
best of our capabilities those countries that are most
affected by piracy in the region.

We call upon other States and organizations to
offer whatever assistance they can, including through
the provision of financial and technical assistance. We
welcome the initiative taken by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the United Nations Office
in West Africa and the International Maritime
Organization to set up a mission to assess the region's
capacity to combat piracy, and hope that this spirit of
partnership will contribute to the eradication of piracy.

We are encouraged in this regard by the intention
of the countries of the region to convene a summit of
heads of State and Government in order to find a
comprehensive response to the problem. We are
confident that this summit will develop an all-inclusive
strategy which aims to bolster efforts in the fight
against piracy and armed robberies in the Gulf of
Guinea. We welcome the efforts made by ECOWAS
members to discuss the creation of regional
mechanisms to tackle piracy in the region.

It is also important to acknowledge and
emphasize the importance of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which remains the
framework for dealing with piracy on the high seas,
including the exclusive economic zone. The relevant
provisions of the Convention, including articles 101,
105 and 107, grant all States the right to exercise
universal jurisdiction. While States have the sovereign
right to legislate, more international assistance is
needed to support all efforts to fight the scourge of
piracy. All of this makes it necessary for all States,
not only those affected, to adopt legislation to deal
with piracy and to implement such legislation.

