Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia and to thank him for his
statement. I also thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah,
and African Union Commissioner Lamamra for their
briefings, which provided updated information on the
Djibouti peace process and the difficult security
situation on the ground in Somalia.

At the political level, my delegation welcomes
the continuing activities of the Government and the
parliament in Mogadishu despite the difficult security
situation, as well as the Government's ongoing policy
of openness, demonstrated by the visits made by
President Ahmed. We reaffirm our commitment to the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement, which is the
only framework for a political settlement of the Somali
crisis. We commend the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government to establish contacts with
opposition groups that are not yet part of the Djibouti
reconciliation process.

In particular, we welcome the signing on 21 June
of a declaration of political, security, humanitarian and
development cooperation with the group Ahlu Sunna
Wal Jama'a. Burkina Faso believes that that is the most
significant success of the policy of inclusive dialogue
pursued by President Ahmed since his election. That is
why we encourage the Government to continue the
consultations begun with influential clan leaders,
elders and clerics in order to expand the base of
support for the stabilization of Somalia.

With respect to security, Burkina Faso once again
firmly condemns targeted killings and attacks against
Government forces by illegal armed groups supported
by foreign elements. These attacks, which began in
early May, have already claimed many civilian victims
and have included the killing of the Minister of the
Interior; they must cease immediately. We call on all
States of the region, without exception, to scrupulously
respect the arms embargo and to refrain from providing
military, logistical or any other kind of support to
illegal armed groups that are active in Somalia, as
required by the relevant resolutions and statements of
the Security Council. Moreover, we are very concerned
by reports that the group Al-Shabaab continues to
enlist young people and children for combat.

Burkina Faso reaffirms its unreserved support for
the Government of President Ahmed as the legitimate
Somali authority. We also reaffirm our support for the
position adopted by the African Union (AU) and the
appeal contained in the AU Peace and Security Council
communique of 15 June 2009, which was confirmed in
a decision by the African Union Conference of Heads
of State and Government held from 1 to 3 July 2009. In
particular, we think that the request that a no-fly zone
be imposed around certain airports merits immediate
follow-up.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretariat
for its support and its ongoing solidarity with the
people and the Government of Somalia and encourages
it to continue its support for development and for
institutional capacity-building in the country. We thank
in particular Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who
continues in spite of difficulties to show unequalled
determination and commitment.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the confirmation of a significant portion of
the $213 million pledged during the international
donors conference held in Brussels on 22 and 23 April
2009. The start of training for new Somali police
officers, which was undertaken by the United Nations
Development Programme on the basis of those pledges,
is encouraging. We hope that this activity will be
continued and expanded in accordance with the
programme that has been planned.

However, at this stage, my delegation would like
to reiterate its position that the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation seems to be the only
option - and that of last resort - for stabilizing
Somalia. Until the Security Council takes a stand on
this option, my delegation encourages the Secretariat to
continue its support for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), in accordance with resolutions
1863 (2009) and 1872 (2009).

We thank Uganda and Burundi for their
significant ongoing efforts, and, given the seriousness
of this situation, we invite the countries that have
already promised troops for AMISOM. to fulfil their
promises as quickly as possible in order to strengthen
the African force. Burkina Faso reaffirms its firm
commitment to the integrity and security of the African
force and thus firmly condemns any attack against
AMISOM.

Finally, Burkina Faso believes in a return to
peace and stability in Somalia and invites the
international community to maintain and to strengthen
its support for that country in accordance with the
recommendations of the African Union and the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development.
