Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, the Chinese delegation wishes to express
its dissatisfaction and deep regret over the fact that the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
cannot attend today's meeting. Allowing him to make a
statement would not impair any country's position,
while, by not allowing the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia a voice, the Security Council has deprived a
sovereign country of its right to express its views.

This contravenes the spirit of the Charter and we
find it very difficult to understand. If we wish to settle
the problems in the Balkans, we must maintain
dialogue with all sides. The Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is an important country in the Balkan
region. When we discuss the Balkan issue, isolating
and excluding the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
narrow-minded, short-sighted and a denial of reality. It
does not help the search for a solution to the Balkan
problem. We deeply regret this discriminatory decision,
which is wrong.

We thank Mr. Bildt for his briefing, but,
regrettably, we have not read his report, as expected.
We commend Mr. Bildt for his tireless efforts to find a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Balkan
question. The Chinese delegation will continue to
support Mr. Bildt in his endeavours.

We thank you, Mr. President, for arranging
today's open debate. I take this opportunity to express
some of the principal positions of the Chinese
delegation.

Since ancient times, the Balkan region has
experienced very complex ethnic, religious and
territorial conflicts, which are interconnected. Some
important recent events have made the situation more
precarious yet. China is deeply concerned by the
development of the situation in the Balkans, including
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

With regard to the question of Kosovo, I would
stress that the grave situation there is the result of
various factors. Ethnic conflicts are domestic concerns,
while the wilful interference of foreign forces is an
external factor that has exacerbated the conflict. Last
year, on March 24, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) bombed the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia indiscriminately and set a bad precedent of
using force against a sovereign country with the excuse
of humanitarian questions. It undermined the basic
norms of international law and the principles and
purposes of the Charter and the credibility of the
United Nations and the Security Council.

NATO's bombing of civilian facilities and a
foreign diplomatic establishment also violated the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations as well as
the Fourth Geneva Convention and its Additional
Protocol. China has expressed its strong opposition to
this. China has made a tremendous effort to bring
NATO's ceasefire and to bring the Kosovo question
back to the Security Council.
NATO's use of force has caused a greater
humanitarian crisis. As a result ethnic disputes have
become ethnic hatred. This wound will need a very
long time to heal. Historical lessons must be learned.
The tragedy of NATO's military intervention into
Kosovo cannot be repeated.

The evolution of the Kosovo situation as well as
the entire Balkan situation, deserves our in-depth
reflection. The majority of the countries in the world,
especially the countries in the Balkans, are multi-ethnic
and multi-religious. Differences among different
religions and ethnic groups should be settled through
peaceful means, rather than deepening their
differences.

There have always been two forces in the Balkan
region, one for unity and one for separation. The
international community should suppress the separatist
forces and extremists. Only in this way can the Balkans
achieve long-term stability and development.
Otherwise, if separatist forces and extremists are
condoned and encouraged, conflicts and wars will erupt
again and the Balkans will be deprived permanently of
peace.

Furthermore, I would like to emphasize that the
United Nations should not encourage and support any
activity of changing a Government of a country
through foreign interference.

We always advocate equality, unity, harmonious
co-existence and common development for the people
of countries with a multi-national character. We are
against any prejudice, oppression and killing based on
ethnicity. We are also opposed to any effort to create
ethnic division or to sabotage national unity.

Fundamentally speaking, the Kosovo problem can
be resolved only within the framework of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, through substantial autonomy
and a good ethnic policy that guarantees the rights and
interests of all ethnic groups and protects and promotes
the human rights of all ethnic groups. Achieving
autonomy should be done by way of negotiations and
solutions acceptable to both sides. The Chinese
delegation believes that only by restoring the national
harmony that the Balkan region once enjoyed can
genuine and lasting peace and prosperity be achieved.
Other than this there is no way out.

