Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
briefing and forf the unstinting work he accomplished
with his team over the past two years at the head of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). The dynamism, vigour and high
professionalism were the essential characteristics of
the Australian delegation in carrying out that important
task, and we are particularly grateful to them for that.
We should also like to wish to every success to Spain
taking up the chairmanship of the Committee in 2015.

As underscored by Ambassador Quinlan in his

briefing and, as is explicitly stated in the Joint Action
Plan, Security Council resolutions remain in full force
in the framework of the negotiations under way, as well
as in the period preceding a comprehensive settlement
to the proliferation crisis in Iran. It was therefore with
concern that we welcomed the midterm report of the
Panel of Experts of the Committee, which was provided
to the Council a few days ago. The information in
the report on Iran's attempts to acquire proscribed
sensitive materials and the possible movements of
individuals on the sanctions list reminds us that it is
essential to continue to exercise vigilance regarding
Iran's activities.

The Committee is indeed still waiting for Iran's
response regarding the weapons intercepted on board
the Klos C ship coming from Iran, which the Panel has
confirmed were illegal and in violation of Security
Council resolutions.
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the Panel for it tireless work, and necessary to the work
of the 1737 Committee.

Since the adoption of the Joint Plan of Action, a
little over a year ago, the E3+3 have been negotiating
with Iran along clear lines: Iran has every right to
develop nuclear energy for civilian purposes, but it
should not develop nuclear weapons. A long-term
agreement must therefore include all the guarantees
necessary to establish the exclusively peaceful purpose
of the Iranian nuclear programme.

The most recent negotiations have resulted in
extensive and useful exchanges among members of the
group of six and Iran. Despite the lack of flexibility
demonstrated at this stage by Iranian negotiators, we
want to believe in Tehran's political will to reach a
long-term agreement. We therefore expect it to make
the strategic choices and take the courageous decisions
that are necessary.

During the series of negotiations in Vienna in
November, new ideas were presented that deserved
careful consideration by the members of the Panel. It
is in that context that the E3+3 and Iran have agreed
to an extension of discussions and negotiations, under
the terms of the Joint Plan of Action, until 30 June
2015. During that period, Iran must continue to meet
its commitments under the interim agreement of
24 November 2013, which has been implemented thus
far.

In that respect, the crucial role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in verifying Iran's
compliance with these commitments should be
welcomed. It is a significant effort on its part, and France
will play its full role by making an extrabudgetary
financial contribution to support the IAEA monitoring
and verification activities.

We remain fully engaged and committed to
reaching a credible, robust and durable agreement
that serves the goal of peace and security and restores
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

An improvement in the cooperation between Iran
and the IAEA is also needed, in particular regarding the
possible military dimension, both past and present, of
its nuclear programme. While Iran had complied until
August 2014 with the cooperation framework approved
last year with the Agency, the Agency reported in
its most recent report the lack of any progress on the
issues that had been identified, and this situation is
very worrying. The settlement of all issues related
to the possible military dimension of Iran's nuclear
programme is indeed a key element for restoring
confidence, and therefore for achieving the long-term
agreement that we all want.

