Mr. Alfano: I am honoured to address the Security
Council concerning the priorities of the Italian
chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I especially want to
thank the Dutch presidency for this opportunity. This
briefing is yet another example of the great spirit of
cooperation between Italy and the Netherlands during
our split term in the Security Council. Today, I am here
because I strongly believe that the OSCE is crucial for
our regional security, among many other reasons.

First, the OSCE is among the most inclusive regional
and multilateral platforms in the world. Its geographical
diversity stretches from Vancouver to Vladivostok.
Secondly, all OSCE States have equal participatory
rights. One voice is as important as another. Thirdly,
the absence of a rigid legal structure enables the OSCE
to respond quickly and flexibly to breaking political
events. Fourthly, consensus is a strength in the OSCE.
The search for a common denominator has reinforced
the sense of an OSCE community and facilitates the
implementation of our actions.

Given all the security risks that we face in Europe,
a forum like the OSCE dedicated to security and
cooperation is of great value to us, because, even when
dialogue is not conclusive and does result in a solution,
it nevertheless continues to build trust among parties.
Trust is fundamental to defusing or resolving crises;
over time, trust brings results. In the OSCE, trust is
an important element, because discussions are inspired
by the principles of equality and neutrality. We are
constantly reminded that security is a global public
good. No nation has ever been secure in isolation for
as long as we can trace back in history. We all share
responsibility for one another's security. For this reason,
I firmly believe in the principle of comprehensive
security that guides the OSCE; its ability to work in
partnership with other security structures, such as
NATO, the United Nations and the European Union;
and its members' determination in working towards a
confidence- and security-building agenda.

The motto of our OSCE chairmanship is "dialogue,
ownership, responsibility". We strongly believe that
these are the key ingredients for further strengthening
multilateralism in an organization that reaches out
to more than 1 billion people. Multilateralism is a
defining factor of Italy's foreign policy. Our support for
the OSCE is inspired by effective multilateralism, and
the OSCE has proved this effectiveness in many ways.
A good example of this is the structured dialogue on
the current and future challenges and risks to security
in the OSCE area, an informal format in which we can
have a frank, inclusive and substantive dialogue on
complex security issues.

Our motto - "dialogue, ownership,
responsibility" - has a specific meaning. We want
to follow an approach that looks equally at the Euro-
Mediterranean, the Euro-Atlantic and the Euro-Asian
regions and their connections; that is open, transparent
and inclusive; and that is firm on principles, but
flexible and creative on ways to defend those principles
more effectively.

These are extremely complex times. The crisis
in and around Ukraine is testing the core values that
we share. We have faced a crisis of mutual trust and
confidence, and there is only one way to rebuild trust:
more dialogue, more political will, more concrete
actions on the ground.

That is why my first mission as Chairman-in-Office
was to Kyiv, Moscow and Donbas. I wanted to send a
strong and clear message: that we expect new steps to be
taken for the implementation of the Minsk Agreements.
The positive results include, first, the success of the
Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE, which is a
crucial instrument for averting a dangerous escalation
ofthe crisis despite the difficult conditions. Allow me to
underscore once again the fact that we place the highest
priority on the safety of the monitors, who must be able
to carry out their work with the least possible risk.

Secondly, there is the acknowledgement by both
Ukraine and Russia of the need for a United Nations
support mission. We obviously are following the
contacts under way to this end. Coordination with the
OSCE is essential given its extensive experience on
the ground. It is also important for the United Nations
and the OSCE to complement each other in their
different missions.

Beyond the Ukrainian crisis, we are also focusing
our full attention on the so-called protracted conflicts.
With regard to Georgia, we support the Geneva
international discussions and are ready to promote
dialogue through informal initiatives as well.

Concerning Nagorno Karabakh, we continue
to support the work of the Minsk Group co-Chairs
for a definitive and shared solution to the conflict.
In Transnistria, we would like to build on the
positive momentum. My Special Representative
for the Settlement Process is in contact with all the
relevant actors.

In the past, our security divide was mainly between
East and West. Today, security concerns between East
and West are still significant, and the OSCE's role is
very relevant. However, we also need to look towards
the South and the Mediterranean. The Mediterranean is
a small sea, almost the size of a large lake when seen
on a globe, but much of our global security is at stake
there. It is therefore crucial to intensify dialogue and
cooperation with the OSCE partner countries of the
southern shores of the Mediterranean.

Last year, in the framework of the OSCE, we
organized the Palermo Mediterranean Conference. As
the Council is aware, the spirit of Helsinki, more than
40 years ago, inspired the rapprochement between East
and West during the Cold War period. Today the spirit
of Palermo nourishes and strengthens the dialogue for
peace and security in the Mediterranean. The spirit
of Palermo means the capacity to build a genuine
partnership among the 57 OSCE countries and the

Mediterranean partners, rediscovering the core mission
of the organization as a plural and inclusive multilateral
platform. This is the same approach that inspired our
mandate in the Council last year.

We are dedicating particular attention to
transnational threats such as terrorism; radicalization;
the illicit trafficking of arms, drugs, cultural goods
and hazardous waste; the links between terrorism and
organized crime, international money-laundering and
the sources of funding of terrorist groups. Fighting
corruption is also central to our agenda, because
corruption deeply affects the rule of law and undermines
the relationship, built on trust, between Governments
and their citizens.

Cybersecurity is another strategic priority. We
are promoting initiatives to increase the awareness of
decision-makers and the private sector as to how the
Internet can affect peace and security. Last September,
here at the United Nations, Italy, France and the United
Kingdom launched a new initiative putting together
States and Internet service providers to respond to the
misuse of the Internet. We need to do much more to put
terrorism offline.

During our OSCE chairmanship, we also intend to
keep a strong emphasis on growth, innovation, human
capital, good governance and the transition to green
energy, contributing to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, an agenda that
was defined by the United Nations globally and that is
being implemented regionally, also through the work of
the OSCE. In fact, the OSCE has always fostered the
view of comprehensive security as encompassing both
sustainable development and human rights.

I also want to underscore the importance of gender
equality and women's empowerment. Not just because
today is International Women's Day, but also because
these issues have always been key priorities for Italy.
As a member of the Council, we worked to mainstream
gender-related issues throughout the United Nations
system, especially in United Nations peace operations.
Again, here at the United Nations, we have emphasized
the fundamental role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution by establishing a Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network. We in the OSCE are dedicating
great attention to the implementation of the OSCE
Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality.

Regarding the human dimension, this year
is a special one because it marks the seventieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. Defending and promoting human rights is an
important precondition for long-lasting peace, security
and sustainable development. If fundamental rights are
protected through the legal system and in everyday life,
the rule of law is affirmed and security is guaranteed.
If there is no such protection, conflicts multiply and
social and political instability easily arise.

In that regard, one of the priorities of our mandate
in the Council was the fight against human trafficking.
During our presidency in November, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2388 (2017) in
order to defend the rights and the dignity of refugees
and migrants. Similarly, as Chairperson of the OSCE,
we are raising the attention of the Organization to this
heinous and intolerable crime, with a specific focus on
women, children and minors.

At the same time, we remain committed to defining
frameworks for safe and regular migration, based on
shared responsibility and international solidarity. It
is crucial to engage countries of origin, transit and
destination at the same table. That is also why we
favour the approach, led by the United Nations, in
the negotiations for the global compact for migration
and refugees.

The fight against all forms of intolerance and
discrimination is another main priority for Italy.
Therefore, it is no coincidence that the first major
event of our OSCE chairpersonship was the Rome
International Conference on Anti-Semitism, bringing
together Jewish, Muslim and Christian political and
religious leaders on that critical issue. Throughout this
year, we want to devote greater attention to countering
all forms of intolerance and discrimination. We cannot
shy away from combating intolerance, because history
has already taught us too many tragic lessons in
that regard.

We will only achieve security when we recognize
that we are all part of the same human race and that
defending human dignity is the key to our liberty. In
fact, that is a rooted value both in the United Nations
and in the OSCE and it is what best defines the long-
standing partnership between our two organizations
in order to prevent conflicts and to promote stability
and cooperation.

