Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
having taken the initiative to hold today' s very timely
meeting of the Security Council, on the eve of the
high-level meeting of the General Assembly, where
Member States will adopt a comprehensive political
declaration on the key areas for a global response to
the challenges of HIV/AIDS.

Surmounting that complex threat requires
comprehensive and coordinated work by the entire
United Nations system. Of particular importance are
coherent actions and appropriate distribution of tasks
among the General Assembly, the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with
their prerogatives under the Charter. It is important that
the Security Council' 5 actions in that area are
incorporated into system-wide efforts. The Council
should continue to focus on considering the issue of
fighting HIV/AIDS in the context of conflict and post-
conflict situations, including during United Nations
peacekeeping operations. That is where we see the real
added value of its contribution to the collective work
of the United Nations.

HIV/AIDS is not a source of conflicts, but
conflicts create conditions that contribute to the spread
of the epidemic and also complicate efforts to curb it.
Affected countries require appropriate and targeted
support from the United Nations. In that connection,
we welcome the coordination and cooperation between
the Secretariat' s Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS. On the whole, we agree with their
approaches and assessments of priority areas for work.

Since the adoption of the milestone resolution
1308 (2000) of the Security Council, some progress
has been made. At the same time, the ongoing burden
of HIV/AIDS in countries where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are under way requires
continuous efforts to react to the challenges of the
epidemic.

Of particular importance is possible assistance
from peacekeepers in efforts by specialized
international bodies to prevent HIV/AIDS among the
civilian population, to overcome social alienation and
discrimination due to HIV/AIDS and to create and
build relevant national capacities, in cooperation with
national and local governmental bodies and the
population. We should look at ways to ensure the
continuity of measures begun in the framework of
peacekeeping operations during longer-term
peacebuilding processes.

We favour additional efforts to reduce the risk of
HIV/AIDS for military and civilian staff of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The idea of
introducing the posts of HIV/AIDS special advisers
and coordinators in peacekeeping operations deserves
to be studied. Also significant is working with troop-
and police-contributing countries to provide
appropriate preparation of personnel before the
deployment of missions and to improve relevant
national prevention policies and programmes targeting
uniformed personnel.

We must be aware that women and children
continue to be one of the most vulnerable categories in
the context of HIV, particularly in conflict and post-
conflict situations. They are frequently either
combatants or victims of sexual exploitation by parties
to conflict. The epidemic also negatively affects the
potential of women to participate in conflict prevention
and settlement. A whole range of Security Council
resolutions on women, peace and security have laid a
solid foundation for work in that area.

The United Nations Secretariat should take
appropriate steps to develop approaches and implement
measures for United Nations peacekeeping forces to
respond to HIV/AIDS. Moreover, the leadership of
United Nations missions should carry out practical
actions at the country level, in coordination with
United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, including the World Health Organization, the
United Nations Children' s Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations
Population Fund.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that the
task of overcoming the global HIV/AIDS epidemic is a
priority for Russia. Our country actively participates in
international efforts in that area, including as a donor
to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria. We have contributed $317 million to the Fund.
In our view, the special role of the United Nations is to
mobilize, coordinate and implement a common
response to HIV/AIDS. Once again, we emphasize the
importance of coordinated actions by all parts of the
Organization in that area.

