Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, we thank him
for his leadership, dedication, tenacity and commitment
during his tenure as Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for Syria. He has our fullest admiration. Under
the most difficult circumstances, he has retained his
empathy, compassion and humanity. We are specifically
grateful to him for not compromising on amplifying the
voices of civil society, and Syrian women in particular,
to which we attach great value.

I will focus on three points today: first, the
constitutional committee; secondly, the fate of detainees
and missing persons; and thirdly, accountability.

With regard to my first point concerning the
constitutional committee, we fully support the efforts
of the United Nations to convene the constitutional
committee. We acknowledge the efforts of the Astana
guarantors to find a way forward on the United Nations
middle third list ofrepresentatives on the committee. Let
me underline that a credible political process demands a
constitutional committee that is credible, balanced and
inclusive of all Syrians. The constitutional committee
needs to be acceptable to all parties, including the
Syrian opposition. A committee that does not meet
those conditions would lack the necessary international
legitimacy. We call on the United Nations to continue
to monitor and ensure equal representation in the
constitutional committee. We repeat the importance of
a minimum of 30 per cent female representation in the
constitutional committee and its subcommittees.

We also call on the United Nations to take a leading
role in the establishment of the working methods and
the procedures of the committee, including provisions
on a balanced chairing agreement. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations has not closed the door
on the constitutional committee and will go the extra
mile. We are looking forward to the incoming Special
Envoy's views on the viability of the necessary package
for a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee. If it can be achieved, we would surely
welcome a first meeting in Geneva. If the stamp of
legitimacy cannot be given, we will support the incoming
Special Envoy in his efforts to find an alternative way
forward under resolution 2254 (2015). The Kingdom
of the Netherlands reiterates that the establishment of
the constitutional committee is not an end in itself, but
part of a broader political process based on resolution
2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

Secondly, with regard to detainees, missing
persons and torture, we express grave concern about
the lack of progress on the detainees file. Hundreds of
thousands of civilians have been arrested, imprisoned
and/or disappeared without due process at the hands
of the Al-Assad regime. We are gravely concerned by
the appalling situation in prisons, as was described in
the most recent report of the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
which referred to torture and sexual violence.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the International Committee of the Red Cross
should have access to the prisons. We are horrified by
the death notices of prisoners that the regime sends out
to family members, and we are staunch advocates for
support and access to information about prisoners for
family members. We call on the parties involved to
invest in confidence-building measures on the detainee
issue. The Syrian regime should start a process of
releasing all political prisoners. We are looking forward
to the prioritization, by the incoming Special Envoy, of
the detainee and missing persons issue as an integral
part of the political process.

That brings me to my third point on accountability.
Once more, we underline that lasting stability in Syria
cannot be achieved without accountability for those
responsible for war crimes. We repeat our support
for the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism in Syria, and we emphasize that we will
continue to actively promote accountability.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands reiterates its calls
for the situation in Syria to be referred to the International
Criminal Court. We regret that the Council has been
blocked from doing so by the use of the veto. Let me
also underline that structural changes are needed in the
political situation and in the governance of Syria. The
conditions for the safe, voluntary and dignified return of
refugees need to be met. That is currently not the case.
The protection ofhousing, land and property rights need
to be guaranteed. That would make reconciliation and
return easier. We need a credible and inclusive political
transition firmly under way before the European Union
can even begin to consider reconstruction aid for Syria.
I would like to emphasize the words of my Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Stef Blok, who said: "It is unthinkable
for the Kingdom of the Netherlands to finance a regime
that is responsible for war crimes."

In conclusion, the Syrian conflict forms one of
the darkest and most violent episodes of our times.
Unfortunately, it is far from over. There are those who
believe in a military solution, but there is none. Military
victories will not lead to stability and will not lead to
safety. In that respect, I reiterate our call on all parties
to intensify their efforts to uphold the ceasefire in Idlib
and find a negotiated and sustainable political solution.
In the end, only an inclusive political process can solve
the Syrian conflict. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to contribute towards that goal.

Let me also take this opportunity to salute all ofthe
countries that have contributed to the Global Coalition
to Counter the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
The Coalition has achieved great progress, but much
remains to be done. Let me associate myself with the
points made in that regard by our French colleague
just now. Also, in this specific context, we stress that
extremism will not be defeated without a political
solution for Syria.

Let me finish by welcoming my good friend, Geir
Pedersen, as the new incoming Special Envoy and by
expressing support for his upcoming work on the basis
of resolution 2254 (2015). We call on the new Envoy and
both current and incoming Security Council members
to commit themselves to the fight against impunity.
The Syrian people deserve justice.

To use the words of Staffan de Mistura from this
weekend at the Doha Forum: justice is

"like a candle and the light should never disappear...
we need that light... because one day, sooner rather
than later, that candle will be giving a feeling of
hope to those who lost so many people due to this
horror".
I thank our dear friend Staffan for keeping that
candlelight of hope andjustice alive.

