Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I shall
give the short version of my speech and would ask
delegations to report the distributed version.

I warmly welcome this debate, inspired by our
Canadian friends, and the Secretary-General's excellent
and thought-provoking report. They could hardly be more
timely. I cannot imagine a more accurate account of a
typical situation the Council is called upon to deal with
than the following passage in paragraph 8 of the
Secretary-General' s report:

"civilian casualties and the destruction of civilian
infrastructure are not simply byproducts of war, but
the consequence of the deliberate targeting of
non-combatants. The violence is frequently
perpetrated by non-state actors, including irregular
forces and privately financed militias. In many
conflicts, belligerents target civilians in order to
expel or eradicate segments of the population, or for
the purpose of hastening military surrender."

The Security Council Mission to East Timor can say a
thing or two about the pertinence of that description.

The United Kingdom will participate actively and
imaginatively in follow-up work to the Secretary-
General's report. Our support for the draft resolution
before us today is only the beginning of that process.

The Secretary-General is right to focus on efforts to
increase observance and awareness of international
humanitarian and human rights law. Better
implementation of the legal framework that exists is
critical, not more law. Better and more effective ways to
address impunity are also a crucial part of this effort. The
United Kingdom will continue to support all efforts to
ensure that war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide are punished. This means not only support for
ad hoc international tribunals and for the future work of
the International Criminal Court, but action to deal with
States that do not cooperate with them.

Turning to the Secretary-General's practical
suggestions for improving protection of civilians caught

 

up in armed conflict, I would like to highlight three areas
with direct relevance for Security Council action.

The first area is the ready availability of small arms,
particularly to non-state actors. Member States have a key
role in controlling this flow, but the Council can act too. It
must continue to be ready to impose arms embargoes where
appropriate, and it should, as the Secretary-General
proposes, ensure that all United Nations peacekeeping
deployments include effective weapons-collection and
destruction programmes.

Secondly, as regards the mandates the Council gives
its operations, the Council should not shy away - as
perhaps we have done in the past - from more robust
mandates if a force needs to act in enforcement mode, for
example to protect civilians. There are risks inherent in the
deployment of operations on the ground in hostile and
unstable situations, and we should be ready to face them.
We cannot expect to make a difference on the ground
otherwise. Remember "safe areas".

The third area is the capacity of the United Nations for
rapid peacekeeping deployment. The United Nations has no
troops of its own. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations cannot be expected to mount a United Nations
operation within a matter of days even when civilians are
under the gravest threat. That is why this week we have
used the option of a multinational force. But United Nations
rapid reaction and planning capabilities have to be
improved. The United Kingdom and France together signed
a memorandum of understanding in June on the forces we
were ready to commit to the United Nations at short notice.
We urge others to do the same.

Timely action is also preventive action. The more the
Security Council is seen to act swiftly, boldly and
decisively when civilians are under armed attack, when
humanitarian access is deliberately denied and when basic
human rights are violated, the more effectively we shall
prevent such abuses from taking place in the future.

It has thus been heartening to see the Council exercise
a variety of its powers in a timely, proportionate and
effective response to events in East Timor. From its initial
statements stressing the concern of the international
community, to a high-profile mission to Jakarta and Dili
and now a Chapter-VII resolution authorizing a
multinational force, the Council has demonstrated an ability
to respond swiftly where international peace and security
are threatened and where the rights of civilians are
subjected to massive abuse. Our task is not over: we must
continue our work with the Indonesians to ensure the
safety of returning civilian refugees and access for
humanitarian aid in East and West Timor.

The United Kingdom warmly welcomes the focus in
the Secretary-General' s report on the issue of enforcement
action in the face of massive and ongoing abuses of
human rights or of international humanitarian law. The
nature of modern conflict - chaotic, internecine and
brutal - challenges the Council to reinterpret its mandate
to maintain international peace and security in terms of
the threat to the security and survival of populations as
much as of States. In his report, the Secretary-General
rightly stresses that when we are faced by massive human
rights abuses, enforcement action must become an option
for consideration. We believe that there is now a need to
build up consensus within the Council and across the
wider United Nations membership on when and how we
should respond to such affronts to our shared values. The
factors which the Secretary-General has proposed that the
Security Council should take into account in considering
enforcement action are an important contribution to the
debate. We welcome them as a basis for early further
discussions in the Council.

