Mr. Ducaru (Romania): As this is the first time
for me to address this distinguished and vital organ of
the United Nations, allow me to extend my
congratulations to all the newly elected members,
particularly the Singapore presidency for the month of
January. It is my great pleasure to welcome warmly the
initiative of Minister J ayakumar and Ambassador
Mahbubani to keep alive a valuable practice by
organizing, during its presidency of the Council, an
open debate on strengthening cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretary-General and the troop-
contributing countries.

We are grateful to the current presidency of the
Council, not only for their initiative, which offers us
the opportunity to address a crucial issue for the future
success of any United Nations peacekeeping operation,
but also for the very comprehensive and sound policy
papers we were provided with, both as food for thought
and as a good starter for our debate.

My country fully endorses the substantive
statement presented by the Swedish presidency of the
European Union on the importance of strengthening the
cooperation with troop-contributing countries. We
share the vision that the United Nations, which bears
the primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, must reinforce its cooperation with
regional organizations and institutions, such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), which have their own experience and
competencies in managing current crises and
preventing the eruption of new ones.

During her one-year mandate as OSCE Chair-in-
Office, Romania is committed to act towards an
improved dialogue and cooperation with the United
Nations, which is the Organization which has indeed a
unique global vocation, as well as with all the other
governmental and non-governmental organizations and
institutions which may contribute to solving those
problems that Europe is still coping with, especially in
its south-eastern corner and the Caucasus.

As a troop-contributing country to several United
Nations peacekeeping operations in different parts of
the world, Romania attaches a great importance to the
recent demarches undertaken by both the Secretary-
General and the Security Council aimed at rethinking
and reforming the aims and the means to successfully
carry out the Organization's missions. We are strongly
encouraged to see that some of the recommendations
included in the Brahimi report and properly endorsed
by the Secretary-General and the Security Council have
already been implemented or are on track for
implementation.

In our view, while recognizing the importance of
the role that is to be played by the major international
bodies and the major individual countries, it goes
without saying that taking into account the
contributions which are brought to the process by all
partners represents a precondition for success in
conducting multinational operations. We consider that
a three-pillar cooperation mechanism among the
Secretary-General, the Security Council and the troop-
contributing countries needs to be designed. In our
opinion, it is high time to move on from a mechanism
working on an ad hoc basis to a more structured and
institutionalized one that is able to offer more
transparency and credibility to our common
endeavours. Such a mechanism, meant to provide
greater transparency and efficiency in conducting peace
operations, should operate from the early stage of
designing and adopting the mandate and until the very
end of the mission implementation. Welcoming
resolution 1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000, in the
spirit of that important document, as highlighted in
annex I, it is our conviction that the establishment of
this crucial consultation mechanism should take into
consideration the views of troop-contributing countries
regarding the modalities of functioning before such a
structure is institutionalized.

Romania has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping operations since April 1991, with a peak
momentum reached between September 1995 and July
1997, when almost 1,000 Romanian Blue Helmets were
deployed in Angola, making us number eight in the list
of troop-contributing countries.

At the same time, I would like to inform you that
the new Romanian Government has included among its
top priorities the elaboration of a comprehensive
strategy concerning the participation of our country in
United Nations-led peace operations. The main goal of
this strategy, taking into account the recommendations
included in the recently adopted report of the special
committee on peacekeeping operations in analysing the
Brahimi report, is to increase both the quality and the
amount of our contributions, as well as to ensure a
higher level of readiness, capability and diversity.

The Romanian Government sees our country's
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations not only as a contribution in terms of our
commitment towards the world Organization, but also
as an important task, meant to facilitate the
achievement of some of our political objectives.
Making our own contributions to the United Nations
efforts towards global and regional peace and security,
we are looking forward to increasing Romania's
participation in political and military cooperation with
the main European and Euro-Atlantic bodies and
individual countries belonging to them.

Allow me to recall that Romania was one of the
countries that, on the occasion of the Millennium
Summit and responding to the call of the Secretary-
General to support the reform of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, have voluntarily decided to
gradually increase their financial contributions to the
United Nations peacekeeping budget. That decision,
which has been taken in a period of difficult economic
transition, emphasizes Romania's will to contribute to
the financial burden-sharing efforts of the Member
States.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to
say that we fully support the ongoing process aimed at
reforming the United Nations peace operations,
initiated by the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, and we are ready to bring our own ideas
reflecting the experience we have accumulated in the
field of United Nations-led peace operations.

