Mrs. Mesquita Borges (Timor-Leste): I would like
to join other delegations in condemning the terrible
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu.
We convey our sympathies to the Government and
people of Somalia and the families of the victims.

Allow me also thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate and for the opportunity
to share my country's experience. We agree with you,
Sir, that the effective and transparent management of a
country's natural resources can be critical to preventing
conflict.

Timor-Leste is a very young nation, and we are
proud to be at the forefront of the world's best practices
in relation to the management of our natural resources.
Much effort has gone into the building of institutional
and legal capacity to transparently and effectively
manage our extractive industries. Last month, we
celebrated the eleventh anniversary of the restoration
of independence. The path towards stability and
development has been difficult, especially considering
the daunting challenge of building a nation from ashes.

Now with a solid foundation of security and stability,
there is a strong sense ofhope and confidence in Timor-
Leste, confidence and aspirations that are stipulated
in the strategic development plan for the period 2011
to 2030, which aims to transform the country from a
low-income nation to a country with upper-middle
income levels by 2030, with a population that is secure,
educated and healthy. An important part of the plan
includes economic progress and the development of
industries that will diversify the economy and drive our
prosperity.

Our petroleum industry is critical to economic
growth, prosperity and capacity development.
Petroleum revenue belongs to the Timorese people.
The Government is determined to ensure that any
income generated from those resources benefits all the
people, including future generations. That is why the
Constitution states that the resources of the soil, the
subsoil, the territorial waters and the continental shelf
and the exclusive economic zone, which are essential to
the economy, shall be owned by the State and shall be
used in a fair and equitable manner in accordance with
national interests. It is why our Parliament adopted a
petroleum fund law that requires taht all petroleum
income to be invested in a sovereign wealth fund in
accordance with the principle of good governance, for
the benefit of current and future generations.

A small portion of the fund is used for the State
budget, pursuant to approval by Parliament. That
transfer is guided by estimated sustainable income. At
this time, that is estimated at 3 per cent, which is the
amount that over time can be spent without depleting
the petroleum wealth. The governance of the petroleum
fund is based on a high degree of transparency and the
disclosure of information to help build public support
for the wise management of petroleum revenues and to
reduce the risk of misappropriation and corruption.

Timor-Leste is very proud to be the first country
in Asia, and third country in the world, to comply with
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. That
means that every dollar of the petroleum revenue is
publicly disclosed and matched with the records of the
resource companies. The Government has embraced
the principles underpinning the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and has gone on to develop the
world's most successful, comprehensive and transparent
online database of publicly available information on
budget expenditure, tenders, development partners'
contributions and programme implementation.

Timor-Leste's management of its extractive
industries resources has been endorsed by the Revenue
Watch Institute. This year, we have been ranked 13
out of 58 countries surveyed and ranked above some
of our development partners for safeguards and quality
control. We are mindful of the resource curves and the
need to diversify our economy, and we are aware of the
potential for conflict ifpeople feel that they are missing
out on the benefits of our petroleum wealth. That is
why the petroleum fund is used in such a transparent
manner in the budget on infrastructure spending and on
the delivery of education and health services.

Timor-Leste is now at a stage where we can give
back to the international community, in particular by
sharing our experiences and lessons learned. Timor-
Leste is the current Chair of the Group of Seven Plus
(g7+) fragile post-conflict and conflict-affected nations.
The aim of the Group is to provide a united voice for the
g7+ countries and to advocate for a different approach
to peacebuilding and state-building, anchored in
national priorities and ownership of the peacebuilding
and development agenda. The g7+ knows from bitter
experience that without peace and stability there can
be no development and that conflict is development in
reverse. As such, a comprehensive approach is needed
that addresses the specific challenges and root causes
in each particular conflict setting.

I take this opportunity to highlight that no fragile
conflict-affected country has achieved a single
Millennium Development Goal (MDG) and that,
according to the World Bank's 2011 World Development
Report, conflict can set a country back 30 years in lost
domestic product growth.

Insecurity and violence, weak institutions and
poverty are interlinked factors that create serious
obstacles to peace, development and the attainment of
the MDGs. Progress requires an approach that links
security, political and development actors. That is why
the g71L nations have been promoting the New Deal
and its peacebuilding and state-building goals, which
address economic foundations along with revenues,
services and security, to ensure that development is
country-owned and country-led. Underpinning all
that is the need for strong institutions, governance and
capacity to ensure accountable and fair social-service
delivery. As our Prime Minister stated at the General
Assembly last September, we are not fragile because
we are poor; we are fragile because we have weak
institutions.

A critical aspect in moving beyond conflict and
in building strong, resilient, effective and efficient
institutions is the need for strong partnerships,
specifically partnerships built on mutual trust, with
respect for national ownership. That is why Timor-Leste
is pleased to co-chair with Denmark the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-building. The
Dialogue brings together fragile and conflict-affected
countries and international partners and exemplifies
the importance of sharing knowledge and experience.

National ownership and the building of resilience
require concerted efforts, and effective and transparent
resource management can contribute greatly to both.
The g7wL advocates efforts to manage risks, increase the
use of country systems and support for the building of

national capacities. Those can all add to the long-term
process of peacebuilding and state-building and assist
in breaking the cycles of conflict and build resilience.

