The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that l have received a letter from
the representative of Haiti in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fils-Aime
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on Haiti, document
S/2004/698.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council extends its
appreciation to participating countries of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and hopes that those countries
that have pledged to contribute troops and
civilian police will do their utmost to expedite the
early deployment of their personnel.

"The Security Council notes that, while the
overall situation in Haiti has improved since last
February, challenges by illegal armed groups to
the authority of the Transitional Government are
undermining stability and security in some parts
of the country.

"The Security Council condemns attempts
by some illegal armed groups to perform
unauthorized law enforcement functions in some
Haitian cities. The Council underscores the need
for the Transitional Government to extend its
control and authority throughout the country. It
stresses the need that MINUSTAH actively assist
the Transitional Government's security
institutions in addressing the activities of all
illegal armed groups in accordance with the
mandate provided in resolution 1542 (2004).

"The Security Council stresses the urgency
of disbanding and disarming all illegal armed
groups. It calls upon the Transitional Government
to complete without delay the establishment of
the required structures and the adoption of the
required legal framework for the implementation
of a national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. It notes that
MINUSTAH will assist the Transitional
Government in these efforts.

"The Security Council underlines that
stability and security remain key to the political
and economic reconstruction efforts of the
Transitional Government and the international
community. It stresses the importance of building
the capacity of an effective and professional
national police in Haiti. It reiterates the
importance of effective coordination and
cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
National Police. It also underlines the urgency of
improving the situation of human rights in the
country, including women's rights.

"The Security Council underlines that only
a comprehensive and inclusive dialogue in Haiti
can lay down the foundations of a peaceful and
democratic political environment. It calls upon all
Haitian political actors to participate in the
national dialogue, as well as in the transition and
in the electoral process to occur in 2005.

"The Security Council welcomes that the
Provisional Electoral Council (CEP) has marked
the start of the electoral process in Haiti by
holding a broad dialogue on the preparation of
elections. The Council encourages the United
Nations and the Organization of American States
to finalize a Memorandum of Understanding

outlining election responsibilities of each
organization as soon as possible.

"The Security Council reiterates that an end
to impunity is key to national reconciliation in
the

Haiti. The Council stresses that justice should
apply equally to all citizens in that country and be
carried out by an independent judicial system
with the support of a reformed correctional
system. The Council expresses its strong concern
at reports of double standards in the
administration of justice. The Council welcomes
the intention expressed by the Transitional
Government to cease travel restrictions without
judicial justification in place against former civil
servants and politicians. It urges the Transitional
Government to end such restrictions without
delay.

"The Security Council welcomes the results
of the donors' conference held in Washington,
DC, on 19 and 20 July and urges for a timely
disbursement of the funds pledged. The Council
looks forward to the follow-up implementation
meeting to be held in Port-au-Prince from 22 to
23 September, taking into account the priorities
identified by the Haitian Government's Interim
Cooperation Framework.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the establishment of a Core Group to maintain
the mobilization of the international community,
to increase the consultation among major
stakeholders to enhance the coordination and
effectiveness of the assistance for Haiti, and to
contribute to the definition of a long-term
development strategy aimed at the promotion of
lasting peace and stability in that country.

"The Security Council welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of MINUSTAH and commits its full
support to his work."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2004/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.

