Mr. Tessema (Ethiopia): On behalf of the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia, I would like to express our appreciation to
you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for convening this debate
and for your delegation's leadership of the Council's
mission to our region. We are doubly gratified to see
you here after you honoured us by visiting our capital a
few days prior to the Council's mission. We also want
to express our special thanks to Ambassador Kolby for
his effective leadership in facilitating the Security
Council's mission to both Ethiopia and Eritrea.

My Government appreciated the recent visit by
the Security Council mission to my country. We are
convinced that it will contribute immensely to moving
the peace process forward and to resolving some of the
outstanding issues that might hamper the full
implementation of the Algiers Agreement and the
upcoming decision of the Boundary Commission. We
believe that the visit has accorded Council members a
first-hand opportunity to appreciate the concerns raised
repeatedly by my Government.

I would like once again to highlight some of the
outstanding issues that were raised by my Prime
Minister during the Council's mission and that need to
be resolved before the announcement of the Boundary
Commission's decision.

First, the Temporary Security Zone established by
the Algiers Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities to
serve as a buffer zone separating the two armies has to
be fully demilitarized and should remain so until the
demarcation process is completed. We have serious
concerns that the Temporary Security Zone is not fully
demilitarized. It continues to be infiltrated by regular
army in the name of militia and police. The Security
Council should see to it that this issue is resolved
sooner rather than later.

Secondly, Ethiopia also believes that the status of
forces agreement, which governs the presence of the
United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE), should be signed. Each party is required to
sign the agreement with the United Nations to
formalize UNMEE's legal presence in their respective
countries. It should be recalled that Ethiopia signed
such a status of forces agreement about a year ago,
long before the deadline. Eritrea has not yet singed the
agreement.

Thirdly, Ethiopia has continued to ensure that
UNMEE enjoys freedom of movement, including
within the lS-kilometer area adjacent to the southern
boundary of the Temporary Security Zone. We would
like to see UNMEE be granted the same right by the
other party, a right that is needed for the physical
demarcation of the boundary. Defiance and denial of
that right have caused serious problems in the past and
remain of major concern to my Government.

Fourthly, on the point reiterated by some Council
members regarding direct high-altitude flights for the
United Nations, a proposal was submitted by UNMEE
to the two parties. Ethiopia asked for a two-minute
deviation east or west of the proposed route, agreeing
to all other possibilities. We hope that issue will also be
resolved once and for all with Council consultation
with the other party.

We are now at a very critical stage in the peace
process between Ethiopia and Eritrea, as has been
reiterated by many Council members. We are looking
forward to welcoming the judicial and impartial verdict
of the Boundary Commission, to be announced during
the latter part of this month. We would not want to see
any of the outstanding issues or non-compliance with
the Algiers Agreement jeopardize the peace process or
the implementation of the forthcoming decision of the
Boundary Commission.

We believe that the decision of the Boundary
Commission should not be under any political
influence, nor should its outcome be politicized, in
whatever form, by any third party. We believe that the
decision of the Boundary Commission ought to be a
judicial decision, with full transparency and void of
any political considerations or pressures. My
Government has so far implemented and observed the
Algiers Agreement and is committed to the full
implementation of such an outcome.

