Ms. Ratsifandrihamanana: Sir, the African
Union welcomes your initiative in organizing this
timely meeting, and our appreciation goes to Under-
Secretary-General Menkerios and all those who have
briefed the Council this morning.

We commend the report of the Secretary-General,
which comprehensively described the situation on the
ground, including the relentless efforts being deployed
by the Somali parties themselves and the Joint Security
Committee established pursuant to the Djibouti
agreement.

At the outset, I should like to draw the attention
of the Council to an African Union (AU) press release
issued yesterday, 19 November 2008, which states,

"The Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, is following with
deep concern the recent developments in
Somalia. He is particularly disturbed by the
political impasse and the rift within the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) top
leadership.

"The Chairperson expresses deep concern at
the recent increasing acts of piracy off the coast
of Somalia. This is a clear indication of the
further deterioration of the situation with far
reaching consequences for this country, the
region and the larger international community. He
calls for more sustained and coordinated efforts
by the international community to support the

peace efforts in Somalia including the early
deployment of United Nations Peacekeeping
Forces.

"[Furthermore,] the Chairperson welcomes
the communique of the 30th Extraordinary
Session of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Council of Ministers on the
prevailing political and security situation in
Somalia, held in Addis Ababa on 18 November
2008, and expresses his strong support to the
stand taken by the IGAD Council of Ministers.
The Chairperson has called upon the leadership
of the TFG to return speedily to Mogadishu and
focus on the issues of governance, particularly,
the implementation of the Transitional Federal
Charter, as well as the Djibouti Peace Agreement
and the IGAD Declaration of 29 October 2008."

That press release recalls the communique of the
meeting of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union on the situation in Somalia held in
Addis Ababa on 11 November 2008. In its
communique, the African Union Peace and Security
Council welcomed the signing in Djibouti on
26 October 2008 of an agreement on the Modalities for
the Implementation of the Cessation of Armed
Confrontation between the TFG and the Alliance for
the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS). The Peace and
Security Council commended the TFG and the ARS for
this further step in the implementation of the Djibouti
Agreement of 19 August 2008 and urged them to
comply scrupulously with their commitments.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
further welcomed the Declaration adopted by the
thirteenth Extraordinary Session of the IGAD
Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held in
Nairobi on 29 October 2008. The Peace and Security
Council expressed its full support for the Declaration
and urged all Somali parties concerned to implement
fully and in good faith the decisions of that summit, in
conformity with the established timeframe set out in
the Declaration.

I should like to underscore the African Union
Peace and Security Council's appeal to the United
Nations Security Council contained in that
communique to take necessary steps to authorize the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a matter of urgency. This call
has been reiterated by the Somali Government and
other Somali parties on various occasions.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/709), the African Union is deploying all
possible efforts to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) as it continues to carry
out its work on the ground, pending the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. African
Union member States were called upon to contribute
additional troops to AMISOM. to enable it to reach its
authorized capacity of 8,000 troops, an increase from
the current level of approximately 3,000 troops from
Uganda and Burundi. An appeal has been launched to
the international community to provide the necessary
financial and logistical support to sustain AMISOM.

We welcome the initiative of the Secretary-
General towards the deployment of a multinational
stabilization force, as provided for under the Djibouti
agreement. We restate the readiness of the African
union to work towards the integration of AMISOM. into
that force, with the hope that this can help in finalizing
the conditions for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia.

As indicated by Director Zenenga there is still
some hesitation regarding this multinational
stabilization force. We therefore urge all Member
States, not only those who have been contacted by the
Secretary-General, to respond positively and to share
the responsibility for establishing this multinational
stabilization force.

While all indicators point to a deterioration of the
situation on the ground in Somalia, we believe it is
most crucial to take advantage of the window of
opportunity provided by the commitment of various
stakeholders and the Somali parties themselves towards
achieving lasting peace and security. We urge the
Security Council to take a decisive step that could
enable us to address the challenges on the ground.
Piracy, armed robbery, violence, trafficking, despair
and the threat of terrorist attacks, just to name a few,
are all only the external symptoms of the deeper
problems suffered by Somalia for nearly two decades. I
would like to draw the attention of the Council in
particular to the extensive violence, suffering and death
being visited upon innocent women and children in
Somalia.

In conclusion, we call upon this Council to
provide a response at the current stage that would

08-6107]
reflect the faith and trust of Somali, Africa and the
entire international community in the Security Council
as the custodian of international peace and security.

