Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his briefing.
Once again, we commend the very important work the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and its humanitarian partners do on a daily basis to help
the Syrian people. Mr. Lowcock's briefings shed light
on the facts regarding Syrians in need of help and the
humanitarian system's ability to reach them, and that
helps us make decisions in the Security Council based
on the realities on the ground and not on political spin.

The United States is proud to have voted in favour
of resolution 2449 (2018), which renews resolution 2165
(2014) for another 12 months. I would like to commend
Sweden and Kuwait for their stewardship over the
negotiations to ensure that the Council's deliberations
on the continuation of the United Nation's vital cross-
border humanitarian aid mechanism remained focused
on the needs of the Syrian people, millions of whom
have received life-sustaining aid from the humanitarian
aid mechanism established under resolution 2165 (2014)
since the mandate was first adopted by the Council,
four years ago.

Today's vote to continue the cross-border
humanitarian deliveries will ensure that food, clothing,
shelter and medical supplies reach, on average, 1 million
people in Syria each month. The United Nations cross-
border mechanism is transparent, effective and essential
for improving humanitarian conditions inside Syria.

In the face of that astounding humanitarian
need, the United States remains the single-largest
humanitarian donor to the Syria crisis, having provided
over $9 billion in humanitarian aid to those most in
need since the start of the conflict. We are proud of our
unwavering commitment to support the Syrian people,
and we will continue it. But we need to be clear that
conditions in Syria are not changing for the better, even
though some would like us to think that they are.

In 2018 the Al-Assad regime attacked civilian
populations using chemical weapons, air strikes and
barrel bombs to reassert control over half the territory.
Even as the regime has seized more territory, the truth
is that humanitarian needs are getting worse. In Syria
today, there are 13 million people, over 70 per cent
of the country's population, in need of humanitarian
assistance. And, by far, most of the people who need
assistance are in areas controlled by the regime. That
is because, as always, the Al-Assad regime seeks to
punish the Syrian people, not to help them.

When we look at the significant gaps in humanitarian
access in eastern Ghouta, Idlib and Rukban, and we
look at the ongoing instability of the security situation
and the hundreds of thousands who remain arbitrarily
detained in regime prisons, it is clear that the conditions
in Syria are still very dire, and for many Syrians they
remain very dangerous. Those conditions are not
conducive to the facilitation of large-scale returns of
refugees, and now is not the time to be pushing Syrians
to return home.

Until the Al-Assad regime lives up to its
commitments to provide regular, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access and fully engage in a political
transition, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), the
United States and our partners will not consider
providing reconstruction funds for Syria, absent an
irreversible political process.

It is a sad reality of the Syrian conflict that
the Al-Assad regime remains committed to using
humanitarian access and aid as a political tool. To this
day Damascus has not approved United Nations aid
convoys to access Idlib, where 3 million people can be
reached only through the cross-border mechanism. The
people of Rukban are once again waiting on the regime
to facilitate a second aid convoy. The uncertainty around
humanitarian access and the regime's unwillingness to
uphold humanitarian principles are why a l2-month
renewal of resolution 2165 (2014) was so critical.

Make no mistake that the United States looks
forward to the day when this mandate is no longer
needed - first, because there will be no risk of further
military escalation by the regime or its allies, and,
secondly, because we will see tangible improvements
in unhindered and sustained access throughout Syria.
However, it is clear from Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock's briefing today that the humanitarian
conditions in Syria remain dire. Security conditions are
fragile, and in some areas they remain very dangerous.
Cross-line and cross-border access remains vital for
millions of Syrian civilians who rely on the continuation
of this resolution's mechanism for life-sustaining aid.

Unfortunately, the risks of even greaterhumanitarian
suffering in Syria remain high, absent tangible progress
towards a political solution through the formation of a
constitutional committee and due to troubling reports
and indications of a potential military escalation in
Idlib, despite the fragile ceasefire, held together by the
Turkey-Russia brokered demilitarized zone.

Let me repeat that any military escalation in
Idlib would be catastrophic for the millions of
non-combatants there and for the stability of Syria's
neighbours. Last week, my Government made public
our analysis that pro-regime forces likely used tear
gas against civilians in Aleppo on 24 November, and
then the Al-Assad regime and Russia falsely accused
the opposition and extremist groups of conducting a
chlorine attack. We believe that the intention behind
Damascus and Moscow's disinformation campaign was
to use the alleged attack to undermine confidence in the
ceasefire in Idlib.

Given the grave humanitarian consequences
of a break in the Idlib ceasefire, it is important that
Council members do all they can to ensure that the
ceasefire holds. Efforts must move forward to form
the constitutional committee as quickly as possible.
Russia's promises to actively support the United
Nations efforts to convene the committee have yet to
be fulfilled, and the 30 December deadline, laid out in
the Istanbul summit statement, is rapidly approaching.

Few places exemplify humanitarian need as much
as Rukban, where once again a United Nations shipment
of assistance is delayed. The United States is gravely
concerned by the humanitarian conditions in Rukban
and calls on the Al-Assad regime and the Russian
Federation to take all the necessary steps to urgently
facilitate the next aid convoy. The United Nations has
underscored the need to move with a sense of urgency.
Winterization supplies are urgently needed in the camp
and UNICEF stands ready to conduct another round of
critical children's immunizations. It should be noted
that those vaccinations are time-sensitive.

This should not be a complicated or contentious
process. The United States and Russia have worked
successfully together to make a humanitarian delivery
possible in November. It is important that we - the
United States and Russia - work together with the
United Nations again now to secure a second delivery
to Rukban this month, as agreed.

Progress is possible. Let us spare no effort to
facilitate an immediate delivery. There is no time for
further delays. The United States is ready to move
forward with the second delivery to Rukban immediately,
and with the convening of the constitutional committee
immediately. The Syrian people are still counting on the
Council. We call on our fellow Council members and
the Syrian regime and its allies to join in our sense of
urgency and resolve these issues without further delay.

