Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Sir, for convening today's
quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yuri Fedotov, and
Kazakhstan Ambassador Kairat Umarov for their
informative briefings. I would also like to thank
Ms. Ghizaal Haress for sharing with us her perspectives
on current developments in Afghanistan.

Uzbekistan traditionally pursues towards Afghanistan
a policy based on the principles of mutual respect,
equality and full support of the Government elected by
the people of Afghanistan. Given such circumstances,
the engagement in the process of finding an ultimate
solution to the current conflict in Afghanistan and the
maintenance of good-neighbourly relations with that
fraternal nation are among the main foreign policy
priorities of the Republic of Uzbekistan.

Currently, Uzbekistan actively participates
in various international negotiations formats on
Afghanistan, such as the Kabul process, the Moscow
format, the International Contact Group, the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process forum, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan contact group
and the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan. Uzbekistan's principled position arises
from its firm belief that the central Government in
Kabul should be the main party to the peace process.
As mentioned by all speakers today, only an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned political process can lead to a
peaceful settlement of the current conflict.

Uzbekistan strongly supports the international
community's efforts in facilitating the process of
resolving the situation in Afghanistan. In that regard,
I would like to cite remarks made by the President of
Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
at the Tashkent-hosted International Conference on
Afghanistan held in March:

"We stand ready, at any stage of the peace
process, to create all necessary conditions
for organizing on the territory of Uzbekistan
direct negotiations between the Government of
Afghanistan and the Taliban movement".

In order to support a reconciliation process in the
country, the international community must invest in the
economic future and social stability of Afghanistan and
its young people.

For its part, Uzbekistan is rendering practical
assistance to Afghanistan in rebuilding its social and
economic infrastructure. In Tashkent, we supported
projects, such as the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan-
Pakistan-India Pipeline, the Central Asia South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA- 1000) and the following initiatives in the areas of
transport, communications, energy, trade and education.

First, with regard to the construction of a
railroad corridor from Mazar-e-Sharif to Herat, the
implementation of the project will provide employment
for up to 30,000 Afghans and allow Kabul to generate
annual profits from the transit in the amount of
between $400 million and $500 million. In addition,
the construction of the road from Mazar-e-Sharif to
Peshawar, via Kabul, remains urgent.

Secondly, the construction of the electricity power
transmission line Surkhan-Pul-e-Khumri will allow
for an increased electricity supply from Uzbekistan to
Afghanistan by 70 per cent, or up to 6 billion kilowatt
hours, per year. The power transmission line will
switch Kabul to the unified energy system of Central
Asia. Moreover, the electricity power transmission line
Surkhan-Pul-e-Khumri may become an important part
of the CASA-1000 project.

Thirdly, with respect to the training of Afghan
specialists, at the moment the educational centre for
training Afghan citizens is operating successfully in
the town of Termez in Uzbekistan. One hundred and
thirty Afghan young men and women students attend
the centre. In the future, we plan to increase the number
of students up to 250. We call upon all countries to
unite their efforts in establishing a special international
fund to support education in Afghanistan, which was
proposed by the President of Uzbekistan.

Fourthly, with regard to the promotion of
trade with Afghanistan, Uzbekistan has opened an
international logistics centre in Termez, with a customs
terminal to assist with an increasing export-import and
transit cargo flow. Uzbekistan has also created a free
economic zone - the Termez Cargo Centre - at the
border with Afghanistan, where we plan to establish
industrial production lines to manufacture the ready-
made items necessary for the projects and programmes
that are currently being implemented in Afghanistan.
Uzbekistan has also opened trading houses in Kabul
and Mazar-e-Sharif, with the aim of facilitating trade
between the two countries so as to gradually increase
volume to $1 billion annually. We have also established
a direct air link between Tashkent and Kabul to provide
support for bilateral exchanges. An Afghan Consulate
recently opened in Termez in order to facilitate
exchange between the two countries.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Uzbekistan is making consistent efforts to assist in
advancing the peace process in Afghanistan. Therefore,
in Tashkent we are strongly committed to continuing
close collaboration with the Government of Afghanistan
and other stakeholders in that quest.

