Ms. Jahjaga: In reference to the issue of the
incidents on the property of the Serbian Orthodox
Church as raised here by previous speakers, allow me
to present our position. I have strongly and publicly
condemned the recent incidents against the Serbian
Orthodox Church in Kosovo, in particular the latest
incident of graffiti on the gates of the Deeani monastery,
which I recently had the pleasure to visit. Kosovo has a
long tradition of interreligious tolerance and a history
of preservation of our common cultural heritage. These
acts go against the spirit of what we are trying to build
in Kosovo. Any attempt to desecrate such objects of
cult is totally unacceptable.

I have asked the authorities to swiftly bring to
justice the perpetrators of such acts, and the authorities
are dealing with these incidents. In the particular
instance of the Decani monastery, the police have
opened a case file on that matter. No church, mosque
or other place of worship will be destroyed in Kosovo.
We have a long tradition of interfaith tolerance, and we
will preserve it.

In reference to the issue of Syria as raised in the
meeting, the problem of foreign fighters who have
been recruited or who have joined the war in Syria has
posed a challenge for all countries around the world.
Unfortunately, the Republic of Kosovo is not immune
to this problem either. But we have taken bold steps to
curb this threat, and I want to assure the Council that we
are confronting this matter effectively. Our approach
has included legal and security measures, as well as
outreach to the Kosovo public. Kosovo's leadership
is united and vocal in condemning this phenomenon
and discouraging our citizens from joining the fight in
Syria. Our religious communities have also engaged
in raising awareness about the negative implications
that this has for Kosovo and the region. Kosovo's
Government has drafted and approved a law that will
punish, with 15 years' imprisonment, those who join
this fight. We will revoke the citizenship of anyone
joining the Syrian war. Our security mechanisms are
working around the clock to address this challenge,
and they have successfully conducted operations to
prevent this problem. According to our estimates, we
are talking about a fringe group that has joined the war
in Syria. The absolute majority of Kosovo's citizens
are determined in our fight against this negative
phenomenon. Kosovo will not be a safe haven or a
transit route for these elements, and we will continue
to work with our partners and international security
organizations to further address this matter.

