Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to express my
gratitude to Spain for convening today's important and
timely briefing. I would also like to thank the briefers
for their informative presentations.

Looking back on 2016, we recognize that terrorist
attacks occurred all over the world, including in the
Middle East, Africa, Europe, North America and Asia.
Ijoin others in offering condolences for the loss of life
in all those attacks, especially to Egypt, as one of the
most recent victims.

Resolution 2322 (2016), which was just adopted,
calls upon Member States to enhance judicial
cooperation to address global terrorism and reaffirms
that terrorists must be held accountable. Japan welcomes
and supports the resolution.

A number of key paragraphs in the resolution
would help enhance our judicial and police-to-police
cooperation. However, I would especially like to
highlight paragraph 17. That paragraph encourages
States to consider extending access to the INTERPOL
I-24/7 network beyond national central bureaus to
other national law enforcement entities at strategic
locations, such as remote border crossings. Terrorists
use lost or stolen passports to travel freely around the
world. To detect such false passports, INTERPOL
gives national central bureaus access to its stolen and
lost travel document database and helps them detect
false identifications. The database includes records of
the more that 68 million lost or stolen passports. From
January to September, the database was searched more
than 1.2 billion times, resulting in more than 115,000
hits - approximately 426 hits every day.

However, more than 100 out of 190 Member States
do not use that powerful database to screen travellers
at airports and border checkpoints. That means that,
even if national central bureaus detect the use of lost or
stolen passports, delayed notice to front-line screeners
may allow terrorists to sneak across borders unnoticed.
Timely access to the database is critically important for
front-line officers to prevent such breaches. I therefore
urge Member States to extend access to the INTERPOL
I-24/7 network, including the stolen and lost travel
document database, to front-line law enforcement
entities, in accordance with today's resolution, with the
goal of restricting cross-border terrorist movements.

In conclusion, I stress that simply adopting today's
resolution is not enough. We now must implement it.
Japan is always ready to closely cooperate with other
countries to enhance their capabilities and capacities.
Only the international community's collective efforts
on judicial and police-to-police cooperation will bring
terrorists to justice.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
