Mr. Sawaneh: My name is Alhaji Babah Sawaneh.
I have come from Sierra Leone. I want to thank the
Luxembourg Mission to the United Nations and
the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn,
for inviting me to participate today in this open
debate. I also want to thank UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the United States
Government for helping me to travel here. And I want
to thank my own country and the Government of Sierra
Leone. Most especially, I want to thank the Secretary-
General for his recent to Sierra Leone, as well as for all
the help provided.

In 2001, I was 14 years old when I was given an
opportunity to come to New York to address the
Security Council about my experience as a child
soldier, and also about the status of children in armed
conflict, especially in Sierra Leone. In my statement
in 2001 (see S/PV.4422), I pleaded with the United
Nations to act firmly against those state actors that were
in the habit of recruiting and using children in armed
conflicts. I now serve as an example of a child who
was forcefully abducted and conscripted into an armed
group, at the age of 10. I was robbed of my youth by
the Revolutionary United Front for two years. This was
one of the most brutish and turbulent civil wars in the
history of armed conflict, which was declared over in a
ceremony entitled "War don don" 4 by then President
Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabba in year 2002. I therefore
draw the attention of the United Nations, especially that
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
not only to hold accountable the individual actors who
recruit and use children, but also to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children in all armed conflicts.

Thirteen years ago, I stood before the Security
Council, in this very Chamber, and I told my story about
the war and how the children of Sierra Leone suffered.
I asked the United Nations, on behalf of the children
of Sierra Leone, to do everything possible to bring our
sad story to an end, to help us find our way back to
our communities and schools and to build a better life
and a better future. The children and young people in
countries affected by armed conflict need a future. We
need education andjobs.

I stand here again today by the grace of God, again
asking for the Council's help. Now after 13 years, I
would like to tell the Council what happened to me. The
story is not easy. I was able to return to school. With the
help of my foster family and friends, I worked hard and
did not give up. In 2011, two years ago, I finished my
bachelor of social science degree in peace and conflict
resolution in Fourah Bay College at the University of
Sierra Leone. I chose to study those subjects. My thesis
was about good governance and public sector reform. I
learned about civil society and how to prevent conflict.
I want to dedicate my life to this work and to speak on
behalf of children and young people so that our story is
known and our voices are heard.

In Sierra Leone, Iwas lucky to meet with people who
were also dedicated to this work. Last year in Freetown,
I met General Romeo Dallaire, the founder of the Child
Soldiers Initiative, and participated in training for the
security sector - the police, the military and other
officials - to prevent the recruitment of children in
armed conflict. I helped to organize the training and
assisted the children who came to tell their stories. The
aim was to build knowledge in the security sector to
protect children and prevent recruitment.

The story does not stop there. There is much more
that we need to do and to accomplish. Really, we are
still at the beginning of our work. Today there are many
children in desperate need of our help. In countries,
regions and around the world children are experiencing
violence and conflict. We need to work hard to protect
them.

I want to continue my work in peacebuilding when
I return to Freetown. It is partly about the security
sector, but it is also about our communities and our
Government and about finding real opportunities for
the future. Today, many children are not in school and
many young people are not able to find work. I call on
Council members to please use the microphones they
have before of them to speak out to help solve those
problems. We need to speak out, and we need to take
action to change the equation. We need to stop war
and the violations against children, especially the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts.

Yesterday, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF launched a campaign entitled "Children,
not soldiers". The campaign will end the use of child
soldiers by Government armed forces. It is a huge job,
but it is possible. However, even that is not enough.
We also have to stop armed groups from recruiting
children. Based on my personal experience, I know it
is a long story. Today there are many children in many
countries who have similar stories.

Fifteen years ago there were child soldiers in Sierra
Leone. I was one of those children. Today Sierra Leone
is child-soldier-free. Therefore, it is possible to change
one country at a time.

Looking back on the 13 years since I was last here
speaking to the Security Council (see S/PV.4422), I can
tell members that it has been really a struggle for me. I
have achieved a lot, but still there is so much we need
to do. No one can do this work alone. We have to come
together in order to succeed.

I thank all members for inviting me to participate
in this important open debate. I hope to see the end of
child recruitment by armed forces by 2016, and then the
end of all child soldiers. That is what we must do. I am
asking for the Council's help on behalf of all children
affected by armed conflicts.

