Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The United States worked hard to adopt a different sort
of draft resolution today, one that would have benefited
the Iraqi people and the Gulf region. We could have,
and the Council should have, done better, and we all
know why that was not possible. Our proposal is
simple: lift the controls on purely civilian trade while
maintaining the focus on the military items and
technologies which must be controlled so that Iraq
cannot restore its weapons of mass destruction
programmes or threaten its neighbours.

We have achieved considerable success.
Resolution 1352 (2001) registered Council consensus
on the main elements of a new approach, one that
would serve as a bridge between the current situation
and that day when Iraq implements resolution 1284
(1999) and all other relevant Council resolutions. Iraq,
however, clearly wishes that approach blocked and
prefers the status quo with the humanitarian
programme and across the board.

There is broad support within the Council for an
effort by the United States and the United Kingdom to
implement that proposal, and we will continue. Last
week, after a month of detailed discussions, we
produced the goods-review list which is central to the
new approach. That list is supported by four of the five
permanent members, and it merits the support of all
Council members, including Russia. It is the vital step
forward in providing the basis for the adoption of the
United Kingdom draft resolution. That draft resolution
remains under active consideration, and the Council
should adopt it as soon as possible.

It is now apparent that agreement in the Council
to change radically our approach to Iraq is not only
desirable but achievable. It would have been adopted
today save for the threat of a veto. But a veto would
bring our work to a halt and thus would be a victory for
Iraq. Therefore, my delegation agreed to this rollover
of the oil-for-food programme while we consolidate and
build on the success we have achieved thus far.

Our reluctance stems not from lack of
commitment or belief in the oil-for-food programme or
in the remarkable work of the United Nations in
carrying that programme out, which we believe
represents both high ideals and world-class
performance by the programme Director and his
colleagues. Rather, our disappointment stems from the
opportunity that we, the Council, have lost for the time
being.

The biggest losers in the failure to move forward
are not the United Kingdom, the United States or the
majority of Council members that favour the new
approach. The ones who have lost the most are in fact
the Iraqi people. The revisions we propose would
facilitate trade and accelerate commerce, and they
would improve the lot of Iraq's people.

We will use the time before the next rollover to
press ahead with our approach. We have made
considerable progress, and have come too close to
agreement to concede the field to Baghdad. My
delegation began this effort seeking to restore a
Council consensus that would help Iraq's people and
would stand firm against Iraq's ability to threaten its
neighbours. Our strongest weapon is Council unity, and
this rollover provides more time for those who agree
with our approach to help us build support to achieve
that goal.

