Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me first of
all, Sir, to welcome you again to our midst as you
preside over this open meeting. Allow me to commend
you for the far-reaching choice of the theme "The role
of the Security Council in the pacific settlement of
disputes".

The pacific settlement of disputes has constituted
and continues to be one of the greatest challenges of
our time. The rich reservoir of options contained in
Chapter VI of the Charter is still unexplored and
remains to be fully tapped by the Member States. Thus,
the theme proposed by the Pakistani presidency for this
public meeting constitutes a coherent and somehow
good opportunity for our Council to continue the
debate pursued during the Mexican presidency last
month, covering three topics: the pacific settlement of
disputes, the role of regional organizations in the
maintenance of peace and security, and the role of the
United Nations in post-conflict situations. The three are
organically linked and, together with the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter, form the core of the
Security Council's mandate in dealing with threats to
international peace and security and actions to prevent
such threats.

Your initiative, Sir, is particularly timely and apt.
Important developments that we welcome are taking
place in South Asia, leading to the establishment of full
diplomatic relations between India and Pakistan and
creating favourable conditions for solving a long-
standing dispute through bilateral dialogue and pacific
means. Angola commends and encourages the two
nations to forge ahead.

The world is still living through a complex
process of global transition, unsettled as it is by
enormous political, technological and civilizational
changes that have occurred during the past decade.
Great hopes were raised when this process was
unleashed for the possibilities for a renewed role of the
United Nations in promoting cooperation for peace and
in ensuring a more stable and secure world. However,
such changes added new risks to old ones, which
remained embedded in international life and are still
the main sources of threat to peace. Such issues as
poverty, disease, famine, oppression and the growing
disparity between rich and poor have not been solved
and require the greatest attention from us all if the
world is to be spared permanent conflict and insecurity.

The United Nations, by gathering the world
community of sovereign States in a common endeavour
of cooperating for the preservation of peace and
security and by benefiting from its operational
experience in dealing with critical situations, remains a
unique and indispensable tool for facing the threats to
peace and building a more secure world.

States are the foundation stones of the United
Nations, in that they bear the primary responsibility for
contributing to the objective of developing the
Organization's potential to achieve international
cooperation for peace. It is up to the States to recognize
the validity and relevance of the United Nations
Charter by abiding by it, refraining from actions
inconsistent with its principles and complying in good
faith with their obligations in the pacific settlement of
disputes.

The Charter is very clear in imposing on States
the obligation to resort to negotiated solutions when
they are party to any dispute likely to endanger peace
and security. The conceptual and practical approaches
to fulfilling these provisions of the Charter have been
defined and put into practice. Preventive diplomacy is
the most suitable way to resolve disputes before
conflict breaks out; it is possible to apply, however,
only when the good faith and political will exist among
the States concerned to solve a dispute by peaceful
means and when the parties are ready to engage in
meaningful negotiations.

My delegation wishes to underline the paragraph
contained in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later, relating to the commitment of the
Security Council to make wider and more effective use
of the procedures and means enshrined in the
provisions of the Charter for the pacific settlement of
disputes as essential components of its work to
promote and maintain international peace and security.

A number of conflicts could have been prevented
in the past - or at least action could have been taken
with a view to their prevention. But too often in the
past the inaction of the international community and
the United Nations allowed situations to grow to
uncontrollable proportions. In our view, when the
Security Council receives reports of mounting conflict
in certain countries or regions, it should engage in
immediate action and put in place the instruments at its
disposal to prevent the deterioration of the situation
and any conflict that might ensue.

In this connection, regional organizations are
particularly well suited to working with the Secretary-
General and the Security Council to provide accurate
assessments of crisis situations. Regional organizations
can engage in preventive diplomacy and take political
decisions whenever a situation is at risk of becoming a
crisis for the region concerned. It is our shared view
that regional organizations can play a fundamental role
in the maintenance of peace and stability. The meeting
held by the Council last month, with the participation
of the heads of the main regional organizations,
reiterated the important role played by them. This
meeting today reinforces that point.

I would like to conclude by reiterating my
delegation's great appreciation to the Pakistani
presidency for having taken this initiative to invite to
the Council three eminent, experienced personalities to
share their reflections. They have enriched our debate,
inviting the Council to tap more fully into the reservoir
of preventive diplomacy, which renders the Council
more effective and its solutions more responsive to the
problems we face in the world today.

