Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to be brief. Let me start, Mr. President, by
congratulating you upon your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. Allow me also to greet the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic, our
brother and great friend, General Antoine Gambi.

Regarding the report on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) (S/2010/529), presented for our
consideration by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General - whom we welcome here today -
we shall refrain from making any observations or any
comments. However, allow me to reiterate our
commitment and our resolve to efficiently fulfil our
mission, namely, to protect civilians, particularly
refugees and displaced persons, through to their
voluntary return to their places of origin.

In that regard, and pursuant to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1923 (2010), dated 25 May 2010, we have
just submitted to the Council an updated plan to make
permanent the Detachement Integre de Securite (DIS).
The implementation of that plan will enable the DIS to
ensure continued security in the refugee camps,
displaced persons sites and surrounding areas, as well
as to provide security escorts and uphold security in
the area as a whole, in coordination with the national
Gendarmerie and the National and Nomad Guard of
Chad.

We have always stressed the need for the
international community to ensure that the special trust
fund should remain after MINURCAT's withdrawal to
meet the needs of the DIS, which is - we have
repeated this on numerous occasions - a pilot force,
which, as we like to say, is the pride of the United
Nations and Chad.

Therefore, allow me to submit for the Council's
consideration a few figures. For 2011, our plan for
making the DIS permanent has a budget covering
operations and logistics in the amount of
10,039,215,680 CFA francs, or $21,561,472. The
Special Representative of the President of the Republic
to MINURCAT will meet informally with the Council.
He will be able to explain the plan better than I, and,
through the Council, will launch an appeal to the
international community to continue its efforts
alongside Chad to help refugees and displaced persons
in the east of our country.

We count on the Council's diligence to ensure
that it not lose sight of the noble mission of protecting
civilians, something that it is has constantly reminded
us of. Indeed, we count on the Council and on each of
its members, who bear the responsibility, in keeping
with the demands they make of us, to ensure that after
the complete withdrawal of MINURCAT the
international community continues to assist us in
fulfilling our humanitarian mission.
Finally, I cannot conclude without reiterating our
full cooperation with the United Nations in the
discharge of its noble mission for peace in our country
and in the subregion.

