Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator; and Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director
of the World Food Programme, for their briefings.

As mentioned in last week's Security Council
press statement (SC/13834), we take positive note that
the redeployment of Houthi troops from the ports of
Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa has begun, and we
call on the Houthis to dismantle all military structures
at the ports. In addition, we call on all parties to
fully implement the withdrawal agreement, respect
the ceasefire in full and resolve outstanding points
of contention, including the issue of local security
forces. In addition, we continue to call on all parties
to implement the Stockholm Agreement in its entirety,
including the prisoner-exchange agreement and the
memorandum of understanding on Taiz.

Although we are seeing just the beginning of
the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah agreement,
Belgium encourages the Special Envoy to continue to
prepare for the next steps in the political process. We
stress the importance of an inclusive process in which
women and youth participate meaningfully, thereby
reflecting the ethnic, geographical and political diversity
of the people of Yemen. The Al-Hudaydah agreement is
of particular importance to the humanitarian situation,
but of course the resolution of the conflict requires a
durable and inclusive political solution. In that regard,
we reiterate our full support for the efforts of Special
Envoy Griffiths.

Violence in the rest of the country continues and is
increasing distrust among the parties. The violence also
has an impact on access to humanitarian aid. We call on
all parties to exercise restraint. In addition, we condemn
the continued targeting of civilians in this devastating
war, including the recent attack on Abha International
Airport, in the Houthi-claimed Asir province of Saudi
Arabia. Belgium is deeply concerned by the increasing
tensions in the region. We emphasize that the path of
dialogue is the only one likely to lead to lasting peace
and security in the region. Belgium believes that the
United Nations has a role to play in supporting such
a dialogue.

Efforts are needed to improve the humanitarian
situation, which, as we heard this morning, remains
catastrophic. We commend humanitarian agencies
for their outstanding work despite the difficulties.
It is essential that all parties facilitate access to
humanitarian assistance and respect international
humanitarian law. In particular, we strongly condemn
any misuse of assistance, which must be provided to
those who need it. What Executive Director Beasley
just described is unacceptable.

We also heard the call of Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock to disburse as soon as possible the pledges
made at the pledging conference held last February in
Geneva. Belgium's contribution has been disbursed in
full. We call on other contributors to do the same.

Children are the main victims of this conflict. As
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, we convened a meeting of the Working Group
last Friday in the presence of the Deputy Permanent
Representative of Yemen, during which Mrs. Gamba
de Potgieter, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, introduced
the report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in Yemen. On the basis of the report, we
will now facilitate negotiations on the conclusions of
the Working Group. We reiterate our request to Special
Envoy Griffiths to include measures for the protection
of children in any peace process.

Finally, we would like to urge all parties to
the armed conflict to respect their obligations and
commitments under international human rights law
and extend to the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen, established by the Human
Rights Council, their full cooperation and all the
access necessary to make an effective and independent
investigation possible.

