Mr. Zuev (spoke in Spanish): The Security Council
deploys peace operations in increasingly complex
and asymmetric environments. The threats posed by
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices aggravate humanitarian crises and
hamper emergency responses. Explosive hazards injure
and kill civilians, peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers, and their presence undermines the prospects
for long-term sustainable peace.

(spoke in English)

Echoing the words of the Secretary-General,
peace without mine action is incomplete peace.
Mine action achieves results in the most difficult
operating environments. As an integrated component
of peacekeeping and special political missions, mine
action is critical to the safety, security and mobility of
mission personnel and to effective and efficient mandate
implementation. It is also of critical importance to the
protection of civilian populations, especially children
and women. I will present only a few impressive
examples of how this challenge is addressed by United
Nations peacekeepers.

In Mali, training for peacekeepers enhances their
capacity to mitigate the threat posed by improvised
explosive devices and saves their lives. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, clearing explosive
remnants of war and other explosive hazards enables
safe movement for conflict-affected communities.
In South Sudan, the use of explosives detection dogs
ensures that protection-of-civilian sites are free
from explosive hazards. In Iraq, vast risk education
campaigns and humanitarian clearance of improvised
explosive devices allow for the safe return of displaced
populations and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In Colombia, mine action was one of the first items
parties negotiating peace agreed and acted upon.

(spoke in French)

Today's debate reminds us that it is important to take
account of mine action in the formulation of mandates
and in renewing them. The Secretary-General's vision
for the reform of the peace and security architecture
is structured around a continuum from prevention to
conflict resolution and from to peacebuilding and
sustainable development, with strong partnerships
playing a central role. Through partnerships with States,
regional agreements such as the one we have with the
African Union, and with civil society, mine action is
able to demonstrate its operational effectiveness and its
capacity for implementation through a wide range of
the Organization's priorities.

With regard to conflict prevention, the depollution
and destruction of anti-personnel mines, explosive
remnants of war and improvised explosive devices
make it impossible to access explosive materials that
could be recycled and used to construct new improvised
explosive devices. Reintegrating demobilized soldiers
and employing individuals from affected communities
in the area of mine action play a role in creating
conditions conducive to peace.

(spoke in Russian)

As we have observed in peace processes, such as in
Colombia, mine action is an effective tool that allows
for the rapid and early strengthening of confidence
and peace in very complex and politically sensitive
environments. The strong leadership and coordination
role of the United Nations Mine Action Service
(UNMAS) supports and promotes those achievements,
as has been recognized by Member States. The role of
UNMAS in the field in coordinating the work of the
mine-action sector, including in complex operational
environments such as in Iraq, provides a coherent,
focused response, increased efficiency and cost-
effective delivery.

The doctrine developed by UNMAS, through broad
and comprehensive negotiations includes guidelines for
reducing the threat posed to peacekeepers by the use of
improvised explosive devices, which provides direction
for a consistent response within the affected mission,
and also includes international mine action standards
used by all operators to provide safe and effective
operations on a global scale.

(spoke in English)

In response to the call by the Secretary-General
in his report on countering the threat posed by
improvised explosive devices (A/7l/187), UNMAS is
also using its expertise to coordinate the development
of standards for the United Nations on the disposal of
improvised explosive devices. The standards, expected
to be completed by the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly, will ensure conformity in training,
equipment and operations. UNMAS is also taking steps
to identify the building blocks for a whole-of-United
Nations response to improvised explosive device
threat mitigation. That has been a key area of concern,
especially for troop-contributing countries.

The Security Council expects to be kept informed
about threats and efforts to mitigate the threats posed
by explosive hazards. I wish to assure the Council of
the strong commitment of UNMAS to support the
Secretary-General and the work of the Council in
advancing the peace and security agenda in general.

