Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to express my gratitude for the
statements delivered by Mr. Menkerios, Mr. Mkapa,
Mr. Kane, Mr. Osman and Mr. Deng Alor Kuol.

Today, we are recognizing a historic event for the
Sudanese people, for the African continent and for all
of those who are convinced that conflicts can and must
be settled through peaceful and democratic means. The
outcome of the referendum is a testament to the will
for independence of the people of Southern Sudan. Its
importance has been emphasized by the massive voter
turnout. Colombia would like to congratulate the
Sudanese people for their genuine expression of
democracy and the leaders of the Sudan for
demonstrating their commitment to and acceptance of
the referendum results. I should also like to highlight
the work of all of those who participated in the
preparation, financing and conduct of the process.

Although the outcome of the referendum marks a
milestone in the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, we must not lose sight of the fact
that the full implementation of the Agreement is
essential to fully resolve the situation. Pending
substantive issues must be addressed in order to ensure
peaceful and mutually beneficial relations between the
North and the South.

Unless outstanding issues are resolved
definitively - such as those pertaining to citizenship,
wealth-sharing, security, natural resources management
and border demarcation - serious reversals could
occur, leading to endless difficulties. It is therefore
important that the parties be encouraged to commit to
the effective advancement of negotiations and to
support the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel responsible for implementing the
recommendations on the Sudan.

We echo and share the concerns of the other
Council members at the situation in Abyei, which we
have discussed on numerous occasions. The parties
need to make a firm commitment and demonstrate
brave political will so as to overcome, with assistance
from the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel, the current impasse in the negotiations.
My delegation is confident that the willingness
expressed by President Al-Bashir and First Vice-
President Kiir at their recent meeting will pave the way
for achieving concrete results on all pending issues.

As the interim period ends, the Security Council
in particular and the United Nations in general should
commit to supporting development and institutional
capacity-building of the new State structures, and to
encouraging peaceful coexistence between the North
and the South. My delegation believes that, with the
successful conduct of the referendum and the
commitment to respecting its results, it will be possible
to achieve an inclusive, adequate agreement that
responds to the needs of the people of Darfur and
addresses all the roots of the conflict. We reiterate our
commitment to the negotiation process evolving in
Doha, and we welcome the work of the United
Nations-African Union Joint Chief Mediator,
Mr. Djibril Bassole', and the Government of Qatar.

In this regard, we welcome the participation in
the negotiations of the Liberation and Justice
Movement and the Justice and Equality Movement, and
we once again urge all rebel groups to join them
immediately and without preconditions, and to
cooperate fully in the process. In the View of my
delegation, the political process in Darfur should be
based on the results achieved in Doha and conducted in
an environment that ensures its functionality and
inclusiveness. It is important to guarantee the
coordination of all stakeholders interested in achieving
a peaceful solution in the region.

The situation and security in Darfur continue to
be of great concern. An agreement leading to a
ceasefire between the parties should be a key and
immediate objective. Finally, let me reiterate that the
international community and our Organization in
particular must maintain their commitment to this and
future generations in the quest for peace and prosperity
for the Sudanese people.

