Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba hopes this debate will contribute to mobilizing the
international community to make integrated efforts to
assist Africa and that it will help relevant bodies of the
United Nations to surmount obstacles that affect the
fulfilment of their mandates and programmes. It will be
productive if, in essence, it helps the will of the
industrialized countries to be expressed in reality and the
appropriation of resources.

Public opinion should not assume that the United
Nations has only just discovered how serious this
epidemic in Africa is. Ignorance is not the cause of its
inaction. In general, there are no new data or ideas. The
growth of the epidemic and the consequences we are
seeing were foreseen years ago. At a debate right here, on
29 September 1999, these matters were addressed, though
no apparent progress has been made.

We understand with profound and painful realism
that there will be no solutions without economic
development. Africa would have to spend more than $57
billion dollars a year just for anti-retroviral drugs for
current patients and, if the developed countries'
therapeutic schemes were to be followed, they would cost
more than $250 billion. Today, Africa can barely spend
$10 per capita on health, which in some countries
constitutes one ninth of their debt service.

Forty-four per cent of Africans - more than half of
the sub-Saharan African population - live in conditions
of absolute poverty. Eight million African refugees
scarcely receive care or resources. Equally serious are the
malaria epidemic and the deaths of millions of people
from hunger and curable or preventable diseases. Every
year, 4.7 million Africans die of infectious and parasitic
diseases, 92 times the number of deaths by the same
cause in Western Europe. Life expectancy is expected to
drop to 45 years. More than one third of African
countries is or has recently been in a conflict situation.

In 1998, Africa received less than $5 billion - 3
per cent of the world's total - in direct foreign
investments. Its current account deficit was $16 billion,
over three times that of the previous year. The debt
burden was up $350 billion, more than three times
Africa's exports of goods and services. Meanwhile,

 

official development assistance accounts for only 0.23 per
cent of the developed countries' gross domestic product.

Development will be impossible and there will be no
structural or lasting solutions to the AIDS problem in
Africa unless the unjust and unsustainable world order that
we are suffering under today changes. It is imperative that
palliatives be found to the epidemic by means of the
integrated efforts of the international community. The
required resources can be contributed only by the developed
countries, which control 86 per cent of the world's gross
domestic product, 82 per cent of exports, 68 per cent of
investments and 74 per cent of telephones. AIDS in Africa,
like hunger, is a problem of underdevelopment, not of
security.

It is necessary to move on to facts. Cuba reiterates its
proposal to establish a collaboration project through the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the World
Health Organization and other agencies and funds for sub-
Saharan Africa, the Caribbean and Central America to
confront AIDS, among other health problems, to which
Cuba is ready to contribute medical personnel free of
charge.

Cuba also reiterates its proposal to provide, free of
charge, all the medical personnel required to launch an
integrated and emergency health campaign in northern sub-
Saharan Africa. We propose that the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the developed
countries provide thereto the minimum indispensable
resources, mainly medicines and medical equipment.

With one doctor and oral hydration salts, which cost
just a few cents, a child's life can be saved. The Cuban
people, with the same feelings that cause them to shudder
today and struggle for the fate of just one of their children
illegally and arbitrarily held in the United States, will
provide the doctor.

This effort is feasible and will not require many
resources. Cuba has been undertaking it on its own, to the
extent of its capacities, and currently has 43 medical teams
in 11 countries, providing health care to over 10 million
people. The expansion of this cooperation is currently under
way. A Latin American University of Medical Sciences has
been set up with a prospective enrolment of 6,000 students.
Steps are being taken to establish medical schools with
Cuban professors in two African countries. A vaccination
campaign is being waged in Haiti. All the necessary college
scholarships will be provided free of charge to the
Caribbean countries.

Hundreds of African youths are studying in Cuba,
where close to 27,000 professionals and technicians have
graduated and more than 5,000 have been trained. As
physicians and dentists alone, 1,165 have graduated. More
than 80,000 Cuban civilian participants have served in
Africa, nearly 25,000 of them in health care.

With political will and effective social programmes,
the exploitation of resources, the creation of effective and
comprehensive health and education systems for the
whole population, as well as equity in the distribution of
wealth, a small, poor and blockaded country like Cuba
can point to successful experience in AIDS treatment and
control.

Since 1986 through 31 December 1999, 2,676
seropositive persons, 1,001 AIDS patients and 691 AIDS-
related deaths have been reported. The epidemic has
grown slowly and is considered to be a low-transmission
one. Only 0.03 per cent of the population between the
ages of 15 and 49 is infected.
All AIDS-infected Cubans enjoy thorough care;
broad medical coverage, understanding and human
solidarity; the right to confidentiality; and full respect for
their private life. They are not discriminated against; they
are guaranteed their right to work, social security and
health care, generally through modern out-patient
treatment. Their legal status is respected and the
enjoyment and exercise of their human rights are ensured.
Health-related education is effective and universal. The
Cuban AIDS-vaccine project, now in the phase of clinical
testing in humans, is among the most advanced
worldwide. May our experience, which we humbly and
modestly present, serve as an opportunity to demonstrate
that this effort is feasible.

The United Nations has to act. The General
Assembly should define policies and mandates for an
urgent and integrated effort in Africa, either through the
special session proposed today or otherwise. The World
Health Organization (WHO), the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and other agencies,
funds and programmes must take immediate action. The
Economic and Social Council should consider ways to
provide effective coordination.

If humankind's conscience is reflected in actions by
Governments, if other international protagonists
participate responsibly, if developed countries act
altruistically, if it is understood that there will be no

 

peace or development without peace and development in
Africa and that in a globalized world the only future that
can be built is a common one, then the fight against AIDS
will be possible.

