Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his informative briefing. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine and the Permanent Representative of Israel
for their statements. Luxembourg fully endorses the
statement that will be made by the observer of the
European Union at this debate.

I would like to speak first about the Middle East
peace process. The direct negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians begun on 14 August are
continuing on a regular basis, and we welcome that.
Nonetheless, we have no illusions. In order to achieve
a negotiated two-State solution in the agreed time
frame of nine months, numerous obstacles must still
be overcome. We hope that with the decisive support
of the United States, and in particular the personal
involvement of Secretary of State John Kerry, as well as
the active involvement of Special Envoy Martin Indyk,
Israel and Palestine will continue to negotiate with the
requisite earnest and discretion. We hope that both
parties will demonstrate good faith and be prepared
to make the necessary sacrifices to build an enduring
peace in the Middle East.

The time has come to take the necessary historical
decisions, to implement a two-State solution based
on the 1967 borders, and to make peace through a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable Palestinian State, living in peace and security
side by side with the State of Israel, with Jerusalem as
the capital of both States. To that end, unilateral acts
that fuel the logic of defiance must cease. No one in
Palestine will believe in the successful outcome of the
peace process if illegal settlement activities continue
at their current pace, if tensions and provocative acts
on the esplanades of mosques intensify, and if the
separation wall continues to deprive Palestinians of
their land. For their part, the Palestinians must end the
violence in the West Bank and stop firing rockets from
the Gaza Strip. They must fulfil their commitments and
continue their efforts to combat terrorism.

Luxembourg will continue to work with its European
Union partners to contribute to the efforts under way in
close cooperation with the key stakeholders, including
the countries of the region and the Quartet. We welcome
the Quartet's meeting on the sidelines of the General
Assembly and its statement issued on 27 September.

I turn now to Syria.

Since the open debate that was held in July, the
Security Council has been able to take two important
decisions with respect to disarmament and humanitarian
access. On 27 September, we adopted resolution 2118
(2013) which follows up on the terrible chemical
weapons attack of 21 August and seeks the dismantling
of Syria's chemical weapons. The destruction in the
established time frame of one of the largest chemical
weapons arsenal in the world is an enormous job.

No effort must be spared in order to support the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations in
its work. Syria, for its part, must unswervingly respect
all the requirements and commitments stipulated by the
Council. On 27 September, Luxembourg made available
to the OPCW a satellite communication facility, and last
week we decided to contribute €500,000 to the special
trust fund established by the United Nations and the
OPCW to cover part of the cost of the Joint Mission.

Of course, the elimination of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme will not in and of itself end the
immense suffering of the Syrian people, which has now
lasted for more than two and a half years. The violence,
unfortunately, has seen no end. Children living in
besieged communities are now dying of famine. In
January, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights estimated that there were roughly
60,000 dead. Today, just nine months later, the number
of victims has doubled. The list of war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes that appal the conscience
of humankind is only increasing. Given the level of
horror, the situation in Syria must be referred to the
International Criminal Court. The Council must
shoulder its responsibilities in that regard.

The humanitarian and security challenges can be
resolved only through a politically negotiated solution
to the crisis. Now that a provisional date for the
"Geneva II" conference has been announced, we would
encourage all parties concerned to participate in order
to finally set in motion a dynamic that will lead to an
end to the hostilities and move towards the necessary
political transition in Syria based on the 30 June 2012
communique (S/2012/523, annex).

In the meantime, it is urgent for the parties in
Syria, in particular the Syrian authorities, to follow up
the provisions of our second important decision, the
presidential statement on the humanitarian situation
adopted by the Council on 2 October (S/PRST/2013/15).
The parties must facilitate without delay free and
unhindered humanitarian access to the affected
populations. The evacuation of civilians trapped
in Moadamiya, on the outskirts of Damascus, and
of thousands of families who are prisoners in other
besieged towns, is urgently needed. There is an urgent
need to lift bureaucratic obstacles, ensure the provision
of medical supplies, provide humanitarian pauses,
open humanitarian corridors and provide cross-border
access and passage across the front lines to affected
populations.

We count on the Secretary-General and his team
to continue their regular updates to the Council on
the humanitarian situation in Syria and its impact on
neighbouring countries, as well as to inform us of
the implementation of the provisions of the 2 October
presidential statement (S/PRST/2013/15). The decisions
we take will be of no value unless we remain focused
on their implementation on the ground and if we
collectively and firmly assure that they are applied.

