The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the German Government for taking the initiative on
this very important issue. The economic dimensions of
armed conflict are often overlooked, but they should
never be underestimated. The role of business, in
particular, can be crucial, for good and for ill.

Private companies operate in many conflict zones
and conflict-prone countries. Their decisions - on
investment and employment, on relations with local
communities, on protection for the local environment,
on their own security arrangements - can either help a
country turn its back on conflict or exacerbate the
tensions that fuelled conflict in the first place.

Private companies also manufacture and sell the
main hardware of conflict - from tanks to small arms,
anti-personnel mines and even machetes. And private
enterprises and individuals are involved in the
exploitation of, and trade in, lucrative local natural
resources, such as oil, diamonds, narcotics, timber and
coltan - a crucial ingredient in many high-tech
electronics. Governments and rebel groups alike have
financed and sustained military campaigns that way. In
many situations, the chaos of conflict has enabled
resources to be exploited illegally or with little regard
for equity or the environment. When local populations
are excluded from discussions on access to and control
of natural resources and see little benefit from them in
their communities, it can in turn be a cause of more
conflict.
These are complex challenges. They touch on
fundamental questions of sovereignty, democratic
governance, corporate accountability and individual
integrity. Moreover, many of the transactions involved
occur in the shadows or within the context of failed
States that do not have the capacity to regulate
activities that are driven by profit but which fuel
conflict. Enforcement and monitoring measures aimed
at cracking down on such activities often lack teeth, if
they exist at all. Supply chains are often so
multilayered as to defy efforts at greater transparency.
Even legal activities can have unfortunate and
unintended consequences.

Business itself has an enormous stake in the
search for solutions. After all, companies require a
stable environment in order to conduct their operations
and minimize their risks. Their reputations, not just
with the public but with their own employees and
shareholders, depend not only on what products or
services are provided but on how they are provided.
And their bottom lines can no longer be separated from
some of the key goals of the United Nations: peace,
development and equity. All these are compelling
reasons why business should play an active role in
tackling these issues, without waiting to be asked.

The Security Council, for its part, has already
addressed many of them. The Council has imposed
targeted sanctions. It has supported the Kimberley
Process which, though a voluntary initiative, has
reduced the trade in so-called conflict diamonds. The
Council has set up expert panels to assess the role of
political economy in triggering or prolonging conflict.
It has authorized some peacekeeping missions to assist
in the monitoring of economic sanctions and arms
embargoes and to support efforts to re-establish
national authority over natural resources.

This meeting occurs against a backdrop of several
important initiatives. The Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development has adopted the
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, with the hope
of ensuring corporate adherence to Security Council
decisions and international conventions. An initiative
led by the United Kingdom aims to increase
transparency in the extractive industry. Some Members
States have issued voluntary principles on security and
human rights aimed at ensuring that, when security and
protection are subcontracted to private companies, it is
done in ways that protect against violations of human
rights.

And my own Global Compact has sought to
improve global corporate citizenship. One product of
the dialogue on this subject is the Business Guide to
Conflict Impact Assessment and Risk Management.
Members of the Compact are also discussing adding a
tenth principle on corruption to the existing nine
principles on human rights, labour standards and the
environment. And they are exploring what they can do
to help implement the new United Nations Convention

against Corruption. All of us - Governments,
businesses, non-governmental organizations and
intergovernmental organizations - need to learn to

operate more openly, in the sunshine of transparency.
That is essential if we are to break the cycle of
corruption and build greater confidence in our various
institutions and enterprises.

In the specific context of the United Nations,
members probably know that I am establishing an
independent inquiry into the allegations of fraud,
corruption and mismanagement relating to the oil-for-
food programme that we were running. Transparency is
the only way to deal with such allegations and by far
the best way to prevent corruption from happening in
the first place. That, I believe, will be one of the main
lessons we have to learn from this affair, whatever the
outcome of the inquiry.

In any case, all of these efforts and initiatives
have only begun to tackle the issue. The time has come
to translate ad hoc efforts into a more systematic
approach. At the United Nations, such an approach
would promote greater cooperation and interaction
between the security and development arms of the
Organization. It would give us the tools with which to
better understand and more actively influence the
economic incentives and disincentives that drive the
dynamics of armed conflict, and it would ensure that
those factors are reflected in efforts to prevent conflict,
in peace agreements and in the mandates given to
peace operations.

With these aims in mind, I have established an
inter-agency group, chaired by the Department of
Political Affairs, which is looking carefully at the
political economy of armed conflict and will provide
recommendations on how to improve the response of
the United Nations system and of Member States. I
urge this Council, and Member States in general, to
focus greater attention on this issue and to engage more
dynamically with the private sector. The Secretariat
will help in any way it can.

This is a subject on which passions run high, as
we know. We need to find the proper balance between
inducement and enforcement. There are times when
outrage is the only proper reaction. There are times
when appeals to the common good will fall on deaf
ears, but with so much at stake, we cannot afford a
situation in which the actors involved are polarized,
demonizing each other and unable to engage in
dialogue. We must create a space where all can come
together and find solutions. I hope that this meeting
will contribute to that goal.

