Mr. Wetland (Norway): As a founding member
of the International Contact Group and Chair of the
Group of Friends of Somalia here in New York,
Norway is deeply engaged in the peace process in
Somalia. Norway will continue to assist in areas such
as peace, reconciliation and training police capacity.
We will cooperate both with the Transitional Federal
Government and with those regional administrations
that are functioning. We have also recently decided to
provide approximately $30 million in humanitarian
assistance to Somalia in 2011.

As the fighting has intensified, a severe drought
has also exacerbated the already grave humanitarian
crisis in large parts of the country. There is an urgent
need to improve access for the provision of
humanitarian assistance to all parts of Somalia.

It is alarming that the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs) are lagging far behind in their
efforts to deliver on what is expected of them before
the expiry of their mandate, in August. We deplore the
untimely decision by the Transitional Federal
Parliament to unilaterally extend its mandate for
another three years.

Action is urgently needed to lay the ground for a
broader political platform and a more inclusive
political process, including with the regional
administrations, in order to build a basis for a more
peaceful post-transition process. The TFIs cannot
afford another internal power struggle; rather, they
must focus their efforts on addressing the pressing
challenges for Somalia and its people.

The international community must act together in
assisting and supporting Somalia with the means
available to overcome the present hardships and
achieve the peace, security and stability that the Somali
people so desperately need. We welcome the recent
joint regional strategy adopted by the African Union
Mission in Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and the United Nations Political
Office in Somalia to better coordinate their efforts. In
that respect, let me pay tribute to the brave
peacekeepers from Uganda and Burundi.

The absence of an effective international presence
in Mogadishu and southern Somalia is an impediment
to having a better picture of the political and
humanitarian situation on the ground. We call for an
increased international presence in the course of 201 1.

Piracy is dramatically threatening humanitarian
and commercial activities. The threat is felt both by
local communities in Somalia and the hundreds of
hostages on land and on hijacked ships. We all agree
that a lasting solution to the problem of piracy can only
be found on land and through the restoration of
effective Somali State institutions. But in the meantime
we need to contain the problem. It is vital that the
pirates and their leaders and investors are brought to
justice. To do so, we need a more coordinated effort in
collecting, analysing and sharing intelligence on the
financial flows related to piracy.

It is important to cooperate with the relevant
Somali national and regional authorities and with other
countries in the region. We have taken due note of the
report (S/2011/30, annex) of Mr. Jack Lang, Special
Adviser of the Secretary General. The report contains
certain proposals that we hope will be implemented.

In 2011 Norway will allocate approximately
$5 million for counter-piracy measures, including
measures to strengthen the justice sector. That will also
include a new contribution to the trust fund established
by the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia. We encourage other countries to do the same.

Finally, I want to salute my former colleague
Augustine Mahiga and to congratulate him on the
important and decisive work he is doing for the people
of Somalia.
