Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2004/907) and to the Head of the
Mission, Mr. Seren Jessen-Petersen, for his substantive
briefing on the situation in the region. We take note of
the participation in today's meeting of the Security
Council of the President of the Coordinating Centre of
Serbia and Montenegro and of the Republic of Serbia
for Kosovo and Metohija, Mr. Nebojsa Covie.

It must be noted that progress in the
implementation of the standards drawn up for Kosovo
by the international community, in particular
concerning the activity of the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government, continues to be distinctly limited.
To cite only one fact, but an eloquent one, the process
of returns has moved in reverse: in 2004, the number of
displaced members of minorities exceeded the number
of those who were able to return to their homes. For
example, since the outbreak of violence in March of
this year, 2,288 persons have still been unable to return
to their homes.

We support the Secretary-General's conclusion
that significant additional efforts are needed for the
genuine restoration of a healthy situation in the region
and for the establishment of a concrete and stable basis
for peaceful coexistence among ethnic communities.
Particular responsibility for genuine change in
Kosovo - change which would be of real benefit to all
communities regardless of ethnic affiliation - lies first
and foremost with the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. Moreover, we view as unconstructive
attempts to shift the blame for breakdowns in the
processes in the region to the Kosovo Serbs, or to
Belgrade.

We underscore the need for assessments of the
implementation of the Kosovo standards to be realistic
and consistent with the actual state of affairs. Here,
there is a need for great caution and a need to avoid
unfounded embellishment of the results, since undue
optimism could have a negative impact on the fragile
process of a Kosovo settlement and on the prospects
for the achievement of inter-ethnic reconciliation in the
region.

We take note of the organized manner in which
the October elections for the regional Assembly took
place. We agree with the Secretary-General that at
present the objective of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government of Kosovo is to form a
representative, stable and effective government that
can bring Kosovo forward. It is important that it be
headed by a constructive political statesman with an
impeccable reputation, whose attitudes would not lead
to even further alienation among the communities in
the region, but would rather promote the achievement
of inter-ethnic harmony among them. Here,
considerations of political expediency are inadmissible.

The lack of participation by the Kosovo Serbs in
the elections is above all an indicator of the utterly
unsatisfactory state of affairs in the sphere of ensuring
human rights and the security of ethnic minorities. It
also reveals how far Kosovo is from resolving the issue
of the establishment of a multi-ethnic, democratic
society. Here, we support the views of Kofi Annan and
his Special Representative in favour of devoting
particular attention to those problems which are most
significant for the Kosovo Serb community: the return
of the population, security and decentralization.

We agree with the high-priority objectives for the
near future set out in the report and in the briefing of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General:
progress on the standards; the establishment of
dialogue on an equal footing, above all with Belgrade;
the proactive involvement of the Kosovo Serbs in the
political processes in the region; and the development
of the economy of Kosovo.

Reform of local self-government must play an
important role in normalizing the situation of Kosovo
in order to ensure that, in deeds rather than in words,
conditions are created for coexistence among all
communities of the region in a single multi-ethnic
democratic society.

There is a need to accelerate the design of a
universally acceptable and effective model of
decentralization for Kosovo. We believe it advisable
that negotiations on this question continue in the
format of the September meeting in Vienna: with the
participation of representatives of UNMIK, the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of Kosovo,
the Kosovo Serbs, Belgrade and the Contact Group.
This is all the more important in the context of the
need to set up constructive interaction between the
United Nations Mission and the regional Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government on the one hand, and
the Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade on the other.

We are awaiting the recommendations of the
Secretary-General, pursuant to the instructions of the
Security Council, regarding a balanced model for the
transfer of competencies from the regional authorities
to the local organs of power and to the communities in
Kosovo. We believe that they will take into account the
position of Belgrade as stated in the 12 November
working paper of the government of Serbia.

We are firmly convinced that the situation in the
region continues to require unswerving implementation
of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We remain
dedicated to full and consistent support of the policy of
"standards before status" as a decisive strategy for
achieving a settlement in Kosovo.

On the whole, Russia shares the strategy
formulated by the Secretary-General for further
progress on a Kosovo settlement. Of fundamental
importance, we believe, is KofiAnnan's premise that
the peace process in Kosovo must be built on the solid
legal basis of resolution 1244 (1999), and strategically
important steps in that sphere must be implemented
with the Security Council playing a lead role.

We endorse the high-priority objectives for
Kosovo, set out in the Secretary-General's letter of
17 November, which include surmounting the
consequences of the violence that erupted in March,
ensuring the security, rights and freedoms of
minorities, and the return of refugees and temporarily
displaced persons. We agree with his position that the
process of reviewing the implementation of Kosovo
standards remains an UNMIK prerogative.

We are also firmly convinced that there can be no
programmed start to a future political process to define
the future status of the region without the genuine
implementation of democratic standards and a special
Security Council decision to that end. We draw
attention to the need for the Head of UNMIK to draft,
within the framework of a strategy for Kosovo, an
effective series of sanctions that are ethnically neutral
focused on those individuals whose actions might be
detrimental to a Kosovo settlement and provoke inter-
ethnic strife.

It is clear that a great deal of the success of the
Secretary-General's proposed strategy for Kosovo will
hinge not only on the actions of the Kosovo politicians,
but also on practical actions by the international
presences there and the contribution of key external
players. For its part, Russia is ready for very close
interaction with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. J essen-
Petersen, in the interests of putting a speedy end to the
tragedy in the Balkans and to moving the situation in
the direction laid down in resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains the sole legal basis of a Kosovo
settlement.

It is our belief that only coordinated activity on
the part of the international community can help to
consolidate security and stability in the region.

