Mr. Suan (Myanmar): Today, 24 October, marks
the seventy-third anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations. In Myanmar we celebrate United
Nations Day every year with a special ceremony and
public activities to promote awareness of the work of
the United Nations. This is a day to celebrate, a day to
cherish, a day to remember the past and a day to renew
our noble commitment to building peace, development
and human rights in the world, the responsibilities the
founding fathers of the Organization entrusted upon us.

Sadly, though, we are gathering here in the
Chamber in defiance of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations - that of our
own Organization - against the standing rules and
procedures of the Council and against all logic and
fairness of human conscience. We are witnessing the
core erosion of the moral and institutional integrity of
the United Nations as a result of the blatant attempt by
some members of the Council to hijack the human rights
issue for their political purposes. My delegation has
joined other Council members in our strong objection
to this injustice and abuse of the established practice of
the Security Council.

When the fact-finding mission on Myanmar was
established by the Human Rights Council, in March
2017, we objected to the mission because of our serious
concerns, particularly about the advisability of its
establishment and the mandate itself. The Human
Rights Council resolution mandated the mission

"to establish the facts and circumstances of the
alleged recent human rights violations by military
and security forces, and abuses, in Myanmar,
in particular in Rakhine State with a view to
ensuring full accountability for perpetrators
and justice for victims" (Human Rights Council resolution 34/22, para. 11)

The mandate was very clear. The mission has
already designated who should be perpetrators and who
should be victims. From its genesis, the establishment
of the fact-finding mission has been flawed, biased
and politically motivated, with hidden agendas.
We are also concerned that the release of its report
(A/HRC/39/64), which is based on narratives and not
on hard evidence, will serve only to further inflame
tensions and potentially hinder the Government's effort
to create much-needed social cohesion in Rakhine state.
The one-sided report of the mission has confirmed
our concerns.

We also raised previously in the Chamber, on
28 August (see S/PV.8333), our doubt - or our
concern - about the sincerity of the mission. Although
the mission was mandated to submit its report to the
Human Rights Council on 18 September, it released,
well ahead and in haste, the unedited version of the
report on 27 August, just one day ahead of the Security
Council's public debate on the situation in Myanmar.
The action called for our legitimate concerns about the
objectivity, impartiality and credibility of the mission.
The methodology of its investigation is also flawed, as
the report was prepared from results of interviews of
selected groups of displaced persons in Cox's Bazar
and information gathered from some non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), international NGOs and human
rights groups who had already set their predetermined
agenda on the issue. Therefore, the mission's report
did not shed new light on the problem but was found
to be identical with the reports of certain human rights
groups with no accountability for their work at all.

We have repeatedly explained the fact that the
current humanitarian crisis in Rakhine state was ignited
by the unprovoked and premeditated attacks against 30
police outposts and a military battalion headquarters by
the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA) terrorist
group in August 2017 and, previously, in October 2016.
The ARSA terrorists had massacred security personnel
and hundreds of innocent civilians, including 100
Hindu villagers, other ethnic minorities and even pro-
Government Muslims. The atrocities perpetrated by
ARSA have made thousands of innocent ethnic people
flee their villages to the other parts of Rakhine state.
Likewise, it created a massive exodus of Muslims to
the neighbouring country. It is crucial to bear in mind
that the present crisis did not affect only the Muslim
community. When we talk about human rights, we
should look at the human rights of both communities.

However, we are dismayed by the fact that the
fact-finding mission has deliberately and glaringly
discounted ARSA terrorist atrocities, which could even
be interpreted by many as justifying or condoning the
acts of Muslim extremist terrorists. In its report, the
fact-finding mission took great courage to reluctantly
and half-heartedly mention the atrocities committed
by ARSA terrorists. It lists a few ARSA human rights
violations, including "the killing of up to 100 Hindu
men and women from Kha Maung Seik" (A/HRC/39/64, para. 54). It continues:

"[t]he mission's primary source information
on the latter incident" - that is, the killing
of Hindus - "corroborates the killing, but is
inconclusive as to the perpetrator. Other militant or
criminal groups were also active in the region and
may also have been responsible for abuses." (ibid)

Amazing. I am just bringing the naked truth of the
report to the attention of the members of the Council.

Much has been talked about accountability. As the
Council is well aware, the Government of Myanmar
has established an independent commission of inquiry,
led by Ambassador Rosario Manalo. The commission
will investigate allegations of human rights violations
and related issues following the terrorist attacks of
9 October 2016 and 25 August 2017 by the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army in Rakhine state with a
view to seeking accountability and reconciliation. The
commission will conduct its mandate in accordance
with the principles of independence, impartiality and
objectivity, and will submit its report within a year. We
are willing and able to take on the issue of accountability
for any alleged human rights violation where there is
sufficient evidence. We need to give time and space to
the independent commission of inquiry.

Mr. Darusman has said that Myanmar has taken
no action on alleged violation of human rights. In fact,
legal actions have been taken against military and
police officers and civilians who were found to be in
breach of standard operating procedures and rules of
engagement following the Inn Din incident. In addition,
other administrative actions have also been taken
against high-ranking senior officers of Tatmadaw who
were responsible for overseeing security operations
in Rakhine.

My delegation categorically rejects the inference
of "genocidal intent" with respect to the legitimate
counter-terrorist actions taken by the security forces in
Rakhine. The conclusion is made based on unverified
circumstantial evidence and has no sound legal proof.
The Government of Myanmar has resolutely rejected
the 6 September ruling of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in connection with Rakhine state. Our
position is clear - Myanmar is not a party to the Rome
Statute and the Court has no jurisdiction whatsoever
over Myanmar. The ICC decision was made on dubious
legal grounds and applied to a situation where domestic
remedies have not yet been exhausted. Therefore, I
want to make it very clear that we will never accept any
call for the referral of Myanmar to the ICC.

As I stated earlier, we have demonstrated our
willingness and ability to address the accountability
issue. Putting accountability above all else, without
regard to other positive developments, will result
only in untoward consequences. Unilateral coercive
measures taken without regard to the objective situation
in Myanmar and the imposition of politically motivated
external pressure will be detrimental to the existing
good will and cooperation of the Myanmar Government
with the international community.

The situation in Rakhine has in no way threatened
international peace and security. The accusation is
absurd and groundless. The report is full of prejudice
and is totally unconstructive, In his United Nations Day
message today, President Win Myint reminds us that,

"The value of the United Nations will be
decided by how the Organization and its Member
States utilize instruments at their disposal to
promote peace, stability and harmony, and
to mitigate harm and enmity. Objectivity,
impartiality, professionalism, respect for national
sovereignty - these are some of the keys to the
success of the United Nations mission."

I would like to remind Council members that
Myanmar is still at a critical juncture of transition to
fully functioning democracy. Mr. Darusman has said
patience will not help Myanmar's democratization, but
the opposite is true. It is not by revolution that we are
building democracy. Our leader, State Counsellor Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, has chosen a peaceful path through
national reconciliation and national consensus, which
require tremendous patience and political wisdom. The
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar,
Ms. Christine Burgener, in her end-of-mission
statement to Myanmar on 20 October, stressed the
need for patience and more trust-building to advance
the peace process towards a home-grown solution. We
concur fully with the Special Envoy. Patience and trust-
building are key to the success of our common efforts
to find a viable and sustainable solution to the present
humanitarian crisis and the whole issue of northern
Rakhine. That is the way to lead us to realizing our
ultimate national goal of building a truly democratic
federal union.

Before I conclude, I would like to bring to the
Council's attention an act of gross contempt of all ethics
and civility on the premises of the United Nations. I
am sorry to raise this issue, but yesterday pamphlets
concerning my country - which I am holding - were
distributed in Conference Room 1, where the Third
Committee was holding its plenary session to hear
an oral presentation by the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee
Lee, and the Chairperson of the fact-finding mission,
Mr. Darusman.

This is not the work of a disgruntle dissident or
a human rights activist who does not care about rule
and regulations. This is the act of a Chairperson of an
international fact-finding mission who was appointed
and mandated by the Human Rights Council, one of the
subsidiary bodies of the General Assembly. We cannot
fathom how such hypocrisy can have a place in this
world body. This is a disgrace to the United Nations.
These pamphlets are a total insult to a Member of the
United Nations and its sitting leaders. It is a gross
violation of the codes of conduct of United Nations
personnel. My Government has condemned this action
in the strongest terms. Hate speech and provocation are
now coming right into the United Nations conference
rooms, where we should all work together for peace,
harmony and tolerance.

Everyone has to be accountable for his or her
actions. History will judge individuals based on what
they have said and done in the Council Chamber and in
the United Nations. The people of Myanmar - and no
one else - will decide their destiny.

