Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would
first like to say how pleased my delegation is to see you
presiding over today's Security Council meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
to welcome the fact that the representative of Chile is
steering the Council for the month of January. I would
therefore like to take this opportunity to sincerely
congratulate you, on my own and my delegation's behalf,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council. I
also commend your predecessor, the representative of
the Republic of Chad, and express our appreciation for
the mastery and skill he showed last month during his
presidency. And, finally, I would like to pay tribute to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom my country
is indebted for the outstanding efforts that have been
made to effectively restore peace in the Great Lakes
region in general and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in particular.

I will focus on three key topics covered in the
reports before the Council: the Secretary-General's
report of 30 December 2014 on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2014/956), his
report on MONUSCO submitted pursuant to paragraph
39 of resolution 2147 (2014) (S/2014/957), and the final
report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2015/19).

In resolution 2147 (2014), adopted on 28 March,
the Security Council requested that the Secretary-
General conduct a thorough strategic review of
MONUSCO and the entire United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of Congo, and submit to it, by
30 December, his recommendations on MONUSCO's
future objectives, activities, exit strategy and efficient
deployment of resources, keeping in mind that the
Mission's effectiveness should continue to increase.
My delegation hopes that our exchanges in this and
subsequent meetings will enable us to reach a consensus
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Security Council on the progress that has been made
towards normalizing the situation in the country, the
obstacles that still clutter the road to normalization
and thus demand our urgent collective attention and,
lastly, on future action by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We can never emphasise strongly enough that the
long-suffering peoples of the countries in our region
see the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
as eloquent proof of the international community's
determination to help find a definitive solution to an
instability that has lasted all too long and for which my
country in particular has paid a heavy price. That was
evident when, as soon as the Framework agreement was
signed, the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo began working to meet its obligations, which
are in fact the same vital and high-priority tasks we
have known about for the past 11 years.

In that context, we have accelerated and systematized
our security sector reform. Recent concrete actions
undertaken to make the defence of our territory more
effective and the State's authority more solid include
rationalizing the structures and personnel of the army
and security and police services; recruiting young
Congolese from every province of the country into
the defence forces; reopening military academics; and
training special forces and support units with the help
ofbilateral partners with the primary aim ofmaking our
rapid reaction force operational. I note that in November
2014, in order to consolidate that State authority, with
the help of MONUSCO and the United Nations country
team, we began implementing stabilization strategies
and action plans in North Kivu, Orientale and South
Kivu provinces. The Government also welcomes the
choice of 13 priority areas for intervention as part of
the revised International Security and Stabilization
Support Strategy. In that regard, MONUSCO'S creation
of new islands of stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, located in Katanga, North Kivu,
Orientale and South Kivu is an encouraging initiative
that my Government wholeheartedly supports.

Decentralization, as provided for in the Constitution,
has taken another step forward with the adoption of the
laws needed to implement it. Reform of the management
of public finance, which has been under way for several
years and whose positive results are apparent in the
overall stability of the economy, is still ongoing and
has been usefully supplemented by the entry into force
of measures designed to improve the business climate
and the national mechanism for certifying mining
resources, which in turn will strengthen economic
growth. Even better, the Government has just completed
a thorough review of its document on strategy and
growth for poverty reduction, aimed at making growth
more inclusive, partially reducing the delays that have
accumulated in achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and ensuring that the fight against poverty is
more credible and effective.
In that regard, we see as particularly crucial
elements the economic recovery and rehabilitation
and social integration components of our stabilization
and reconstruction programmes, particularly the
stabilization and reconstruction plan for areas emerging
from armed conflict and the programme developed
by the United Nations country team, designed to
consolidate and develop the northern and western
regions that, though they have not seen conflict, are still
having to deal with the consequences of the instability
in the north and east. We are therefore counting on
the active involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in those programmes' funding
and implementation.

In the wake of the reform of the National
Independent Electoral Commission (CENI) and the
enactment of various relevant laws, my country is
resolutely committed to the process leading to the
holding of democratic elections for the third time. The
Government is determined to meet the challenge of
organizing them peacefully and in a way that ensures
that they will be free and democratic. The unfortunate
events that took place in Kinshasha over the past few
days, to which Under-Secretary-General Ladsous
referred earlier and which should be viewed as part
of the learning experience on the road to democracy,
will not hinder the organization of those elections, the
calendar of which is to be published by CENI, which is
constitutionally mandated to manage them.

With regard to these events, I note that during the
2011 elections, various partners of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the opposition made
suggestyions that CENI deemed useful to include in
the new electoral law enacted by Parliament. Those
suggestions included promoting gender awareness and
counting the votes of Congolese abroad. The events
were the result of the manipulation of the country's
population by an opposition party.

When we consider the security situation that
prevailed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
just two years ago, this analysis gives us grounds for
great satisfaction. Major progress has been made in
reducing threats to the security of the population and in
improving the conditions under which the Government
can assume responsibility for that security. We
legitimately believe that we are emerging from the
phase of restoring and keeping the peace. From that
point of view, we should look at future objectives and
the MONUSCO withdrawal strategy.

After 15 years of United Nations presence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, we should give
credit to the partnership of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations, the international
community and regional organizations for, among
other things, the withdrawal of foreign armed forces,
the reunification of the country, the establishment of
the transitional Government, and the holding of two
national elections.

Fifteen years is a significant amount of time. We
believe that we are jointly responsible for assessing the
United Nations actions in our country to support the
Government in order to ensure that they remain relevant
to the goals we have set and the emerging challenges
we face. We agree with the Secretary-General that
frank discussion between the United Nations and the
Government of my country is necessary to reach a
compromise without endangering the progress achieved
on the ground. My Government would like the Security
Council to engage in such a discussion instead of
making a unilateral decision.

The ultimatum issued to the Forces democratique de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) rebel group to lay down
its weapons and demobilize for voluntary repatriation
ended on 2 January. The forced disarmament of
that Rwandan rebellion by the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo, in cooperation
with the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade, is now
a military issue. The impatience seen among a number
of partners is shared by the Congolese people and their
leaders. The mere 25 per cent ofFDLR combattants who
laid down their arms to enter transit centres is not at all
satisfactory to my Government. Forced disarmament
remains the only option at present. It will take place as
soon as possible and in the most appropriate fashion,
bearing in mind all the parameters that are open to our
defence and security forces.

We recall that FDLR is not an army in the
traditional sense. These are fighters without distinctive
markings who hide behind a human shield made up of
our compatriots and Rwandan civilian refugees. It is
therefore up to the army to adapt its entire strategy to
that reality on the ground. At this time, the national
imperative for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is to put an end to the presence
in the country of FDLR combattants, who are a threat
to peace not only in their country of origin, but also
and above all in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
where they have committed many criminal acts against
our country and its population for over two decades.

It is generally agreed today that assistance to a
country in a post-conflict situation like my own must
be based on the priorities of that country and its real
needs in order to make it possible for the population to
legitimately benefit from the dividends of peace. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo recognizes that it
needs lasting peace in order to respond to the challenges
of building a well-functioning, strong and prosperous
State that cares for the rights of its citizens and is able
provide for their needs. We therefore expect a great
deal from the United Nations, which undeniably has
the ability to assist in strengthening public institutions.
All that we ask is that we be treated as responsible
adults able to assume the prerogatives of our recovered
sovereignty.

The keywords for the future of our cooperation are
"dialogue" and "partnership" based on the principle of
ownership by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the secondary role of international cooperation.
We recognize that to be effective, ownership requires
strengthened national capacity.
To conclude, my delegation takes this opportunity The President (spake in Span . There are no to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-Secretary»General further speakers inscribed on my list. I now invite the
for Peacekeeping Operations, and the representative of members of the Council to proceed to consultations on
Jordan for their briefings. I would also like to thank the this same topic.
members ofthe Security Council for all oftheir tireless
and very welcome initiatives to re-establish peace in
my country.

 

The meeting rose at 11 am.
