Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Michel Kafando, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, and
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, for
their briefings on the evolving situation in Burundi.
We listened with interest and gratitude to the
report of Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, the Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chair of the country
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We note the balanced approach that the Commission
takes to Burundi, which is one of the reasons why
the PBC continues to be a channel for trustworthy
communication with Bujumbura. We believe that its
initiatives for revitalizing cooperation with Burundians,
with an emphasis on issues related to the country's
socioeconomic development and re-establishing
donors' trust, are what is needed.

Based on information we have received, including
from Russian diplomats in Bujumbura, we have
concluded that the situation in Burundi is calm and
trending towards normalization. The improving
security situation has been reflected in a significant
drop in the level of violence, including the attacks on
civilian infrastructure by the radical opposition. We
should also note that the process of refugees' gradual
return to Burundi from neighbouring States has begun,
as my colleagues have already indicated.

We view the constitutional referendum that took
place on 17 May last year, in an atmosphere of calm
and with the participation of an overwhelming majority
of Burundi's population, as a key event in the country's
political situation. We should remind the Council
in that regard that a majority of voters - 73.26 per
cent - expressed support for changing the Constitution
and that the referendum was preceded by a democratic
and transparent information campaign.

The Russian Federation believes that the 2020
presidential and parliamentary elections are a domestic
issue for Burundi and that any outside interference
in them would be completely unacceptable. We urge
the authorities and the opposition to refrain from
any negative rhetoric and to focus on preparing for
the electoral cycle, especially given that despite
the alarmist forecasts of various members of the
opposition and Western experts, the acting President,
Pierre Nkurunziza, has declared that he will not be
participating in the election.

Concerning the problems in promoting the
inter-Burundian dialogue, we would like to point
out that assigning responsibility for them to one side
alone would be counterproductive and even dangerous.
We have been closely following and supporting
the East African Community's efforts aimed at
relaunching a direct negotiation process between the
Burundian parties. We also welcome any similar efforts
made with Bujumbura's consent and for the good
of Burundi.

Our overall view is that the situation in Burundi
does not pose any threats to international peace and
security, which gives us good reason to doubt whether
it makes sense to keep Burundi as an item on the
Council's overburdened agenda. We think that keeping
the Council's attention focused on Burundi is becoming
counterproductive and is basically there as a convenient
excuse for the unreconciled opposition to complicate
the country's internal political processes.

