Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): We
warmly welcome you, Sir, to the Security Council. We
are very pleased to be serving on the Council alongside
Uruguay.

(spoke in English)

In order to save time, I will state my salient points
and distribute my full text to the Council. Let me start
by looking at the overall situation in the Middle East.

One year ago, the Council strongly condemned the
heinous murder of two Japanese citizens in Syria by
terrorists. A year later, terrorism and acts of violence
continue to exploit the political vacuums and economic
difficulties in the region, with civilians bearing the
brunt of the cost. Further terrorist attacks in Africa,
Asia, Australia, Europe and North America serve as a
cruel reminder of the far-reaching repercussions of the
growing instability in the Middle East. From Syria to
Yemen, the numerous crises in the Middle East urgently
require political solutions. We therefore welcome
the resumption of the Yemen peace talks and look
forward to the initiation of the intra-Syrian dialogue
on 29 January.

We note with concern, however, the rise in regional
tensions. Provocative rhetoric and the drawing of fault
lines do not contribute to political solutions. Dialogue
must be maintained at all times; it is the essence and
power of diplomacy. The Security Council must
continue to urge dialogue and take measures to reduce
tensions in that volatile region.

The rise of extremist ideology and the mass
movement of refugees are occurring where economic
prospects are truncated, civilians indiscriminately
attacked and families uprooted. Let us not forget these
underlying factors, which fuel instability in Syria
and other countries of the region. Under the concept
of human security, Japan seeks to help empower
individuals and strengthen communities from the
ground up. Japan is currently disbursing $2.5 billion
in non-military assistance to the region, from assisting
Gaza reconstruction and providing education
opportunities for Syrian children to offering vocational
training in refugee camps. Furthermore, last week the
Japanese Diet approved an additional $350 million in
non-military assistance to Syria and its neighbouring
countries.

Nowhere are a resumption of political dialogue
and improvements on the ground more overdue than in
Palestine. Positive steps on the ground are lacking. In
that regard, we reiterate our call for a freeze on settlement
activities, which are violations of international law
and which severely undermine the viability of a two-
State solution. While welcoming the increased efforts
on Israel's part to address settler violence, we call on
Israel to refrain from collective punishment measures,
including the demolition of homes. We also call on
Palestine to maintain its security cooperation with
Israel, which is vital for stability, and to strengthen
efforts to achieve national reconciliation.

It is the parties themselves who must reach
agreement. However, we must recognize that the
Council has hardly provided tangible support. The
current impasse must not prevent us from moving ahead
where progress is possible. Japan firmly believes that
a sustainable Palestinian economy is indispensable to
the viability of a two-State solution. With that in mind,
the Japanese Diet recently approved an additional
$78 million in assistance, on top of the $1.6 billion we
have already disbursed for Palestine's development.
One outstanding example is the Jericho Agro-
Industrial Park, which saw its first investment lead to
the beginning of operations last autumn. In what was
formerly a desert there now stands a modem industrial
park capable of creating 700 jobs for Palestinians. It is
the result of cooperation between Japan, Israel, Jordan
and Palestine and attests to the dividends to be gained
through peaceful cooperation. We hope the success of
the project will attract further investment.

Assistance efforts must have a goal in sight.
Postponement is not an option. Japan stands ready to
play a constructive role, both inside and outside the
Council, in working for the long-overdue attainment of
a two-State solution.

