Mr. Baja (Philippines): Once again, the Council
is unified in sending a message, through resolution
1574 (2004). The message is special, substantive and
significant. The message is special because the
Security Council crossed oceans and passed through
time zones to highlight its seriousness of purpose in
addressing the situation in the Sudan. Resolution 1574
(2004) was conceived in New York and delivered in
Nairobi. The Permanent Representative of Great
Britain, Sir Emyr Jones Parry, proved to be an
excellent midwife. The message is substantive, because
resolution 1574 (2004) sets out what must be done by
all parties concerned to bring peace to a sovereign,
united and independent Sudan. The message is
significant since, by holding a historic meeting in
Nairobi, the Council has shown that Africa matters and
that it cares about the largest country in Africa.

Resolution 1574 (2004) is a gift to the Sudan. As
members declare in operative paragraph 1, there is
strong support for the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement
to reach a comprehensive peace agreement. It is a gift
that keeps on giving, as the succeeding paragraphs
outline what will follow upon the conclusion of a
comprehensive peace agreement. The choice is clearly
in the hands of the Sudan.

As with any resolution or agreement, the value of
resolution 1574 (2004) will depend on full and
transparent implementation. It will be effective and
will benefit the Sudanese only to the extent that the
parties allow. The challenge now is for all the parties to
redeem the pledges and commitments made yesterday,
and those signed this morning. Such redemption could
start by the building of trust and confidence among the
parties themselves and the establishment of what
Mr. Garang yesterday called a momentum for peace in
all of the Sudan, including with regard to the
humanitarian crisis in Darfur.

When the story of resolution 1574 (2004) is told,
it will be a tale of the labours of Security Council
members to help the people of the Sudan to promote
national reconciliation and to build a peaceful, stable
and united Sudan.

Resolution 1574 (2004) also shows that the
Security Council can, and will, act to discharge its
primary responsibility and mandate. In this resolution,
it commits itself to monitor compliance by the parties
with their obligations and to take appropriate action
against any party failing to fulfil its commitments.

We commend the United States presidency for its
initiative in pushing for this historic meeting in Nairobi
and for its vigorous leadership in pushing for
resolution 1574 (2004), of which I believe every
Council member is pleased to be a part.

