The President: I shall now put to the vote the draft
resolution contained in paragraph 4 of the report of the
Committee on the Admission of New Members, document
S/1999/716.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands, Russian
Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

Against:
None

Abstaining:
China

The President: There were 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution contained in
paragraph 4 of the report of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members, document S/1999/716, has
been adopted as resolution 1249 (1999).

I shall immediately convey the decision of the
Security Council recommending the admission of the
Republic of Nauru to membership in the United Nations
to the Secretary-General for transmittal to the General

 

Assembly, in accordance with rule 60 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.
I shall now make a statement, in my capacity as
President of the Security Council, on behalf of the members
of the Council:

"The Security Council has decided to recommend
to the General Assembly that the Republic of Nauru
be admitted as a Member of the United Nations. On
behalf of the members of the Security Council, I Wish
to extend my congratulations to the Republic of Nauru
on this historic occasion. The Council notes with great
satisfaction the Republic of
N auru's solemn commitment to uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and to fulfil all the obligations contained therein. We
look forward to the day in the near future when the
Republic of Nauru will join us as a Member of the
United Nations and to working closely with its
representatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1999/19.

The Council has thus concluded its consideration of
the matter before it.

The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.

