The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

I, too, want to lend my voice to those who have
expressed condolences on the death of General Jose'
Luiz Jaborandy, Jr., of Brazil. As Force Commander
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
he demonstrated astute leadership and contributed
significantly to the achievement of the Mission's
mandate.

I want to take my colleagues back to 1599, when
Shakespeare wrote in the play Julius Caesar that the
eye sees not itself but by reflection. Today in 2015, it is
not any different. My delegation believes that periodic
reflection on the work of the Security Council can
contribute significantly by either shaping or modifying
the Council's response to the issues under our purview.
That is why we have convened this public wrap-up
session.

In July, the Council presidency of New Zealand
was as innovative as it was bold. New Zealand built a
foundation for the discussion of issues that are not so
commonplace on the agenda of the Council. We thank
them for providing valid points of departure.

During our presidency, we have sought to focus
attention on three key issues that we considered not
only of contemporary significance, but also especially
interlocking and interdependent. We convened a
briefing that took up the international response to the
Ebola outbreak (see S/PV.7502); another briefing aimed
at giving practical effect to resolution 2151 (2014), the
first stand-alone resolution on security sector reform
(SSR) (see S/PV.7508); and an open debate on the role
of regional and subregional organizations in addressing
contemporary security challenges (see S/PV.7505).

Let me commend the Council for the focused
attention given to the debate on Ebola. We believe that it
offered an opportunity to highlight the roles of various
stakeholders in mobilizing a global, rapid, coordinated
and sustained response to the Ebola outbreak in West
Africa. In the words of Margaret Chan, Director-
General of the World Health Organization, the "world
has learned from the Ebola experience." (S/PV. 7502, p. 3) It is our hope that we will use what we have learned
to collectively improve our response to future outbreaks
of pandemics. In our View, the debate was successful
in underscoring the need for sustained engagement
with the countries most affected by the virus. As the
world tries to bring the rate of Ebola virus transmission
to zero, the international community must remain
vigilant and ensure sustained technical, operational and
financial support to the affected countries.

On security sector reform (see S/PV.7508), Council
delegations affirmed that the successful implementation
of resolution 2151 (2014) would ultimately depend on
improved coordination of efforts within the United
Nations system and between the United Nations and
the relevant stakeholders. States have the primary
responsibility for their own security within their
borders. They must therefore endeavour to provide
the political leverage needed to facilitate the required
external support in meeting specific SSR targets.

The discussion on regional organizations
underscored the importance of utilizing the comparative
advantages of the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Regional organizations
have demonstrated their relevance through preventive
diplomacy, mediation and other collaborative efforts.
Specialist regional knowledge, which is invaluable
in conflict resolution, can be provided by regional
organizations by virtue of their in-depth knowledge
of regional actors and their sensitivities to local,
historical and cultural factors. As strategies for placing
more emphasis on the role of regional and subregional
organizations evolve, it is important to periodically
assess our options so as to give a more central role to
those entities. Let me commend the Member States
that participated in the open debate. I believe that their
contributions greatly enriched our debate.

The overarching principle of our thematic debates
during the past month underscored the imperative of
collective action in the maintenance of international
peace and security. States must collaborate with
regions, which in turn must collaborate with the United
Nations. Nigeria is greatly concerned about recent
occurrences that have been revealed in the context of
United Nations peacekeeping operations in the Central
African Republic, in particular the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. The briefing by the
Secretary-General on 13 August on the allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse perpetrated by
peacekeeping personnel in that country was quite
sobering. The Council's response underscored the
imperative for the highest standards of conduct to be
upheld in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We
must remain steadfast in our support of the Secretary-
General as he investigates those allegations. We count
on the relevant troop- and police-contributing countries
to offer the needed support in this investigative process.

As we reflect on the trouble spots across Africa,
the Middle East and Asia, and particularly Burma,
as we did on Friday, it is clear that nation-building is
greatly impeded by sectionalism and ethnicity. The
lack of inclusiveness often breeds dissent and conflict.
My experience is that we tend to employ a fire-fighting
approach to conflicts. Is it not possible for the Council
to develop theoretical perspectives, or, indeed, a context
in which we can all place those patterns of conflict,
and thus provide the best opportunity for strategic
solutions? Is that possible?

Even more significant, I would like to urge the
Council to firmly establish what I have often referred
to as the cause-and-effect relationship between the
dire humanitarian situations that we confront in areas
of conflict and the political process. Yes, we are
right - Mr. O'Brien has briefed us many times in the
Council this month - about our feeling of urgency on
humanitarian issues. But if we continue to diverge on
what gives effect to a humanitarian situation, I believe
we cannot succeed. Let us together treat the symptoms
as well as the causes. We tend to treat symptoms rather
than causes. We must address the root causes ofconflict.
I would like to end where I began, by offering
the wisdom of Shakespeare. On the matter of unity
in dealing with political situations, in Act I, Scene i,
Shakespeare said in Henry VI, Part 1], "Join we together,
for the public good".

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before I adjourn the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August - I hope - I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Nigeria to the members
of the Council, especially my colleagues the Permanent
Representatives and their respective staffs, as well
as to the entire secretariat of the Council, for all the
support they have offered to us. Quite unexpectedly, it
has been a very busy month - and one during which
we all rallied to consensus on several issues within
our purview. We could not have done it alone. Thanks
to God, we were not isolated. Without the hard work,
support and positive contributions of every delegation
and of the representatives of the Secretariat, as well as
other relevant Conference Services Officers, it would
have been difficult.

As we end our presidency at midnight, I know that I
speak on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation
of the Russian Federation every good fortune as it
assumes the presidency during the month of September.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
