Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Allow me to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General David Shearer for his tireless work in supporting peace in South Sudan and for his insightful briefing. I would also like to thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her important briefing this morning. Indonesia welcomes the agreement to form the Transitional Government of National Unity and commends both parties for their spirit of compromise. Their confidence shows their commitment to creating an enabling environment for peace. While the ceasefire continues to hold, we note clashes in areas of Western and Central Equatoria and Upper Nile and that a number of security challenges remain. However, we are also confident that with the parties' commitment to fulfilling their respective responsibilities, the challenges can be overcome. Sustainable peace and stability with prosperity are very much possible. The people of South Sudan deserve that fully. In that regard, I wish to underline the following three points. First, the formation of the Transitional Government needs to be finalized. Recognizing that much work needs to happen, including on transitional security arrangements and the establishment of three administrative areas, the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan remains the best overarching blueprint to build peace with the wide support of the South Sudanese parties. The effective implementation of the Revitalized Agreement, including the finalization of the Transitional Government, is of critical importance. We need to show the South Sudanese that this time will be different. The party's leadership must deliver. In the process, every effort must be made to cease any actions that might be perceived as provocative by the other party. Indonesia commends the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and South Africa, along with other countries, for their support of peacebuilding in South Sudan. The engagement of the United Nations and regional and international partners remains vital. Secondly, the humanitarian situation should be improved. The opening up of space and positive political developments should also be used to deepen and widen humanitarian action, which is presently unevenly spread. Indonesia is concerned that 1.67 million people remain internally displaced, with another 2.2 million living in neighbouring countries. The Secretary- General's call to fulfil the $1.5 billion target under the 2020 humanitarian response plan needs to be responded to befittingly. We also commend the signing of the comprehensive action plan to end and prevent all grave violations against children, which indicates that South Sudan has set the right priorities, and its implementation must be supported fully. Third is the role of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). Indonesia supports the renewal of the UNMISS mandate, which maintains its current strength and role in supporting the peace process. At the same time, the mandate must also reflect the ongoing positive developments. Since physical access iS an important hindrance to humanitarian assistance, UNMISS resource mobility, especially of its air and water assets, should be enhanced. Indonesian military and police officers, including women police peacekeepers, are currently proudly serving in UNMISS. Their professionalism and hard work, including through local community engagement, have already made a concrete impact. In conclusion, the South Sudanese people's journey towards peace has come to a critical juncture. Its commitment, with effective backing from the United Nations and other partners, promise a peaceful and prosperous future. I reaffirm Indonesia's long-standing support towards a lasting peace and stability in South Sudan, including through its contribution to UNMISS.
