Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her semi-annual briefing on the activities of the Court
with regard to the situation in Darfur. As a State party
to the Rome Statute Cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its full
support for the efforts of the International Criminal
Court to promote international justice and combat
impunity both in Darfur and the rest of the world.

My delegation notes with satisfaction the situation
of peace and relative stability in the Darfur region,
after several years of crisis. We call on the international
community to work towards consolidating the progress
made. In that regard, Cote d'Ivoire supports the ongoing
political process and encourages the Government of the
Sudan to redouble its efforts to further address the root
causes of conflict to achieve lasting peace and stability.

Cote d'Ivoire remains firmly committed to
respecting human rights. We believe that the fight
against impunity is an important aspect of the national
reconciliation process and that the quest for lasting peace
in Darfur remains dependent upon accountability for
those who are guilty of committing serious crimes and
human rights violations. In that regard, my delegation
reiterates its appreciation for the efforts of the Office of
the Prosecutor to address that need for justice.

We encourage the Sudanese authorities, in the
context of enhanced cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor, to provide an adequate response to
the concerns expressed, in particular with regard to
clarifying the allegations of human rights violations
and bringing to justice those responsible for such
violations and other atrocious crimes committed during
the conflict in Darfur.

As highlighted in the special report of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations (S/2018/530)
on the strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, published on
1 June, despite the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan to re-establish authority over Darfur as a whole,
weak institutional capacity and the lack of financial
resources have a negative impact on the establishment
of rule of law, justice and security institutions.

According to the same report, attacks against
civilians, including sexual and gender-based violence,
continue in Darfur, despite the efforts of the Government
of the Sudan to establish the rule of law. Cote d'lvoire
therefore encourages the international community to
assist in the establishment of strong institutions capable
of meeting the challenge of establishing the rule of law
in Darfur.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to commend the
Government of the Sudan for the significant progress
made in improving the security situation and stability
in Darfur. We note with satisfaction the incorporation
of that progress in the reorientation of United Nations
work towards peacebuilding, development and recovery
activities, with the exception of the Jebel Marra area.

The lifting of various sanctions imposed on the
Sudan by certain States and the improvement in the
sociopolitical situation in Darfur constitute positive
developments that contribute to amplifying the peace
and development dynamics under way.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
for the actions of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court in cases relating to the situation in
Darfur and calls upon the international community
to support the efforts of the Sudanese Government to
definitively restore peace and stability to that region.

