Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, let me express my gratitude to
the President of the Security Council for organizing
this meeting on Burundi and for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/89) on the situation in the
country, presented by His Excellency Mr. Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
to whom Equatorial Guinea conveys its sincere
thanks for the outstanding work that he is doing there.
Likewise, Equatorial Guinea expresses its confidence
in the mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President
of Uganda, and in its facilitator, His Excellency
Mr. William Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the
Republic of Tanzania, for the work being carried out
to find common ground for an agreement among the
members of the political class in Burundi. Accordingly,
the joint communique issued by the latest Summit
of Heads of State of the East African Community
expressed appreciation for, and acknowledged the
work being carried out by, both statesmen within the
framework of seeing through the inter-Burundian
dialogue. The briefing by Mr. Jurg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, also afforded us a
clear picture of the situation in Burundi, for which we
are extremely grateful.

As always, Equatorial Guinea understands that
a situation such as the one in Burundi, which is an
internal matter, must be resolved internally through
a genuine and inclusive political negotiation process
among Burundians. In that regard, Equatorial
Guinea commends the positive initiatives adopted
by the Government of Burundi and its President, His
Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, so as to maintain
national stability and promote internal reconciliation,
and urges all parties in Burundi to participate actively
in the political dialogue and resolve their differences
peacefully through dialogue and negotiations.
The mediation efforts of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the East
African Community, and the constructive role that the
United Nations can play must make up the bulwark of
mechanisms for finding a lasting political solution to
the situation.

Equatorial Guinea believes that political dialogue
is the only way out of the situation in Burundi, and, for
that reason, it very positively views the initiatives of the
East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue
held in Arusha, the outcome of which will undoubtedly
help normalize the situation. The return to normalcy
implies that the dialogue - as the Government has
suggested - can already take place within Burundian
territory - the home of all children of Burundi - since
the security situation has significantly improved, as the
report of the Secretary-General notes.

The gradual voluntary return of refugees to
their homes is another sign of the normalization of
the situation, and the challenge must now lie in their
relocation and return to normalcy. We believe that the
United Nations, together with local entities, should
help in that process, which must comply with the
principles enshrined in the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees of 1951. We wish to acknowledge
the generosity of neighbouring countries that have
welcomed refugees.

As a sovereign country, Burundi enjoys the right to
adopt any legislative initiative that it deems appropriate
for itself. In that regard, we believe that the constitutional
referendum scheduled to be held next May falls within
powers of the country as a sovereign State. Many other
countries have gone through similar processes. They
have been considered internal affairs, and in Burundi
the case should not be different. The sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi must
be fully respected. Any negotiation process must lead
to the holding of fair elections in 2020. It is therefore
essential that all parties commit to the East African
Community-led process and unwaveringly show their
good will for the benefit of the Burundian people.
Only in that way will we witness the full and complete
recovery of the people of Burundi so that they can enjoy
their innumerable economic possibilities and get on

board the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union to participate
fully in the sustainable development of that beautiful
African country and brotherly nation of Central Africa.

