Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset, Sir,
let me thank you for this possibility of an exchange
with the High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio
Guterres. We would like to welcome High
Commissioner Guterres and thank him for his
informative and thought-provoking briefing. Let me
also add that we believe that more frequent and regular
briefings by the High Commissioner to the Council,
including country-specific briefings, would be
extremely useful.

The displacement of people across and within
borders is an important element in most of the
situations on the Council's agenda. That shows that
there is a strong nexus between peace and security, on
the one hand, and refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) on the other. In light of the rising
number of uprooted persons, Austria attaches great
importance to the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
and would like to commend the High Commissioner
for his leadership and for the organization's tireless
efforts in recent years.

In his analysis, the High Commissioner referred
to an accumulation of adverse trends and causes of
displacement, such as competition for scarce resources,
poverty, conflict and climate change. Austria shares his
concerns about those trends, which are leading to a
growing number of people on the move. We have to
ask ourselves how the Security Council can enhance its
responses to those challenges.

I wish to highlight particularly the impact of
climate change and its implications for human security,
and even for the security of States. Incidentally, that is
also a matter on which the European Union (EU) has
invested quite some thought. The potential of climate
change to aggravate the situation of vulnerable groups,
notably women and children, and its nature as a major
cause of migration and displacement make it an urgent
concern. In that context, Austria wishes to draw
attention to the activities of the Human Security
Network in identifying the implications of climate
change on human security.

Austria welcomed the initiative to organize an
open debate in the Security Council in April 2007 to
examine the relationship among energy, security and
climate change. That debate (see S/PV.5663 and S/PV.5663 (Resumption ])) highlighted the extent to
which those issues are interrelated. The Council should
therefore continue to keep the issue under review.

As regards the interplay between peacekeeping
operations and humanitarian activities, Austria believes
that it is worth highlighting the role of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad and the United Nations-mandated EU military
operation in eastern Chad and the north-west Central
African Republic. Their primary focus on increasing
the security of Darfur refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) is, in our view, a good example of how
the work of the Council can contribute to the
improvement of humanitarian situations. In today's
very critical situation, it is also evident that the
humanitarian aspect must be at the core of the
deliberations of the Council on the situation in Gaza.

On the issue of post-conflict peacebuilding, we
fully share UNHCR's view that the safe and voluntary
return of displaced populations plays a crucial role in
peacebuilding efforts and is a key component of
durable peace. Peacebuilding activities should,
therefore, take into consideration the specific needs of
displaced populations and of their receiving
communities. The advancement of regional protection
programmes is particularly important, and capacity-
building in the region of origin needs to be advanced.
Austria highly appreciates and supports the intensive
efforts of UNHCR to facilitate the voluntary return and
reintegration of displaced persons. I would like to use
this opportunity to ask the High Commissioner whether
there are lessons to be learned from UNHCR's
experiences in ensuring the sustainability of refugee
returns.

Finally, we agree with the High Commissioner on
the importance of improving the participation of
refugees and internally displaced persons in peace
processes and negotiations. That is a particular
challenge as far as IDPs are concerned. In that context,
Austria also welcomes the initiative of the
Representative of the Secretary-General on internally
displaced persons, Professor Walter Kalin, to develop,
together with the Department of Political Affairs, a
draft guide for mediators on integrating issues of
internal displacement into peace processes and peace
agreements.

Given the important, but in many cases
underestimated, role of women in peacebuilding efforts
for their communities, we also would be interested to
hear what lessons UNHCR can share from the
implementation of its gender policy and efforts to
actively involve women in all aspects of its work.

I wish to conclude by wishing the High
Commissioner all success for his highly important
work for the international community.

