Mr. Maurer: Some of the most horrific
consequences ofwar are those that we cannot see. When
traumas are invisible, they are overlooked, ignored or
deprioritized. This is perhaps most starkly evident when
it comes to the critical issue of missing persons. Every
day, people go missing because of conflict, violence,
disaster or during migration.

Today, as we focus on the issue of missing persons
in armed conflict, I have to report that the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has observed an
alarming increase in cases recent years. In 2018 alone,
over 45,000 new cases were registered by the ICRC
Central Tracing Agency - the neutral entity mandated
by the Geneva Conventions. We know that this figure
is the tip of the iceberg and does not convey the true
extent of the problem or do justice to the suffering of
each and every family.

I thank Kuwait for its stewardship in bringing
forward this debate. The ICRC welcomes the adoption
of resolution 2474 (2019) as the first Security Council
resolution fully dedicated to the issue missing persons
in conflict and commends the Council's commitment
to the issue.

Every time someone goes missing, families wait for
answers. Ricocheting between hope and despair, they
mark anniversaries: one year, two years, ten years. The
trauma of ambiguous loss is one of the deepest wounds
of war. The pain infects whole communities, lasting
decades and preventing societies from reconciling. The
ICRC is a daily witness to this suffering. Our teams are
frequently approached with pleas for help - mothers
searching for sons, husbands searching for their wives.
And sometimes there are answers. Every minute,
the ICRC, together with national Red Cross and Red
Crescent societies, helps a family separated by conflict
to restore contact.

Yet so much more can be done. prarties to conflict
fulfil their obligations to search for missing persons
and if they manage the dead systematically and with
respect, missing persons can be found, remains can
be identified and answers can be given. We have the
legal framework. International humanitarian law sets
out obligations on preventing persons from going
missing in armed conflict and clarifying of the fate and
whereabouts of those who do. And we have practical
experience. Preventing family separation - for
instance, during evacuations - registering all persons
deprived of their liberty or issuing identity disks to
armed forces are all concrete steps that can be taken
today.

What is needed is stronger political will and
cooperation. This is crystal clear to the ICRC, as the
custodian of international humanitarian law and from
decades of experience working with parties to conflicts
to resolve cases of missing persons. The ICRC'S work
extends from chairing coordination mechanisms,
advising on national laws and policies, to registering
detainees, supporting with families and offering
technical forensic expertise.

We have seen what can be achieved through
political will and cooperation. The agreement on
identifying the remains of unidentified soldiers
involved in the Falkland/Malvinas Islands conflict is
a striking example. We also note, too, the joint efforts
of the Gulf War Tripartite Commission on the recovery
of remains in southern Iraq in just the past few weeks.
These breakthroughs offer enormous hope to families
that have waited decades for answers.

Today's wars pose new challenges but also new
opportunities to search for missing persons. While the
issue remains complex, there is now a wealth of new
sources of information that can facilitate the search.
As the ICRC Central Tracing Agency prepares to mark
150 years of service next year, we are modernizing our
approaches, including by investing in improved search
technologies, such as facial recognition.

Additionally, there is a growing body of expertise
and experience, including in forensic science, to
improve prevention and response tactics. The ICRC
is building a community of practice and, through the
Missing Persons Project, it is reaching out to experts
and practitioners, international and non-governmental
organizations, State institutions and families to identify
best practices, develop technical recommendations and
coordinate our efforts.

It is clear to us that the way in which the issue of
missing persons is addressed during and after conflict
can determine the scale ofthe problem, its repercussions
on communities and future relations between parties to
the conflict. Crucially, cases of missing persons need
to be handled without discrimination; missing persons
and their families are not bargaining chips.

I urge Member States, in implementing today's
resolution and beyond, to adopt these four steps:

First, States and parties to armed conflicts must
respect and ensure that international humanitarian
law is respected in their operations. They must uphold
families' right to know; ensure that civilians are
protected; ensure that no one disappears in armed
conflict as result ofhostilities or after arrest; and ensure
the systematic and dignified management of the dead.
In particular, we call on parties to conflict to enable the
ICRC to access detention facilities and facilitate family
contact. This important step would go a long way in
preventing those detained from going missing.

Secondly, States must put in place preventative
measures. Without early action, the work to account
for missing people only redoubles, as do the suffering
of families and the future support required to address
their needs. Obligations do not start after hostilities
come to an end.

Thirdly, the issue of the missing must be first and
foremost humanitarian and not part of political agendas
and accountability processes. States must address cases
of missing persons without discrimination. Too often,
we see political manipulation ofthis issue or families of
former enemies stigmatized or blocked from services.

Fourthly, States must support professional,

neutral, impartial humanitarian action on the issue
of the missing. Through its technical experts and
institutions, the United Nations can join efforts with
the ICRC and local and international organizations to
support the creation of a global community of practice
and universally recognized technical standards and
recommendations.

We urgently need stronger political will and
commitment on the part of all actors to implement
their obligations on the missing. We ask States to
live up to their responsibilities and to take the steps
necessary to address this profound yet overlooked
humanitarian challenge.

