Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for briefing the Council on the activities
of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI).

We listened carefully to the report of the
Permanent Representative of the Unites States,
Mr. Khalilzad, on the efforts on the multinational
forces. We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Permanent Representative of Iraq,
Mr. Bayati.

I would like to begin by expressing gratitude to
all the members of the United Nations mission who are
carrying out their important and necessary work in the
conditions of war-torn Iraq. We welcome the efforts of
the mission in the humanitarian and electoral fields and
its work in reforming the Constitution of the country,
supporting the political process and involving Iraq's
neighbouring States in ways of overcoming the inter-
Iraqi crisis.

We take note of the attention that the mission is
devoting to the resolution of the problem of Kirkuk.
Here, we should once again like to emphasize that
questions of the future of this city and of Iraq's internal
boundaries in general must be resolved solely on the

08-3196]
basis of compliance with the interests of all the ethno-
religious communities residing there and firm
guarantees that the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of the country will be preserved.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council today, on the whole objectively reflects the
situation in Iraq, although at the same time, despite its
minute attention to facts, there is an obvious attempt to
tone down or side-step the most acute problems in
present-day Iraq.

According to statements by Iraqi leaders and the
Multinational Force command, some definite successes
have been achieved in the security sphere. Possibly, to
some extent, this is indeed so. However, the situation
remains unstable, and positive changes have not yet
become irreversible. This is demonstrated by the
fighting in Basra and Baghdad and by the recent
terrorists acts in the central regions of the country,
which have claimed dozens, if not hundreds, of lives.

Here we note that, unfortunately, the Government
of Iraq has not yet been able to take advantage of the
somewhat diminished level of violence in the country
to establish an effective dialogue among the leading
ethnic and religious groups.

Moreover, serious problems remain unresolved
within the Iraqi Government itself. The tactical
successes achieved in the past six months in improving
the situation in Iraq by no means guarantee the
preservation in the future of the current positive
dynamic in the process of an inter-Iraqi settlement.

At the same time, the key to solving Iraq's
numerous problems and to ensuring the country's
security lies in the genuine launching of the broadest
possible Iraqi dialogue in which mutually acceptable
and reasonable compromises are reached. There can be
no alternative to the achievement of national accord in
the country on the basis of taking into account the
interests of all the major forces in Iraq.

In that connection, let me note that the United
Nations Mission is becoming more actively involved in
achieving that goal. We call upon it to act energetically
and consistently - all the more so as complex tasks lie
ahead, including, as I have already mentioned, the
determination of the status of Kirkuk and the
provincial elections.
We would like the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq to devote greater attention to the

08-3196]
problem of the protection of human rights in Iraq and
to describe in its reports what is taking place in that
regard in greater detail. The report (S/2008/266) that
we are discussing today contains primarily accounts of
successes achieved. While we can acknowledge that in
the past three months the situation in the prisons of the
Iraqi authorities and the multinational forces has
improved radically, we wonder why nothing is said, for
example, regarding the more than 400 peaceful
civilians who perished as a result of the ongoing siege
of the Sadr City area of Baghdad. Why has the subject
of the activities and excesses in Iraq of mercenaries
from private security companies disappeared from the
report?

With regard to the mechanism for multilateral
support for a resolution of the Iraqi situation, we are
not satisfied with the functions that have been assigned
to it, which essentially boil down to technical
provisions for the holding of ministerial meetings. In
our view, that process requires additional work.

There is one more question that we must bear in
mind: the timetable for the withdrawal of foreign
troops, which, let us admit it quite frankly, many Iraqis
consider to be occupying troops. Of course, we are not
talking about the immediate evacuation of the
multinational forces, as conditions do not yet exist for
that. As unequivocally attested to by recent events in
the southern regions of Iraq, several governorates
elsewhere and the capital itself, the national military
and security forces are still not ready to fully shoulder
responsibility for providing security in the country and
effectively countering various types of militias.

At the same time, if the mandate of the
Multinational Force, which expires at the end of this
year, is replaced by a bilateral agreement on the
continued presence of foreign forces - in other words,
a mere change of signs - that would not help to
clarify the issue of the continuation of such a presence
or to radically improve the situation in Iraq.

In conclusion, I should like to remind the
Secretariat of the readiness it expressed in December
2007, when we last discussed the problem of Iraq, to
organize with the International Monetary Fund at its
Washington headquarters a briefing for the
representatives of embassies of Security Council
member States on the subject of the Iraq Development
Fund. Sufficient time has now elapsed, and I believe it
would be of interest to all of us to know what is taking
place today in that closed and opaque structure and
whether anything has been done to overcome the
glaring shortcomings that we were told of in December
by Assistant Secretary-General Sach.

