The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations. Members
of the Council have before them the report of the
Secretary-General concerning the situation in Abkhazia,
Georgia, document S/2000/345.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 24 April 2000 (8/2000/345).

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
enhance contacts at all levels between the Georgian
and Abkhaz sides, and calls upon the parties to
continue to expand such contacts. It supports the
Secretary-General's appeal to both sides to make more
active use of the Coordinating Council machinery, and
actively to consider the paper prepared by the Special
Representative concerning the implementation of the
agreed confidence-building measures. In this context,
the Security Council recalls with appreciation the
invitation of the Government of Ukraine to host a
meeting in Yalta.

"The Security Council believes that resolution of
issues related to the improvement of the humanitarian
situation, socio-economic development and ensuring
stability in the zone of conflict would facilitate the
peace process. In this regard, it calls upon the parties
to finalize their work on and to sign a draft agreement
on peace and guarantees for the prevention of armed
confrontation and a draft protocol on the return of
refugees to the Gali region and measures for economic
rehabilitation.

"The Security Council notes with deep concern
the continued failure of the parties to achieve a
comprehensive political settlement, which includes
a settlement on the political status of Abkhazia
within the State of Georgia. It also notes the adverse
impact that this failure has on the humanitarian
situation, economic development and stability in the
region. It calls upon the parties to display the
political will required for a breakthrough and to
spare no efforts in order to achieve substantive
progress without further delay. In this regard, it joins
the Secretary-General in encouraging the parties to
be ready to consider proposals, based on the
Security Council decisions, to be presented in due
course by the Special Representative on the question
of the distribution of constitutional competences
between Tbilisi and Sukhumi.

"The Security Council strongly reaffirms the
imprescriptible right of all refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs) directly affected by the
conflict to return to their homes in secure and
dignified conditions. It calls upon the parties to
agree upon and to take, in the nearest future,
concrete steps towards implementing effective
measures to guarantee the security of those who
exercise their unconditional right to return, including
those who have already returned. In particular, the
undefined and insecure status of spontaneous
returnees to the Gali district is a matter that must be
addressed urgently. The Security Council encourages
the Abkhaz side to continue the process of
improvement of security conditions for returnees,
which the Secretary-General notes may be beginning
in the Gali region.

"The Security Council encourages the Special
Representative, in this context, to continue his
efforts, in close cooperation with the Russian
Federation in its capacity as facilitator, the Group of
Friends of the Secretary-General and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the measures undertaken by the
Government of Georgia, the United Nations
Development Programme, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
World Bank in order to improve the situation of
those refugees and IDPs who have not been in a

 

position to exercise their right of return, to develop
their skills and to increase their self-reliance.
"The Security Council notes that the situation on
the ground in the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) area of responsibility has
remained generally calm although unstable during the
reporting period. It welcomes all efforts which have
been undertaken, in particular by the Special
Representative, with a view to alleviating tensions and
increasing confidence between the parties. It regrets
that the Protocol of 3 February 2000 has not been
implemented in full and, in particular, that the
withdrawal of illegal armed groups has not been
brought about. It is concerned at the tension created
by recent attacks against Abkhaz militiamen. It
deplores these attacks and the high level of criminal
activities in the zone of conflict, as well as acts of
violence against UNOMIG personnel and members of
their families. In this context, the Council recalls the
relevant principles contained in the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
adopted on 9 December 1994 and the statement of its
President of 10 February 2000 (S/PRST/2000/4). It
calls on the parties to refrain from any actions which
could increase tensions on the ground and to ensure
the safety of the UNOMIG personnel.

"The Security Council welcomes the important
contribution that the UNOMIG and the Collective
Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS Peacekeeping Force)
continue to make in stabilizing the situation in the
zone of conflict, notes that the working relationship
between UNOMIG and the CIS Peacekeeping Force
has been good at all levels, and stresses the
importance of continuing and increasing close
cooperation and coordination between them in the
performance of their respective mandates."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/l6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
