Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like once again to convey to you, Sir, my
delegation's congratulations on your accession to the
presidency for this month. We would like once again
also to express our deep appreciation to Ambassador
Lavrov and his colleagues for the outstanding manner
in which they guided our work in June.

I should like also to thank Mr. Michael Steiner for
his introductory statement, which provided further
information on numerous items included in the
Secretary-General's most recent report on Kosovo.
That report and the additional statement made by
Mr. Steiner put forward - four years after the adoption
of resolution 1244 (1999) - a comprehensive stock-
taking of the efforts of the international community and
the United Nations to normalize the situation in
Kosovo through the establishment or restoration of
functioning democratic institutions; the creation of an
increasingly safe environment in which efforts are
being made to ensure genuine participation for all,
including minorities, in managing affairs of State; and
the carrying out of reforms necessary for the
relaunching of the economy.

This exercise in stock-taking was necessary to
enable us to evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy
of standards and benchmarks that emerges from
resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation is indeed
satisfied with the results.

There is no doubt that significant progress has
been made in Kosovo. Relative peace has been restored
in the province, and elections have taken place that
have given rise to institutions which, as I emphasized
earlier, are more or less functional. The Kosovo Police
Service, trained by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), is now
operational, and a stable market economy is gradually
coming into existence. The return of minorities and
displaced persons is no longer a taboo subject. On the
contrary, more and more voices are being heard
speaking publicly in favour of this process.

Contacts, albeit limited, have taken place between
Belgrade and the Provisional Institutions in Kosovo,
which are also engaged in a dialogue with UNMIK.

Kosovo, as the Secretary-General notes in his
report, is making progress towards substantive
autonomy and genuine self-administration, as spelled
out in resolution 1244 (1999).

The progress and successes achieved - which,
indeed, can be credited to the United Nations and to the
entire international community - remain precarious
because of numerous problems, which are described in
detail by the Secretary-General in his report. Mr.
Steiner, too, noted several of these.

These ongoing problems - and my delegation
has stated this previously - result from internal feuds
fuelled by partisan rivalry, which provide a breeding
ground for intolerance, hatred and issues of identity, all
of which tend to lead to insecurity, injustice, violence
and hatred, thereby slowing down constructive
dialogue and delaying the re-establishment of that
confidence which is a prerequisite for the peoples of
Kosovo.

Given that scenario, how can one not be
discouraged? How can these efforts be continued, when
extremists of all types are working tirelessly to
undermine the foundations of the state of law which is
slowly and carefully being built by men and women of
good faith, who have come from distant lands to help
the people of Kosovo, who have only one desire - a
normal life. That aspiration allows the people to remain
hopeful that one day they will live in a reconciled
society in which all people can work hand in hand with
their neighbours, in a spirit of solidarity, in building
their common destiny.

That is why we believe that the United Nations
and the international community as a whole must
further strengthen their presence among the people of
Kosovo to help them to meet the challenges and
overcome the difficulties confronting them.

I should like to reiterate the dedication of my
country, Cameroon, to the principle of "standards
before status". Let me also appeal to all political and
administrative officials, to all those involved in
shaping public opinion in Kosovo, and to civil society
there to draw inspiration from, inter alia, the
outstanding work done in restructuring the police, the
result of which is an ethnically balanced police force.
They must refrain from any actions that might kindle
strong sentiments and thereby undermine the process of
building a multi-ethnic and multicultural civil society.

My delegation welcomes the appeal issued
yesterday in Pristina for the return of displaced persons
to Kosovo. That is the kind of news that we hope to be
receiving more often.

I should like now to recall the need for a frank
and constructive dialogue with Belgrade. Such a
dialogue is crucial. It must be held in a spirit of calm
and tranquillity, with respect for international law and
for the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

Finally, I should like to pay a well-deserved
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner, for his selfless work, his
leadership, his commitment to the implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), his unstinting dedication to
bring back to Kosovo the basic human values of
tolerance, respect for one another, and the acceptance
of differences.

I should like also to express my delegation's
appreciation to his entire team, which, courageously
and clear-sightedly, is endeavouring to assist the people
of Kosovo to establish new relations through new and
innovative structures, with the ultimate objective of a
reign of peace, stability, harmony and prosperity for
all.

