Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his statement this morning. I pay tribute to
him for his contribution to peace and security in the
Central African region during his tenure at the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The United Kingdom looks forward to working closely
with his successor, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bathily, on the broad range of issues
that UNOCA is working to address.

The Central African region is beset by a wide range
of security challenges: armed groups, which exploit
local populations and natural resources to sustain
their way of life; piracy, which damages regional
prosperity and security; terrorism, which strikes fear
into communities; and internal conflict, which results
in human rights abuses and threats to democracy. What
those challenges have in common is that they cross
borders. Overcoming them requires the support and
cooperation of neighbouring countries. That is why the
work of UNOCA is central to consolidating peace and
preventing conflict in the region.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) has struck
fear into the lives of civilians in the heart of Africa
for almost 30 years. It remains an abhorrent menace
to peace and security across the region. The concerted
efforts of Uganda, the other affected countries, the
African Union (AU), the United Nations and other
partners have substantially weakened the LRA.
Our goal now must be the permanent eradication of
the threat it poses. Countries of the region and the
international community must further their efforts to
achieve security and stability in the affected countries.
That means all regional Governments fulfilling their
commitments under the African Union's Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army and ensuring that the AU Regional
Task Force is fully operational in conducting patrols
in their territory. Until that happens, the LRA will
continue to evade capture by moving across the porous
borders of affected countries, continuing to carry out
their reprehensible acts of criminality with impunity.

Cross-border coordination between the United
Nations missions and the LRA-affected countries must
also be enhanced. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) should ensure that they
coordinate closely with the AU Regional Task Force,
sharing information rapidly and harmonizing troop
deployments. That will help to ensure that the LRA no
longer has safe havens in areas of the Central African
Republic currently out of reach of the Regional Task
Force. The United Kingdom also calls on the Sudanese
Government to ensure that the Kafia Kingi enclave
does not become a safe haven for the LRA.

Turning to another aspect of UNOCA's broader
role, UNOCA coordinates activity to combat the illegal
wildlife trade. Central Africa has displayed the highest
levels of poaching on the African continent and has
lost two thirds of its elephant population since 2004.
Poaching and the illegal wildlife trade not only threaten
individual species, but also strike at the heart of our
goals for good governance, the protection of national
and regional security and sustainable economic
development. The United Kingdom welcomes steps
taken by regional partners to address those issues. Chad
recently burned over a ton of its ivory stockpile, thereby
showing that it will not tolerate the trade in elephants,
and Ethiopia has committed to similar action.

There are a number of alarming developments
in the wider region. The United Kingdom remains
extremely concerned about the situation in the Central
African Republic. The humanitarian situation is dire,
and armed groups continue to commit human rights
abuses and to terrorize communities across the country.
The United Kingdom welcomes the decision to deploy
MINUSCA from 15 September 2014, which will help
to improve security in the country with the goal of
promoting reconciliation and recovery.

The United Kingdom also continues to be concerned
by rising political tensions and the closing of political
space in Burundi ahead of elections in May 2015. The
international community has a responsibility to ensure
that Burundi does not deteriorate further. A continued

international presence in Burundi is vital.

We have all been appalled by the kidnapping of
over 200 schoolgirls in northern Nigeria last month.
Boko Haram is a morally repugnant organization that is
committing vile acts of terrorism. The United Kingdom
is providing assistance to the Nigerian Government
with their response to that incident. We sent a team of
experts to Nigeria to assist them in finding the missing
schoolgirls and to help develop Nigeria's capacity to
prevent similar incidents in the future.

However, any effective response to the threat posed
by Boko Haram must be carried out in coordination with
Nigeria's neighbours. We are increasingly concerned
about reports that indicate that Boko Haram's influence
outside Nigeria's borders is growing. It is likely that
they may now be operating in southern Niger, parts of
northern Cameroon and around Lake Chad. We call on
Governments in the region to increase cooperation on
the issue and to clearly demonstrate a joint commitment
to tackling the problem. We also call on the international
community to address Boko Haram's activities before
its position as a regional threat is consolidated.

UNOCA plays a vital role in helping the region
overcome those challenges. The efforts of incoming
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily will be of critical importance in identifying
and pushing forward regional solutions to those cross-
border problems.

