The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Davies
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them the
thirteenth report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, contained in
document 8/2002/267. Members of the Council also
have before them document 8/2002/321, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council's prior consultations. In this
connection, I would like to draw attention to an
amendment to operative paragraph 15 of the draft
resolution. The third line of operative paragraph 15
should read

"stakeholders to continue to cooperate to this end
to fulfil their commitments under the Abuja
Ceasefire Agreement".

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it, as
orally revised in its provisional form. Unless I hear any
objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
In favour:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, China, Colombia, France,
Guinea, Ireland, Mauritius, Mexico, Norway,
Russian Federation, Singapore, Syrian Arab
Republic, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1400 (2002).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.

