President Hu (spoke in Chinese): It gives me
great pleasure to attend this historic meeting, Madam
President. I highly appreciate the efforts of the
Philippines and your own efforts in organizing it.

Sixty years ago, the Member States of the newly
founded United Nations entrusted the Security Council
with the mandate of maintaining international peace
and security. The past decades have shown that the
Council has indeed had an irreplaceable role in
resolving major global and regional issues affecting
world peace and security. In order to maintain peace,
we should make sure that the Security Council is able
to carry out its Charter responsibilities properly.

First, we should uphold the Council's authority
by adhering to multilateralism. Only by strengthening
multilateral cooperation, enhancing the role of the
United Nations and maintaining the authority of the
Security Council, in particular, can we effectively cope
with increasing global threats and challenges and truly
achieve universal security. With regard to major issues
affecting world peace and security, the Council should
be allowed to judge the merits of the actual situation
and act collectively in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

Secondly, we should improve the Security
Council's efficiency so that it can respond more
effectively to threats. The Council needs a rapid
response capacity. Moreover, it should address both the
symptoms and the root causes of problems by
formulating a comprehensive strategy featuring
prevention, peace restoration, peacekeeping and post-
conflict reconstruction. Coercive measures alone will
not solve a problem once and for all; what is achieved
through dialogue and negotiation may last much
longer. China supports an important role for the
Security Council in responding to terrorism and other
non-traditional threats to security. We also support
closer cooperation between the United Nations and
other international and regional organizations with a
view to sharing resources, advantages and
responsibilities.

As terrorism poses a serious threat to world peace
and security, the international community should act in
strict accordance with the purposes and principles of
the Charter and should work together closely in a more
effective fight against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. It is essential to promote dialogue
among civilizations and to earnestly address problems
such as poverty, ignorance and social injustice in order
to eliminate the breeding grounds for terrorism.

Thirdly, we should pay closer attention to African
concerns and increase the Council's commitment
accordingly. This meeting should renew our pledges to
Africa and should encourage the Council to increase its
input in Africa, to listen more attentively to the
concerns and proposals of African countries and to take
fully into account their fervent desire for peace,
development and cooperation so that hundreds of
millions of African people can truly benefit from the
care and support of the international community.

China is prepared to work with other Member
States in advancing the lofty goals of peace and
development for all mankind.

