Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As
we do every month, we thank Under-Secretary-General
Stephen O'Brien not only for his comprehensive
briefing but also for his and his team's work, including
that of the thousands of humanitarian workers deployed
in Syria, working under extremely difficult conditions.
We express our gratitude to all of them.

What more can we say at this stage in the Syrian
conflict that has not already been said? Frankly,
very little can be added. Uruguay's position has been
clear and uniform since assuming its mandate as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council last
year. Our first goal is and must be to work towards
a political solution so as to end the crisis and move
towards a peaceful transition in Syria negotiated by all
Syrians and backed by the international community. To
that end, we have every confidence in the good offices
of Special Envoy De Mistura to move forward in the
next round of negotiations in Geneva among the parties
so as to gradually arrive at points of convergence and
give shape to a new chapter in Syria.

Let us avoid the duplicity of the stakeholders inside
and outside of the region who call for a negotiated
political solution while maintaing their support for
armed groups whose actions put them in the same
category as Da'esh and the former Al-Nusra Front.
Along with the Geneva process, the Astana process is
crucial to relaunching and strengthening the cessation
of hostilities across the entire Syrian territory, which
would lead to a significant reduction in violence in that
country. We commend the efforts of Russia, Turkey and
Kazakhstan, among others, and hope that they will be
able to continue on that path next week. Let us step
up the work of the International Syrian Support Group
in Geneva, so that we can help it forge a path leading
towards a negotiations, which is the only way out of that
tragedy. We recall that the Security Council adopted
resolution 2336 (2016) calling for such a cessation four
months ago. We support that resolution and demand
that it be implemented.

Of course, the political process and the cessation
of hostilities are only two of the stages that will ensure
turning a new page in Syria. The third concerns
the humanitarian dimension. We take note of the
improvement in humanitarian access in February and
March in hard-to-access, besieged areas. However,
compared to a year ago, we are far from any encouraging
results. Let us continue to call for the immediate,
sustained and unfettered access to everyone, without
distinction, in order to provide for the needs ofmillions
of people.

For Uruguay, the protection of civilians in Syria
and any other area of conflict is an absolute priority.
It is immoral to make distinctions among civilians.
Unfortunately, over the past seven years, we have
seen the most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law by all parties to the
conflict. Until there is accountability for those crimes,
those responsible will continue to enjoy impunity and
commit them. In that regard, we welcome the report
presented last Friday by the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic
during the Arria Formula meeting. We would like to
see further exchanges between the Commission and the
Security Council, which would be extremely useful to
the work of both.

Mid-April was particularly difficult for Syrian
civilians. To the continued and indiscriminate
bombings and attacks using all types of prohibited
weapons was added, on 4 April, the brutal chemical
attack in Khan Shaykhun, which all of us here
condemned unanimously. We are all aware of why we
were unable to adopt a draft resolution. This is a war
crime that needs to be comprehensively investigated
so as to identify the perpetrators. We are confident
in the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, and hope that it will soon be able
to present illuminating conclusions. We condemn the
term "staged", which was used to qualify this cowardly
and disproportionate attack. That incident triggered
the unilateral use of force by some Member States. We
reiterate that this is the least appropriate way of dealing
with this kind of situation because it only increases the
tensions and undermines the reaching of a solution to
the conflict at the multilateral level.

The other incident that marked this month was the
brutal attack against civilians being evacuated from
Fo'ah and Kefraya in the framework of the agreement
of the four towns, which also includes Madaya and
Zabadani. Although we share the concerns about forced
displacement of the population, which could constitute
a war crime, we must also take into account that
there are scores of thousands that are still in difficult
conditions in besieged areas, and they are the victims
of constant bombings and attacks. In many cases they
are dying of hunger. Any evacuation must ensure the
safety of civilians, ensure the provision of humanitarian
assistance and make efforts to ensure that they can
eventually return to their homes as soon as possible.

A year since the adoption ofresolution 2286 (2016),
we continue to witness the destruction of hospitals and
other medical facilities in Syria. It is an outrage that
the parties have ignored their commitments, thereby
depriving thousands of people of their right to medical
assistance and causing hundreds of victims among
medical personnel. We see this practice repeated
in schools, markets and other places of civilian
infrastructure. We condemn such attacks in Syria,
Yemen and wherever else they occur. They are also war
crimes, and those responsible must be held accountable.

In conclusion, we would like to make several
requests. First, we must consolidate the cessation of
hostilities across the entire Syrian territory. Secondly,
we must call on all disputing parties to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including medical facilities.
Thirdly, we request that the Syrian authorities eliminate
or minimize bureaucratic restrictions to ensure that
supplies and humanitarian assistance can reach hard-
to-reach and besieged areas. Fourthly, there is already
a ceasefire in force, adopted through resolution 2336
(2016). We add our voice to the call made by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
to establish a humanitarian pause of 48 hours in
eastern Ghouta. That should be the practice in all areas
under siege.

