Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
associate myself with comments that will be made later
by the Permanent Representative of Finland on behalf
of the European Union.
I too would like to add my thanks to Ambassador
Mayoral, Ambassador Loj and Ambassador Burian, not
only for the briefings they gave the Council this
morning, but also for their work and for the dedication
and enthusiasm that they bring to it.

There are a number of issues before the Council
today, arising out of the work of the three Committees,
but I would like to concentrate my remarks on just one
of them.

I think the sense of the Council today has been to
stress the common threat we all face from terrorism.
There are many sad examples of the pernicious work of
terrorism in all our countries. I would like to add the
voice of the United Kingdom to that of the several
speakers who today have stressed the importance of the
counter-terrorism strategy of the General Assembly and
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005).

In particular, we see resolution 1624 (2005) as
part of a conscious strategy to take on those individuals
and organizations in the world who encourage others to
commit acts of terrorism, to promote terrorism as a
course of action and to, in their speech and activities,
encourage the hatred and murder of others. Resolution
1624 (2005) was a significant step forward in the
international community's defence against and
rejection of such individuals and organizations. It calls
for Member States' own legislation against incitement,
as well as the implementation and enforcement of that
legislation. It also calls for the development of best
practices in this sensitive field and for guidance and
assistance to be offered to those who seek it.

On 14 September of this year, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) reported to the Council on
the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) to date,
based on reports from Member States. We welcome
that report (S/2006/737). It is a comprehensive and
clear snapshot of the measures taken by United Nations
Member States to implement Security Council
resolution 1624 (2005). A number of speakers today
have drawn attention to the fact that this is not a
complete report in the sense of all Member States
reporting back. I would like to associate the United
Kingdom with the comments by France, Japan,
Tanzania and others to encourage States that have not
yet reported to the CTC to do so.
The United Kingdom considers this report to the
Council to be the beginning of a process, not an end.
The next step is to share information on the outcomes
of the measures in the report, on the lessons we have
learned, on best practice, on ways to involve civil
society in our efforts and on international capacity-
building needs in this area. There is much work still to
do.

For instance, we hope that help can be found for
those States in need of assistance in developing their
legislation. I think the representative of Tanzania drew
attention to that important requirement.

We also need to give thought to providing a way
to help us all to develop a partnership with civil society
to support those efforts. In this respect, I found very
interesting the statement by the representative of the
Congo about how people in all of our countries are
vulnerable to the messages of terrorism and of the
terrorists themselves.

I would like to recall what Kim Howells, the
United Kingdom Minister of State at the Foreign
Office, said at the 19 September ministerial-level
meeting on the launch of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. He said that

"Governments alone cannot defeat terrorism. We
must help generate and support the united
network of citizenry that loudly rejects the
ideology of the terrorists. We must better
articulate an alternative vision to that of the
extremists, backed by action that will ensure that
our citizens, particularly the young, benefit from
open, tolerant, inclusive and prosperous
societies".

I would like to make four further points, if I may,
on other issues on the counter-terrorism agenda. First,
the United Kingdom will stress its commitment to
promoting consistent and transparent analysis of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and tailored
dialogue with States. We believe that it is critical that
the Committee show results in facilitating technical
assistance, including of the sort that leads to better
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) and better
defences for everyone against the terrorist threat.

Secondly, with regard to the 1267 Committee, the
United Kingdom would like to thank the Monitoring
Team for its fifth report, which expands on its previous
ones. We look forward to the Committee's acting on
some of the recommendations that the Team has made.
We are particularly grateful for the Team's work in
organizing valuable regional intelligence meetings, and
we welcome its recommendation for hold similar
meetings between the heads of financial organizations.

We particularly welcome the Committee's efforts
to improve the implementation of sanctions measures,
and I would like to join other colleagues in welcoming
continued cooperation with Interpol, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the International Air
Transport Association. We also look forward to the
introduction of practical tools, such as permanent
reference numbers and a cover sheet for submissions
for listing. We expect the Committee in the near future
to finalize its revision of the guidelines on listing and
de-listing.

Thirdly, with regard to the 1540 Committee, the
United Kingdom attaches significant importance to
active outreach by the Committee to explain the
provisions of the resolution, to understand how States
are implementing it and to ease the passage of
assistance for those States that need it. Since the
Council last considered the issue, the United Kingdom,
together with other countries, supported the Beijing
seminar on resolution 1540 (2004). We have heard
from a number of speakers this morning about the
follow-up meetings in Accra and Lima and their
importance to this work. We hope that these outreach
activities can be properly focused so as to meet the
requirements of the regions concerned.

Finally, I would like to make a short comment on
the adoption by the General Assembly of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, to which I referred earlier.
We believe that, to defeat terrorists, every part of the
United Nations and of the international community as a
whole has something concrete to contribute. We take
note of the fact that some of the recommendations will
require work in the three Committees that have
reported to us today.

The United Kingdom intends to play its part in
the Security Council, at the national level, in the EU
and through General Assembly to see that the Strategy
is implemented. We look forward to working with
Member States in the Council and in the General
Assembly to the same end.

