Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I would like
first of all to thank Ambassador Oshima for his
excellent leadership of the Security Council's mission
to Afghanistan last month and for his report to the
Council. Denmark fully supports the report and its
recommendations. I would, however, like to make a
few comments and observations in my national
capacity.

The serious challenges and obstacles facing
Afghanistan which are detailed in the report should not
be underestimated. We believe that the overall process
that began with the Bonn Agreement and now
continues under the Afghanistan Compact is largely on
track and that the right strategies are in place. But a
continued strong and long-term commitment to see
them through - on the part of both the Afghan
Government and the international community -
remains absolutely essential.

Considerable progress has been achieved,
including the establishment of representative political
institutions, the enhanced capacity of the security
sector and improvements in human rights, including
women's rights and media freedom. But in spite of that
progress, Afghanistan is facing a number of intractable
problems.

The persistent threat to security posed by armed
groups such as the Taliban throughout large parts of the
country, the reign of drug lords and other criminal
elements, the weak central Government presence and
service delivery outside Kabul, and the continued high
levels of corruption and impunity among key public
officials have undermined the Afghan people's trust in
their own Government and triggered a Vicious circle in
which the lack of development and productive
employment opportunities feeds insecurity, and vice
versa.

The only way to break this cycle is to continue to
do what the Afghan Government, the international
community and the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) are already doing, that is, to
endeavour to improve the Government's institutional
capacity for service delivery throughout Afghanistan,
including agricultural and rural infrastructure support
for Viable alternatives to poppy cultivation; strengthen
accountability and the rule of law by bringing corrupt
officials to justice and promote further respect for
human rights, including women's rights, which are
currently under increasing attack; and build up the
capacity of the Afghan army and police force, ensuring
full coordination and cooperation between the Afghan
security structures and the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF).

I would in this regard particularly like to
emphasize the need for improved aid coordination so
as to get more out of the limited resources available.
We believe that UNAMA's coordination role should be
strengthened. It is particularly important to ensure that
the increasing amount of aid provided through the
Provincial Reconstruction Teams is made fully
accountable and aligned with the development
priorities in the Afghanistan Compact.

Another key area in which urgent action is
needed is the implementation of the Government's
action plan for transitional justice. The fact that former
warlords and others who have committed massive
human rights Violations continue to serve in public
office is clearly perpetuating the culture of impunity
and undermining the public's trust in the rule of law.

Finally, we would like to stress the importance of
regional cooperation, including cooperation between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, on improving security in the
border region. The current insurgency in Afghanistan
cannot be brought to a halt as long as sanctuaries exist
for the insurgents across the country's borders. We
therefore welcome Pakistan's determination, stated
during the mission's visit to Islamabad, to prevent
Talibanization and terrorism and to reinforce border
security. We welcome the fact that preparations for the
proposed cross-border jirgas, which are part of the
strategy to counter that threat, are currently being
discussed at the highest level.

Afghanistan has travelled a long way in the past
five years. With continued efforts to overcome the
current challenges, we hope that, in another five years,
the Afghan people will be able to enjoy increased
stability, prosperity and democracy.

In closing, I would like to pay tribute to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tom Koenigs
and to all the staff of UNAMA for the sterling job that
they are doing in Afghanistan, often at great personal
risk.

