Mr. Leon Gonzalez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Middle East continues to hold the attention
of the international community. Time and again, the
Council convenes such debates without any progress,
while the major problems persist. The illegal Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to achieving peace and
a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East.

It is essential that the Council play its proper role
in defending international peace and security and that
it immediately adopt concrete, practical measures
to ensure that Israel ends its aggression against the
Palestinian people. There will be no peace in the
Middle East so long as such aggression persists and the
legitimate, inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
are ignored. Israel's conduct in deliberate violation
of United Nations resolutions, international law and
international humanitarian law constitutes a threat to
regional and international peace and security.

The General Assembly took a historic decision when
its members, by majority decision, granted Palestine
non-member observer State status in the United
Nations. The international community must continue
to support the Palestinian people's legitimate call for
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
based on the pre-l967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.

The construction and expansion of the illegal
Israeli settlements on occupied Palestinian territory;
the difficult and painful reality ofPalestinian prisoners;
and the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where the living conditions of
the inhabitants have worsened as the unjust blockade
has tightened, are unacceptable. Israel has announced
plans to build more than 7,600 new settlements,
together with the ongoing construction of thousands
more throughout the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem and its surroundings, since negotiations
resumed in 2013. Furthermore, Israel demolished at
least 200 Palestinian homes in 2013, forcibly displaced
hundreds of people, and continued the construction of
the wall, isolating entire communities and hindering
the establishment of the State of Palestine. Israeli forces
continued their incursions into the occupied Palestinian
territories, perpetuating the violent, destructive
image of the occupation. In 2013, more than 4,000
Palestinians - including children - were arrested
or detained, adding to the thousands of Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli jails. Only an end to the settlement
policy, the release of Palestinian prisoners, ensuring
the right of return and the immediate, unconditional
and complete lifting of the cruel and illegal blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip will lead to the launching of
a genuine political process to peace in the region.

Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in theirjust struggle for self-determination, and
welcomes the proclamation of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We hope
that it will mark a historic milestone in the Palestinian
people's achievement of all of its rights, including the
acceptance of the Palestinian State as a full Member
of the United Nations. Cuba welcomes Palestine's
application to accede to 15 international instruments.
We demand an end to the occupation of all of the Arab
territories and reiterate our position in favour of a just
and lasting peace for all people of the Middle East
region.

Cuba continues to attach attention to the situation
in Syria and reiterates that a political solution, attained
through dialogue and negotiation, is the only alternative
to the conflict in that country. We oppose the calls of
those who promote regime change in Syria and the use
of force and violence. We cannot fail to reiterate our
concern over the loss of innocent lives resulting from
the Syrian conflict. We condemn all acts of violence
against the civilian population in that country and
reject the supposed protection of human life as a pretext
for foreign intervention. We also reject the complicity
of the mainstream media, which distort reality while
avoiding any consequences of their actions.

The Council's duty is to promote peace, not
violence. It is to prevent destabilization, not to
contribute to the financing, arming or training of any
destabilizing actors. We emphasize the call to preserve
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and its people's right to self-determination
without foreign interference or intervention of any
kind.

We encourage the international community to
continue assisting Syria in the implementation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the fulfillment of
the agreements on the destruction of its stockpile of
chemical weapons under existing commitments. We
also welcome the progress achieved in eliminating
chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
cooperation of the Syrian Government with the joint
mission of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We also
underscore the current efforts undertaken in complex
conditions, to remove the chemical weapons from
Syrian territory.

We reiterate that it is essential that those with
influence on the opposition groups use it to promote the
success of the mission, rather than hinder the process.
Cuba regrets that the second round of talks on Syria
ended without agreement among the parties. We share
the yearning of the international community to pursue
the dialogue and reach agreement on ending the conflict
through a peaceful process led by the Syrian people.

Cuba reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices ofterrorism in all its aspects
and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, including State terrorism. In that regard,
Cuba condemns the acts of terrorism committed in the
Middle East, including in Syria, as well as support for
irregular armed groups, including mercenaries, which
only contribute to destruction and death and hinder
diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict.

