Mr. Kotzias (Greece): I would like to start by
thanking the Russian Federation for organizing this
important meeting. The issues we are addressing in this
debate are closely intertwined and have precipitated a
migration and refugee crisis.They have driven hundreds
of thousands of people from the region, creating new
pressures on the societies and economies of countries
neighbouring on and far beyond the region itself.

Greece, which is situated at the crossroads of the
refugee crisis, is also particularly concerned about
the fate of the minority communities in Iraq and the
region, including Christian communities, which, after
two millenniums in the region, are facing an existential
threat, owing to the atrocities perpetrated by the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS).

It is clear that the threat posed by ISIS continues to
undermine the stability and political dynamics of Iraq
and Syria, leaving the security situation in the region
very volatile. But for some time it has been equally
clear that, through the foreign fighters phenomenon
and the migrant and refugee crisis, waves ofinstability
are being felt much further afield, on a global scale.
The crucial issue for the international community is
therefore to implement a consistent, determined and
multifaceted strategy for countering ISIS.

The horrendous tactics that ISIS is using are
serving to unite regional States, including many with
divergent interests. That is truly a key element in
our common endeavour to defeat ISIS: a determined
stance on the part of all actors. However, ISIS cannot
be defeated by military means alone. We also have to
address the financing ofjihadist organizations and their
recruitment tactics, including the use of the Internet
and social media. Last but not least, it is crucial for
the international community to work collectively and
in unity in order to arrive at the long-overdue solution
to the Syrian crisis through the immediate initiation of
an inclusive political process.

The war needs to stop. There needs to be a grand
alliance for peace, an alliance for the reconstruction of
Syria. We must give back to the youth of Syria, and
of the Arab world in general, their right to dream and
to lead a different life. Otherwise, without that dream
or prospects for a different life, they will not fight for
peace and the reconstruction of Syria.
