Mr. Laurin (Canada): Canada welcomes this
open debate on children and armed conflict, which
comes at a critical juncture for child protection efforts.
We congratulate you, Mr. President, on having opened
this debate with a short video prepared by War Child
Canada. So often visuals are more persuasive than
words.

We wish to indicate our appreciation,
Mr. President, for the presence of your Foreign
Minister during the greater part of the day. That is a
clear indication of the importance that Chile attaches to
this issue.

The Security Council now has at its disposal a
substantial international framework for action. That
includes Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999),
1314 (2000), 1379 (2001) and 1460 (2003), as well as
complementary resolutions on the protection of
civilians, conflict prevention, women and peace and
security, and the safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. Together with the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols,
those instruments provide us with the tools to ensure
the protection of children in armed conflict. Canada
encourages those Member States that have not done so
to ratify the Optional Protocol on the involvement of
children in armed conflicts. Canada calls to the
attention of Member States that the use of child
soldiers is classified as a war crime under the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court.

Unfortunately, egregious violations of the rights
of children continue to take place. There is much work
that remains to be done. In that regard, we want to
thank the Secretary-General for his November report
on children and armed conflict (S/2003/1053). The
mention of specific conflict situations and the naming
of parties using children in conflicts represent
important steps in efforts to press parties to conflicts to
comply with their international obligations.

We were particularly encouraged to see that the
report and its annexes include not only country
situations already on the Council's agenda - such as
those in Afghanistan and Somalia but also situations
equally deserving of the Council's attention, such as
the events taking place in northern Uganda. We must
think seriously about how we can further induce those
parties to conflict to cease their recruitment and use of
children. We must ensure that there are serious
consequences for those who refuse to comply.

 

We recognize, however, that the demobilization
of child soldiers is not enough. In his report, the
Secretary-General highlights the importance of
addressing the specific needs of children in our
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
efforts. Girls continue to be left out of DDR
programmes. Greater attention by United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations is needed
to ensure that girl and boy combatants - regardless of
how they were recruited or used - are demobilized
and gain access to country-specific child protection and
reintegration programmes. In addition, in order to be
deemed successful, the reintegration of children into
their families and communities must include effective
strategies to prevent their re-recruitment.

We must not forget that the violations of
children's rights that occur in situations of armed
conflict are not limited to the conscription of boys and
girls into fighting forces. In recognition of that, the
Human Security Network has made - and will
continue to make - a comprehensive approach to
children and armed conflict a priority. In that regard,
we fully associate ourselves with the statement made
today by the representative of Mali, which holds the
chairmanship of the Network.

Similarly, discussions of small arms and light
weapons must directly address the implications for
children of the proliferation of these weapons. Our
work at the international and regional levels must not
lose sight of the staggering cost of the misuse of these
weapons for children and their communities, as was
highlighted by Member States at the First United
Nations Biennial Meeting of States on small arms.

(spoke in French)

We have learned that, for child protection
mechanisms to be effective, we need reliable
monitoring and credible reporting with well-articulated
follow-up for non-compliance with the standards
currently in place. We were pleased that the Council's
resolutions on Liberia and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo contained important references to children,
but, on many occasions, the Council continues to
ignore child protection in its country-specific
deliberations. We realize that the Council must be
provided with relevant and timely information on
which to base its actions. To that end, Canada reiterates
its appeal to the United Nations Secretariat to
formulate concrete advice and recommendations to the
Council on country-specific situations, to report
systematically on child protection and to provide the
Council with the information it needs to act.

However, when such information is provided, the
Council must shoulder its responsibilities and take
action. For peace operations, its action should include
clear mandates and the financial and human resources
required for child protection at the country level. In
that regard, the deployment of child protection advisers
in peace support operations is an important way to
systematically monitor and remedy the specific effects
of conflict on children. For example, child protection
advisers have had a clearly positive impact on the
effectiveness of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
we believe they can also make a difference in other
United Nations missions. We urge the Council to
consider the deployment of child protection advisers in
the context of upcoming mandates - for example,
those for the missions in Sudan and Burundi. The
Council must also focus on child protection in the
framework of its own missions - particularly by
meeting with children themselves - and must be able
to follow up swiftly and effectively on reported cases
of egregious violations of children's rights.

We eagerly await the outcome of the work of the
Office of International Oversight Services assessing the
United Nations system's response to children and
armed conflict, in conformity with the Secretary-
General's United Nations reform efforts. We hope that
the assessment will provide important guidance on
ways to address child protection in situations of armed
conflict in a sustainable and coordinated way.

Canada recognizes the contribution of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. The Special Representative is a
powerful voice for children victimized by armed
conflict. We encourage the Special Representative to
interact with special rapporteurs, United Nations
actors, civil society and non-governmental
organizations, and children and youth in his work.

We also wish to highlight the activities of those
who work on the front lines: the representatives of
United Nations agencies and of the partner non-
governmental organizations who - often at personal
risk - strive to meet the needs of children in armed
conflicts. Those efforts are essential to combat
violations of children's rights and to ensure adherence
to relevant international law.

If the Council truly wants to protect children and
to suppress egregious violations of children's rights in
situations of armed conflict, it must systematically
meet its commitments. The era of application proposed
by the Secretary-General is well upon us, and we, the
international community, are long overdue in
translating our commitments to the child protection
programme of action and its mechanisms into concrete
operations on the ground.

In conclusion, child protection is a shared
commitment, and we urge Council members -
together with Member States, United Nations agencies
and regional and civil society organizations - to make
good on our commitment to better protect the rights
and well-being of children and to build sustainable
peace for all.

