Mr. Chambas: I am honoured to be here today to
introduce the latest report of the Secretary-General
(8/2018/649) on the activities of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.8156), positive
developments, in particular on the democratization
front, have been competing with the volatile security
situation, in particular in the Sahel and the Lake Chad
basin. The spillover of the Malian crisis is increasingly
affecting Burkina Faso and the Niger. Terrorist groups
continue to cause devastation throughout the region,
despite ongoing counter-terrorism operations. The
complexity of recent attacks is a worrying outcome of
West African and Sahelian Islamic groups reinforcing
their linkages. The expansion of extremist activities
has had a devastating impact on local communities.
Local insurgencies are also spreading, exacerbating
intercommunal conflicts and undermining
State authority.

Allegations of human rights violations by security
forces are particularly concerning as they undermine
our collective efforts. I call upon Governments of
the region to prevent such Violations and to bring
perpetrators to justice. UNOWAS and its partners,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism, are
supporting dialogue on countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism, and have been
advocating for the involvement of more women and
youth in those efforts.

In the Lake Chad basin, despite gains made by
the Nigerian armed forces and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, Boko Haram's Islamic State's West
African Province remain active. Attacks in south-east
Niger have recently increased, including on 1 July with
the killing of 10 soldiers from the Niger. The trend of
Boko Haram using female suicide bombers continues,
and reportedly almost one in five suicide bombers is a
child. The most recent attacks on a Nigerian military
garrison in Yobe state and the ambush of a military
convoy in Borno are the most recent manifestations of
the threats still posed by Boko Haram.

There is a need to provide increased support to
diplomatic, security and humanitarian responses
to Boko Haram in a holistic manner. To that end,
UNOWAS is providing technical support for a joint
summit of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of
Central African States, on 30 July, as called for by
resolution 2349 (2017).

The severe depletion of Lake Chad has led
to environmental degradation, socioeconomic
marginalization and insecurity for 45 million people.
An estimated 2.3 million people remain displaced by
the aggregate effects of insecurity, weak governance
and climate change. I urge Member States to support
the humanitarian response to the Lake Chad crisis,
which remains critically underfunded, as well as the
revitalization of the Lake Chad basin.

Violence between farmers and herders is
increasingly a major security threat in the region
and risks morphing into the terrorist attacks that
have defined the security landscape. Farmer-herder
conflicts are becoming more sophisticated and
deadlier, especially in Nigeria's Middle Belt. During
four days in June, new spates of attacks and retribution
killings between herders and farmers in that region
resulted in scores of deaths.

Let me stress that any military response to
security challenges in the region needs to be matched
by the implementation of comprehensive strategies
linking security and humanitarian interventions to
development and human rights initiatives. There is
also need to increase our collective efforts to address
the challenges facing the Sahel region with actions
that combine politics, security and development. In
that regard, we have repositioned the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel (UNISS) and
developed a United Nations support plan to mobilize
resources for the 10 UNISS countries. I call on Member
States, partners and other stakeholders in the Sahel
to provide desperately needed financial resources to
the region.

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea increased during the
reporting period. Drug-smuggling and the trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, including by terrorist
groups, pose major security threats. I welcome the
ongoing efforts of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in West Africa and the Multinational
Maritime Coordination Centre to strengthen their
operational capabilities. I also note the efforts of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
establish a framework for enhanced cooperation with
the Maghreb and Sahel countries in the fight against
trafficking and transnational organized crime.

The demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria border
and the pillar construction continue to face challenges
due to insecurity in areas affected by the presence
of Boko Haram and unrest in the English-speaking
regions of Cameroon. Nevertheless, pillar construction
is expected to resume at the end of the rainy season.

The period under review saw an upsurge in
popular discontent in the region, manifested through
often Violent demonstrations calling for political and
economic reforms. The sometimes violent conduct
of security forces, notably in dealing with popular
demonstrations, has also fuelled political tensions.
The commitment of countries of the region and
support from the international community will be key
to ensuring the effectiveness and accountability of
security sector institutions as part of broader security
sector reform efforts.

Several countries continue to struggle with
justice, national reconciliation and human rights
challenges. Among those is the concerning number
of high-profile arrests, judicial prosecutions and
convictions against political and civil society actors.
We must collectively continue to urge Member States
to provide an enabling environment for the exercise
of the freedoms of expression and assembly, which
are critical to consolidating democracy and good
governance. In a recent positive development, Benin
and Burkina Faso abolished the death penalty, which
makes nine countries in the region that have ended
capital punishment.
Since my last briefing, the region has continued on
a positive trajectory of democratic elections with local
elections in Guinea, local and municipal elections in
The Gambia, and presidential, legislative and local
elections in Sierra Leone. While they were well
organized and voting took place in a mostly peaceful
atmosphere, the critical pre- and post-electoral phases
were marred by tensions. Let me commend the role
of the electoral observer missions of ECOWAS, the
African Union, the Commonwealth, the European
Union and the International Organization of la
Francophonie in defusing tensions.

Looking forward, we continue to closely
monitor the situation in countries with forthcoming
elections, such as Mauritania, Nigeria and Senegal.
The continuing political crisis in Togo has already
caused the suspension of the parliamentary elections
that were due to take place in July. We welcome
ECOWAS mediation efforts to facilitate the peaceful
resolution of the political impasse. In some countries
of the region, including Nigeria, UNOWAS is working
closely with ECOWAS and other partners to support
the establishment of national peace architectures that
can provide a systematic and inclusive approach to the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.

Democratic gains in the region are not immune to
reversal. There is a need for democratic consolidation
through genuine processes of national reconciliation,
job-creating growth and inclusive sustainable
development. That should be the focus of our
international engagement.

In conclusion, let me assure members of the
Security Council of the continued commitment of
UNOWAS to working with all stakeholders and
development partners in the region to promote peace
and stability in West Africa and the Sahel.

