Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zarif for his briefing. I would
like to welcome President Jahj aga and President Nikolie
to their first time before the Council, and thank them
both for their statements.

I would like to express our deep condolences to all
those in Serbia, as well as in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia, who have suffered as a result of the
devastating floods. We stand with them as they begin
to recover and rebuild.
The United States commends both Serbia and
Kosovo for their continued dedication to the European
Union-facilitated Kosovo-Serbia dialogue and the
implementation of the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations of 19 April
2013. Both Governments have made difficult decisions
that are critical to realizing a more stable, peaceful
and prosperous region. We would in particular like to
recognize the efforts of President Jahjaga, the first and
only female head of State in the Western Balkans, to
promote inclusivity in Kosovo. We also thank the new
Government in Serbia for its renewed commitment
to continuing the normalization process, in line with
Kosovo's legal and institutional framework and in
accordance with the Agreement.

I would like to raise three points today: Kosovo's
upcoming parliamentary elections, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
Kosovo's strategic security review.

We welcome President Jahjaga's announcement
that parliamentary elections will be held on 8 June.
The 2013 municipal elections demonstrated Kosovo's
capacity to meet international electoral standards, and
it will be important for Kosovo's leaders to show the
political will to do the same during this pre- and post-
election period. We were pleased to hear President
Jahjaga's assurances in this regard. Such open and fair
political processes help Kosovo cement its place in
Europe.

The United States commends the Kosovo
Government and the Kosovo Assembly for their
approval of the exchange of letters on the EULEX
transition and the extension of its mandate, and on their
support for establishing a special court to hear potential
cases of the Special Investigative Task Force. We also
thank the European Union for its continued role in
Kosovo. The letters set out a new two-year EULEX
mandate, taking into account Kosovo's progress since
2008, and detailed guidelines to ensure creation of an
internationally credible judicial structure and process
for any trials that may result from the work of the Task
Force.

The strong vote by the Assembly underscored
Kosovo's commitment to justice and the rule of law.
Following elections next month, we look forward to
the new Assembly's prompt consideration of related
implementing legislation. It is in our common interest
to resolve the 2010 Council of Europe report allegations
once and for all, to strengthen Kosovo's international
credibility and to advance its European aspirations.

Finally, I would like to comment on Kosovo's
strategic security sector review, which was facilitated by
a team of United States advisors, to evaluate Kosovo's
legitimate security needs. The final report released in
March outlined a responsible plan to gradually develop,
over a period of years, a limited territorial self-defence
capacity, in accordance with Euro-Atlantic norms and
built on the existing multi-ethnic Kosovo Security
Force. This process has been conducted in a transparent
and professional manner over the past two years.

In its facilitation role, the United States engaged
the Government of Serbia on this issue on several
occasions, and the Kosovo Government has briefed
regional partners and NATO members on the review's
recommendations to transfer the Kosovo Security
Force (KSF) to the Kosovo armed forces, in keeping
with resolution 1244 (1999). We are confident that with
the involvement of NATO and regional partners, we can
build trust between the two sides and ensure that the
arrangements will strengthen the security and stability
of the region. In this vein, we welcomed the written
assurances of the Kosovo Government to NATO that
reaffirm its earlier commitment, made in conjunction
with the April 2013 Agreement, that the KSF and its
successor would undertake no mission in the north
without the prior concurrence of the Kosovo Force.
Further, as a member of NATO, the United States notes
that the Alliance's commitment to Kosovo remains
unchanged.

We are moving towards the day when Kosovo and
Serbia will be not only good neighbours, but partners
in the European Union and Euro-Atlantic institutions.
Kosovo has made great progress in consolidating its
democracies since its declaration ofindependence. Over
one half of United Nations Member States, including
nine members of the Council, now recognize Kosovo
as a sovereign and independent State. For the sake of
greater stability in the region, we urge those States that
have not recognized Kosovo to do so. We hope that the
leaderships in Belgrade and Pristina will continue their
positive momentum as they work to establish peaceful
and secure environment that will allow their citizens
to flourish. They will have full support of the United
States in this regard.

