Mr. Jenie (Indonesia): First, allow me to
associate my delegation with the statement made
earlier by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

In the past few weeks, the situation in the Middle
East has reached alarming dimensions. The future of
the road map is very uncertain. In our View, it would be
a great tragedy if all the work that has been undertaken
by the Council and by the Quartet in this regard were
permitted to go to waste.

The desire for peace in the Middle East and in the
hearts of the Palestinians and Israelis is, we are
convinced, superior to the violence and irrationality
that are currently militating against the road map. In
the view of my delegation, that desire, and nothing
else, is the measuring stick of the strategic importance
of the road map, and it is what we should continue to
measure progress by. The international community can
help move the road map forward by standing above the
situation morally, politically and practically, rather than
permitting itself to become a part of the crisis.
In our view - and this should be obvious -
there is no reason to expect peace or the success of the
road map if Israel has no faith in it. In particular, we
urge the Government of Prime Minster Ariel Sharon to
halt its resettlement policy, the extrajudicial killings,
the construction of the separation wall and its
aggression towards President Arafat and the Palestinian
people. We object very strongly to any attempts by
Israel to deport the elected Palestinian leader. Israel
must also respect to the fullest extent international
humanitarian law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War.

At a historic moment such as this, my delegation
calls on the international community for their complete
vigilance and support for international law. The Quartet
and the Security Council must ensure that Israel fully
pursues the peace process and avoids contradictory and
inflammatory statements and policies capable of
worsening the situation.

Today, we have reached a critical turn on the road
to peace in the Middle East. To the benefit of the
Council and the international community, the right turn
is obvious: it is the one by which Israel faithfully
implements existing resolutions. The Council has no
option: it can do no less than to make sure that there is
no deviation from this right turn. It is the only road that
leads out of conflict and into the future.

