Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): First of all,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening today's
meeting to follow up on our discussion (see S/PV.8039)
last week concerning North Korea's sixth nuclear test,
on 3 September. I very much appreciate the opportunity
to participate in this important discussion.

The Republic of Korea welcomes and fully supports
the adoption of resolution 2375 (2017), which introduces
new robust sanctions measures against North Korea
in response to its most powerful nuclear test to date,
conducted in defiance of the repeated warnings of the
international community. We appreciate the leadership
of the United States, which was crucial in bringing
about this resolution. We know how difficult it is to
secure such a significant negotiated outcome within the
time frame of one week. Our appreciation also goes to
the other members of the Security Council, especially
China and Russia, for their cooperation, without which
the adoption of today's resolution would not have
been possible.

The unanimous adoption of this resolution in such
a swift manner reflects not only the sense of urgency
on the part of the Security Council in addressing the
North Korea nuclear problem, but also the true gravity
of the situation on the Korean peninsula caused by that
unjustifiable act in flagrant violation of international
norms and obligations. The resolution includes the
strongest measures ever against North Korea. Not only
will the oil supply to North Korea be substantially
reduced, but North Korea will also lose two of its
largest income sources, namely, textile exports and
overseas labourers. We believe that those measures, if
fully implemented, will significantly undercut North
Korea's capability to pursue further nuclear-weapon
development. The resolution also sends a clear message
to Pyongyang that enough is enough. Continuing on
the wrong path will only deepen its isolation, seriously
endanger its political stability and hinder its economic
development. That is surely not what North Korea
desires, but is what it will certainly face if it does not
change its course immediately.

By introducing the most biting and robust measures
in this new resolution, the international community
has reaffirmed its unwavering commitment to remain
united in stopping North Korea's further pursuit
of nuclear weapons. Our goal is not to bring North
Korea to its knees, but to achieve a peaceful solution
to the North Korean nuclear issue. Under the current
circumstances, whereby North Korea categorically
rejects any kind of dialogue with any country in the
world, there are simply no viable options, other than
scaling up sanctions, to make Pyongyang return to the
negotiating table for denuclearization. Strong economic
sanctions are undoubtedly the only diplomatic means
available to that end under the present circumstances.
So as to make North Korea wake from its delusion Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2375
of becoming a nuclear-weapon state, I call on all the (2017)~ adopted today. Pyongyang Will then feel the 7331
members of the international community to fully and pm" Of sanctions (h's time around. 
thoroughly implement the measures in all the relevant The meeting rose at 7.20pm.
