Mr. Berger (Germany): My delegation would
like to convey a particularly warm welcome to
President Ramos-Horta. We also wish to congratulate
him on the upcoming anniversary of Timor-Leste's
independence. His statement shows the commitment
with which both the Timorese people and the
Government are working towards shaping a peaceful
and prosperous future for their country.

I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Haq
for her briefing and her leadership. As I have stated in
the Council before, Germany commends the successful
work of the United Nations team, both in Timor-Leste
and in New York, in support of the Timorese people.

Let me also thank the delegation of South Africa
for taking the lead in this dossier. Germany is fully
supportive of the draft resolution to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) one final time until the end of this
year. It is our intention to co-sponsor the draft
resolution.

My country aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union later in this
debate.

Germany continues to be fully confident that the
people of Timor-Leste, with the support of the United
Nations and many international partners, remain on the
right track. Today's briefings clearly underpin our
optimism. We welcome the continued overall progress
in the country, among other things with regard to the
consolidation of the substantial institutional
achievements made, the generally calm security
environment, and the preparations for the upcoming
electoral cycle. In the latter context, Germany
welcomes the invitation by the Government of Timor-
Leste to the European Union to send an election
observation mission. In light of this progress, my
delegation feels assured that the successful completion
of another electoral cycle this year will mark the right
moment for initiating the withdrawal of UNMIT.

At this stage, Germany encourages maximum
attention to a smooth and sustainable transition from
UNMIT to the Timorese Government, the new United
Nations presence or other bilateral partners, and lauds
the respective efforts made so far. It is crucial that we
develop an understanding of what we are transitioning
into. Here, my delegation considers it very helpful that
a national consensus is taking shape on the nature of
the future, post-UNMIT United Nations support in the
country. We encourage the next Government to make a
timely decision on the international support requested.

With regard to the remaining volatilities,
Germany is of the view that the right lessons have to be
drawn from the past. Yet, we underline the medium-
term requirements for further consolidation in the areas
of justice, governance, human rights and civilian
capacity-building, as was also mentioned by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We

also support our Timorese partners in their expectation
to maintain a close link to the Council for as long as
volatilities remain. As became apparent in this
morning's membership consultations, many of those
requirements coincide with the United Nations
strategic focus and comparative advantages.

At this stage, I would like to express once again
the appreciation of my Government for the valuable
contributions made by UNMIT and commend the
dedication and service of its staff. Let me conclude by
wishing President Ramos-Horta and his compatriots all
the best for this very important year. Germany highly
values its close friendship with Timor-Leste and will
continue to stand by Timor-Leste during transition and
thereafter.

