Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The establishment of a public force that respects
the law is an essential element of Haiti's transition to
democracy. To that end, the United Nations has supported
the action of the Haitian Government.

This was made possible by the establishment of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti and subsequently of the
United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH),
which was established in June 1996 and extended last
December. That assistance has played a central role in the
efforts to enhance the efficiency of the Haitian National
Police.

As the Secretary-General stresses in his report of 19
July, the training of a new national police force represents
a long-term undertaking. Since the extension of UNSMIH
last December, this professionalization effort has
continued and - as the Ambassador of Haiti mentioned
earlier - substantial progress has been made.

The Haitian National Police is already having a
positive effect on security in the country, but we must
also recognize - again, as stressed by the Ambassador of
Haiti - that security conditions there remain unstable.
New types of organized crime are emerging. The National
Police is not yet fully able to meet these challenges.

 

Progress has therefore yet to be achieved, inter alia, in the
areas of recruitment, equipment management and training.

For these reasons, France supports the request of the
Haitian authorities that the United Nations presence be
maintained to the end of November. It also supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations to that effect. As a
member of the group of "Friends of the Secretary-General
for Haiti", France participated in preparing the draft
resolution before the Council and will vote in its favour.

The draft resolution proposes the establishment of the
United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti for the next four
months. That mission will help the Haitian authorities to
pursue the professionalization of the police. The objective
is to strengthen the Haitian National Police so as to enable
it, by the end of the transition, fully to carry out its
functions.

I pay tribute to the efforts of the contributing
countries, particularly Canada. For its part, France will
contribute to the new mission at a similar level to its
contribution to UNSMIH. I would recall that this
contribution currently includes 29 gendarrnes and 17 police
officers.

