At the outset, Portugal would like to congratulate South Africa for convening today's open debate on such an important topic. We would also like to thank the President of the International Court of Justice for his briefing. The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. Its mission is devoted to the pursuit of the Organization's purposes, including in matters related to the maintenance of international peace and security. My country, Portugal, has strongly advocated the importance of peacefully settling disputes and the Court's role in fulfilling that purpose. For that reason, in the past, Portugal asked the International Court of Justice to rule on disputes it had with other States on the application of international law in two specific cases - Right of Passage over Indian Territory (Portugal v. India) and East Timor (Portugal v. Australia). Portugal values the fundamental role the Court plays in contributing to peace and security through the judicial settlement of disputes between States. In addition, and of no less importance, the Court has helped through its jurisprudence to clarify the law applicable on a multitude of aspects related to sovereignty, jus ad bellum and jus in bellum, human rights, natural resources and boundary delimitations, to name just a few. Such clarification undoubtfully helps in the prevention of conflicts. It is also worth noting that, under Article 94, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council may be called on to take action to enforce a judgment of the Court. Furthermore, the Council is directly involved in the election of the judges of the Court. It is therefore clear that the respective operations of the Security Council and the Court are complementary in nature. Their political and judicial approaches to a conflict are in fact mutually reinforcing, albeit independent. The strengthening of the cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice would without a doubt reinforce the noble tasks that the Charter confers to the United Nations, its States Members and specifically those two organs. Among the concrete steps already provided for in the Charter that could serve progress in that direction are the Council considering more often to recommend the submission of a dispute to the Court pursuant to Article 36, paragraph 3, of the Charter, which states that the Council should take into consideration that legal disputes should be referred by the parties to the Court; the Council revisiting its power to ensure compliance with Court judgments, pursuant to Article 94 of the Charter; the Council taking a more proactive role and establishing an overview procedure, together with the Court, to monitor compliance; and the Council requesting with greater frequency advisory opinions of the Court, pursuant to Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Charter, as it has done so only once, in 1970, in relation to the situation in Namibia, which contrasts with the practice of the General Assembly. The foregoing steps, although essential, are not without difficulties. Members have different views on the relationship between the Council and the Court and on the role of the Court in settling disputes between States. That has had the effect of the Council not having the custom or practice of using all the mechanisms available to it with respect to its relations with the Court. Portugal therefore encourages the Council to dedicate more attention and effort to that matter. A first step forward could be the drafting of a road map on specific ways to implement the tools that the Charter makes available to the Council. In conclusion, we would like to renew our appreciation for the South African leadership on a very important topic. We hope that its efforts and the Council's deliberations will bring about tangible results. For its part, Portugal will continue to closely follow the matter and join efforts aimed at fulfilling the Council's and the Court's respective mandates in the maintenance of international peace and security.
