Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish first of all to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this timely debate on
the situation in Somalia.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity.

After two decades of instability, Somalia seems
to be finally showing signs of real promise. The
election of a new President and a new Speaker and
the appointment of a new Prime Minister, who still
requires a vote of confidence from the new Parliament,
represent a turning point in the history of Somalia.
Such developments have instilled new legitimacy in the
political process that began in 2004 with the start of the
Somali transition.
As Prime Minister Monti stated at the mini-summit
on Somalia in New York on 26 September, those are
Somali achievements, while the consolidation of peace
and stability will be primarily a Somali challenge. That
is an honour and a burden, a merit and a responsibility.
Somalis are certainly aware that reconstruction will
require a far-sighted vision and the commitment to
work for the benefit of their people, with full respect
for the principles of transparency and accountability.

The adoption of the provisional Constitution
lays the foundations for a federal democratic State.
The new Parliament must be the embodiment of the
responsibility to honour democracy and human rights.
The new President is a symbol of national unity and the
guardian and promoter of the founding principles of the
Constitution. The new Government, which we hope to
see performing its duties as soon as possible, will have
the task of implementing and administering the policies
for which the Somali people have been waiting for two
decades.

We welcome the six-pillar policy launched by
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. The priorities
set out in the document are at the core of the bold and
comprehensive strategy that the new Somali authorities
should carry out decisively in the years ahead. From
now on, reconstruction and stabilization must be the
guideposts for action. We expect due attention to be
paid to developing the institutional and legal framework
of democracy, the judiciary, the rule of law, human
rights and fundamental freedoms. Only when the new
Constitution is fully implemented will civil coexistence
once again be possible in Somalia. Italy is ready to do
its part in concretely supporting the work in progress
in that field.

The needs of the people must be at the top of the
agenda. A civic strategy focused on health care, social
services and the creation of job opportunities is the
precondition for a full recovery.

Security must also be a priority. The African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is doing a remarkable
job, but threats still exist. Italy calls on all Somalia's
partners to provide adequate resources to finance the
Somali National Security Forces and AMISOM, whose
presence is still needed to consolidate the security
framework. Italy is working in close cooperation with
the African Union to provide assistance to the Somali
army and training to the Somali police. We hope that
other partners will soonjoin us.

The past two decades of Somalia's history have
taught us that a strategy implemented by military
means alone is not enough. We should therefore ensure
that a civilian strategy is implemented and that local
administrations, representative of all clans, are set up
to revive the reconciliation process. To that end, we
encourage the new Government to spare no effort in
building an effective federal State. At the same time,
we urge all Somalia's partners willing to support
that federalist agenda not to encourage a process of
fragmentation. The preservation of the unity of a
Somali federal State is essential if we truly want to turn
the page and put Somalia's past instability behind us.

Ending a transition is always difficult, but the
positive achievements of recent months are a ray of light
after two decades ofdarkness. Ifthe summer of2012 is to
be remembered as the Somali Spring, we need a renewed
and broad commitment to make such accomplishments
durable and sustainable. The international community
must continue to stand alongside the Somalis, building
on the important lessons learned, first and foremost,
solidarity and determination.

The United Nations has played a positive guiding
role and must continue to do so. The review of the
United Nations role in Somalia must take into account
the emergence of today's new and more legitimate
authorities. The new United Nations role should
therefore be shaped through an in-depth dialogue
with the new Somali authorities to guarantee Somali
ownership of the process, to prevent duplication and to
ensure that our efforts will enable the United Nations
to play an effective role in State-building and the
consolidation of peace.

