Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the outset,
following on from the President of the Council and
the colleagues who spoke before me, I should like
to express once again the deep sorrow and sincere
condolences of the Haitian Government and people to
Egypt, Sweden and Somalia, where the deadly attacks
of the past weekend caused innocent victims. I assure
the Egyptian, Swedish and Somali Governments of the
complete solidarity of the Haitian authorities.

I should like to begin by thanking the Security
Council for inviting the Government of the Republic
of Haiti to express its views and observations on
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (S/2017/223).
I wish to express the Haitian Government's grateful
appreciation to the Secretary-General who, in his
first report on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), shows a spirit of
solidarity and commitment to the Haitian people for
which we are deeply thankful. His objective, well-
researched and balanced report, as well as his judicious
recommendations, testify to his well-known breadth of
vision and generosity of spirit.

The progress made in recent years towards the
establishment of the rule of law in Haiti, although
limited in some respects, remains undeniable. That
progress is clearly highlighted in the report. Institutional
weaknesses are also highlighted, as is the slow pace of
some key reforms. There are still many obstacles on the
path to the rule of law and the development of human
rights in Haiti. The report also stresses the serious
socioeconomic challenges, the effects of declining
official development assistance flows, the urgent need
for food security, and the deteriorating health situation,
illustrated by the resurgence of the cholera epidemic.
However, there are glimmers of hope on the horizon.

The accession to the presidency of His Excellency
Mr. Jovenel Moise, on 7 February, at the conclusion of
an arduous and complex but highly successful electoral
process, was unanimously hailed as a decisive turning
point in political life in Haiti. As the Secretary-General
points out in his report, with the peaceful conclusion
of the electoral process and the return to constitutional
order, an important step has just been taken. A general
election with unchallenged results was held. The peaceful
transfer of power, the restoration of Parliament to full
functioning, the legitimacy of elected representatives,
and the appointment of an open Government bringing
together some of the main political groups represented
in the legislature, are elements that form the bedrock
of the stability that the new Government, led by Prime
Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, is working to consolidate.

The impartiality and professionalism demonstrated
by the Haitian institutions in these elections are rightly
emphasized in the report. In that regard, MINUSTAH's
role in strengthening the capacities of the Haitian
National Police, which was undoubtedly a key element
in the establishment of a climate of security and
stability, should be commended. That is undoubtedly
one of the outstanding achievements to be credited to
the Mission. Now that the objective of creating a safe
and stable environment - one of the major thrusts of
the mandate entrusted to MINUSTAH by resolution
1542 (2004) - has been achieved, we can overcome
the structural disadvantages and address the serious
problems that have so long compromised the political,
social and economic stability of Haiti, and that have
impeded foreign direct investment in the country. The
report of the Secretary-General provides an overview
of the challenges ahead.

In that regard, the President of the Republic,
together with the Government and Parliament, has
just launched a programme of institutional reforms to
tackle the most pressing sociopolitical and economic
challenges, in particular that of bringing Haiti through
a situation of economic fragility to one of sustained
growth. It is in that spirit of dialogue and consultation
that the Prime Minister has presented to Parliament an
ambitious programme of action aimed at implementing
a number of reforms that are considered essential from
the economic and social points ofview, as well as in the
areas of security, justice and human rights - in short,
in terms of consolidating the rule of law, in parallel
with the sustained revival of growth and development.
In that regard, we welcome the desire of the United
Nations to actively support the priorities of the
Government and the main thrusts of its plan of action
by, inter alia, assisting in the organization of the Etats
generaux sectoriels de la Nation.

With regard to the mandate of MINUSTAH, there is
a perfect convergence between the views of the United
Nations and the Government of Haiti on the gradual
and orderly withdrawal of MINUSTAH after 13 years
of work in Haiti. The Haitian Government considers the
consolidation of security and stability achievements to
be essential. The phased withdrawal of the military
and civilian components of MINUSTAH should
enable the Haitian institutions concerned to effectively
assume the functions of the Mission. Consequently,
both parties must agree on a withdrawal timetable
that cannot give rise to any kind of security vacuum.
The proposed transition period thus responds to the
common concern to ensure that the Haitian National
Police has adequate capacity to assume over time full
responsibility for the country's security and to address
all threats of instability within the country, irrespective
of an international uniformed presence.

For that reason, the Government of Haiti supports
the Secretary-General's recommendation on the
extension of the MINUSTAH mandate for a final
period of six months, extending the original deadline to
15 October 2017. it also supports the recommendation
to the Security Council to establish, under a new
name, a new presence whose functions would be
focused mainly on strengthening the rule of law and
the police. In that context, the Government of Haiti
endorses the modalities of the transition, including,
first, the complete but staggered withdrawal of the
2,370 members of the military component during the
transition period; secondly, the reduction in the number
of police units formed and of individual police officers;
thirdly, the participation of the new mission in the
implementation of the strategic development plan of the
Haitian National Police; and fourthly, the integration of
the activities of the new mission into the United Nations
country team, taking into account Haiti's residual
stabilization needs, as well as its good offices role in
support of political stability and good governance.

The guiding principle to orient the future role and
presence of the United Nations in Haiti is to ensure a
responsible transition that builds on the achievements
of the past 13 years, while meeting the country's
priority needs for stabilization and capacity-building.
The Government of Haiti adheres to that vision. It
will continue to work closely with the United Nations
to ensure the full success of the new phase in their
cooperation. It also hopes that the United Nations
appeal for a new impetus of solidarity with Haiti will
be widely heard by the international community.

It is in this context that the President of the
Republic and the Government of Haiti place the
greatest interest in the reactivation of the humanitarian
and reconstruction mechanisms in the regions that
were tragically hit by Hurricane Matthew in October.
Whole populations are still living in scarcity and
distress, the stricken victims of Haiti's exposure to
climate change. I reiterate the Haitian authorities' call
to keep Haiti's Sud and Grande-Anse provinces on the
agendas of humanitarian agencies, non-governmental
organizations and the country's cooperation partners
through the structures of the Haitian State.

As it did on 1 December 2016 at the informal
information meeting with the Secretary-General
on the new United Nations strategy against cholera
in Haiti, the Haitian delegation reiterates the value
attached by the Government of Haiti to the two-
pronged approach advocated by the Secretary-General
to the eradication of cholera in Haiti. The Government
strongly and urgently calls for the funds necessary
for the implementation of parts I and II of the plan of
action - some $400 million over two years - to be
raised within the required time frame.

The Government of Haiti takes this opportunity to
thank all friendly countries, members of the Security
Council, troop-contributing countries and all of Haiti's
cooperation partners for their ongoing commitment, in
one way or another, to MINUSTAH. May the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore', be thanked and congratulated for the hard
work she has done for nearly four years.

At this crossroads, where a safe and stable
climate allows the Haitian people to see a glimmer of
hope, the Government fervently looks forward to the
continued support of all its partners in the context of
the new United Nations presence in Haiti. It calls on
the international community to lend its full support to
the difficult task of rebuilding the country's essential
infrastructure, sustained growth, social progress and
sustainable development.

