Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
debate on combating drug trafficking in the Sahel and
West Africa. We appreciate Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon's personal engagement on this issue. We
also thank Executive Director Fedotov and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit for
their briefings today.

Drug trafficking continues to be a threat to
international peace and stability. The illicit drug trade
undermines the authority and effectiveness of State
institutions, hampers socioeconomic development
and erodes the rule of law. The region most seriously
affected by this scourge today is West Africa, which
is fast emerging as a major transit point and as an area
of consumption and production. We are particularly
concerned about the potential threat to peacebuilding
efforts and the hard-won advances in the economic
development of the region.

Drug trafficking cannot be tackled by any one
country alone. That is all the more true when the States
faced with such challenges lack the capacity to respond
effectively to them, as we see in the Sahel and West
Africa. A comprehensive and integrated response is
urgently required. Cooperation and coordination among
the affected countries, as well as among international
and regional organizations, are vital. In that context, I
would like to make a few observations.

First, the effective implementation of the relevant
regional and international strategies depends upon the
capacities of Governments. Therefore, emphasis should
be placed on strengthening legal and institutional
capacities, especially in the area of border and customs
control. Establishing national criminal justice systems
that are accessible and aligned with international norms
is also important. We commend the role of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in providing
valuable support to that end, especially through the
West Africa Coast Initiative. Continued assistance by
international donors remains crucial.

Secondly, given the nature of the challenges, the
central role of regional organizations should be fully
brought into play. We support the efforts made by
regional Governments to better coordinate their actions
to combat drug trafficking. The Economic Community
of West African States regional plan of action and
the African Union plan of action are instrumental
frameworks to that end. The international community
should continue to support such regional initiatives.

Thirdly, it is important to address the underlying
structural causes of vulnerability. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel rightly recognizes the
mutually reinforcing linkage between development and
security in the Sahel. It also places strong emphasis
on strengthening national and regional capacities for
development. In our efforts to tackle drug trafficking
and organized crime, it is important that the integrated
strategy be fully implemented.

Fourthly, establishing early-warning and prevention
mechanisms should be a matter of priority for the
Council. We need to take drug trafficking issues into
account in conflict-prevention strategies and in the
mandates ofpeacekeeping missions. The Council should
also explore ways to further strengthen intermission
cooperation among the relevant United Nations
missions. The Republic of Korea welcomes today's
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2013/22 and
will remain committed to helping West Africa in its
fight against drug trafficking and organized crime.

Lastly, as this is probably the last meeting of
the Security Council this year, I would like to thank
the outgoing members of the Council - Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo - for their
valuable contributions and cooperation with us in the
Council.

