Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with
the statement that will be delivered by the observer
of the European Union later this afternoon. I would
nevertheless like to make some additional remarks in
my national capacity.

First of all, we thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/696) and we strongly welcome the
strategic review. We thank Special Representative
Yamamoto for his comprehensive briefing and, like
others, we wish to express our appreciation for the
tireless efforts ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) aimed at promoting peace
and coordinating international community assistance
in an extremely challenging environment.

Italy welcomes the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Afghanistan. I thank him for his briefing. It was the
first of many, I hope.

We continue to witness an unending escalation
of the intensity of the conflict in Afghanistan and the
terrible consequences that it has brought, starting with
severe casualties, particularly among those who are
most vulnerable, such as women and children. Terrorists
remain a grave and dangerous threat to the country's
stability, as we have seen from the devastating and
heinous attacks that have taken place in recent months.

This situation requires us to renew our collective
support for the National Unity Government's efforts to
bring peace and stability to the country. Faced with the
relentless violence from the Taliban and from terrorist
groups, the Afghan national security and defence
forces continue to play a pivotal role in defending the
substantial progress made in Afghanistan since 2001.
We pay tribute to their courage and dedication.

Italy renews its active commitment to continuing
to train, advise and assist the Afghan security forces
in the framework of the NATO-led Resolute Support
Mission. But in order for lasting peace and security to be
brought to the country, the solution must ultimately be
a political one achieved through negotiations between
the Government and armed opposition groups in the
framework of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process that respects the country's Constitution. This
process will require the full and concrete support of
Afghanistan's partners. We therefore welcome the new
United States strategy for the country, which confirms
the intention to work towards achieving this ultimate
outcome. We also welcome renewed United States
commitment to the broader fight against terrorism. In
that context, the role of regional actors will be crucial.
We need genuine and constructive cooperation from all
regional stakeholders in a common and resolute fight
against terrorism and in promoting the conditions for
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Italy supports all diplomatic initiatives, such as the
Kabul process, aimed at improving cooperation. We
also share the goal of fostering a national consensus
around peace reconciliation, which will require the
active and inclusive participation of all sectors of
Afghan society, including women, whose role is of
particular significance in that regard. To that end,
we encourage the full implementation of the national
action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security.

Equally important in the process ofachieving lasting
peace and stability in Afghanistan is for the Government
and its institutions to gain the full confidence of the
citizens of the country by exercising good governance
and by meeting the country's development needs. This
is all the more critical given the alarming levels of
poverty and unemployment, especially among young
people. That will require the full and comprehensive
implementation of internal reform. We acknowledge
the substantial progress made in the electoral process,
but several important issues need to be resolved in
order to ensure that the upcoming elections are fully
transparent and credible. The fight against corruption
must be carried forward with steadfast determination.
We acknowledge that positive results are beginning
to emerge in that regard through the action of such
institutions as the Office of the Attorney General and
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre.

Promoting and defending women's rights will
continue to be a top priority, as is the full empowerment
of women within Afghani society. Further efforts are
required to ensure that there is no risk of reversal in
this area.
The upcoming meeting of senior officials in Kabul
will provide an important opportunity to measure
progress against reform benchmarks in the framework
of a partnership between Afghanistan and its donors,
which was reaffirmed at the Brussels Conference last
year. The international community's commitment to
helping to bring peace, stability and self-reliance to
Afghanistan and its people remains steadfast, and Italy
is determined to continue to play an integral part in
this process.

