Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and your delegation for having convened
this important debate. Our country is firmly committed
to the international legal system and believes that global
disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction can, and should, be achieved through
dialogue and the negotiation of legal instruments.

Over the years, a number of proposals and
measures have been put forward to make progress
in this area. We have banned nuclear tests, but the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) has
not yet entered into force. We have attempted to ban
the production of fissionable material, but we have
not yet been able to begin the negotiations in the
Conference on Disarmament, which has been paralysed
for years and does not have universal membership. We
have called for greater transparency with regard to
arsenals, for the verification of any arsenal reductions
by the International Atomic Energy Agency and for the
cessation of programmes to upgrade arsenals; however,
bilateral and unilateral verification processes continue
to be the norm. We also adopted resolution 1540 (2004),
which imposes a number of binding obligations on
all Member States, including, inter alia, the duty to
refrain from providing any support to non-State actors
who might attempt to develop, acquire, manufacture,
possess, transport, transfer or use nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons and their means of delivery.
However, implementation still faces many challenges.

All of those steps and objectives are very important
for some States, but not for all. And yet the international
community has not given up on its attempts to achieve
a world without nuclear or other weapons of mass
destruction, and even less on achieving that objective
with the benefit of sophisticated verification and
control systems.

Costa Rica is a small, democratic, disarmed and
civilian-based country. The multilateral system and
international law are our only means of defence. We
know quite well that peace and security as a global
public good can be achieved, in part by honouring the
Charter of the United Nations, in particular Articles 10
and 26, as Costa Rica has been advocating for decades.

As a country without an army, we possess no
weapons of mass destruction. In our legislation there is
a ban on devices that produce asphyxiating, poisonous,
paralysing, irritating or tear-generating gases. We have
also banned the use, production or introduction into the
country of gases, chemicals, toxic or deadly viruses
or bacteria that could lead, inter alia, to irreversible
physical or mental consequences.

Precisely because we have sufficient credentials
and, above all, the moral authority flowing from those
customs and practices, we reiterate our call to the
international community to avoid an increase in the
number of new States that possess nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction, which might be acquired
either through the use of their own technology or through
technology that they have acquired from other States.
In addition, we must continue working to eliminate the
increase in the quantity and quality of nuclear and other
types of weapons by States that already possess such
weapons. Finally, we must avoid at any cost an increase
in the number of States that possess weapons of mass
destruction as a result of the evolution of the civilian
use of nuclear and other technologies.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2016/712, annex) that provides the basis for today's discussion,
globalization and technological development facilitate
the efforts of the international community to reduce
new risks and threats. However, such tools can have
unintended effects: they can also foster the danger
that, in the long run, such weapons might end up
falling into non-State hands. It is therefore necessary
to strengthen international mechanisms for controlling
the technology and materials needed to develop such
weapons. We must also redouble efforts to prevent
terrorist groups from acquiring any type of weapon of
mass destruction and ensure that the export and import
of materials, equipment and technology needed to
develop such weapons is subject to control.

We stress the importance of compliance with
Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations, which
provides for the Security Council to submit to Members
plans

"for the establishment of a system for the regulation
of armaments"

with a view to

"the establishment and maintenance of international
peace and security with the least diversion for
armaments of the world's human and economic
resources".

We are convinced that a world without weapons
of mass destruction is the only way to achieve
humankind's main objectives, namely, peace, security
and sustainable development. That is why we will
continue to work towards what is a utopia for some,
but an achievable goal for us, namely, a world free of
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction.

