Lieutenant General Dos Santos Cruz: It is very
difficult to offer suggestions to the highest level of
decision-makers in the world. But even I have the
opportunity to disagree or to freely provide some
opinions on peacekeeping operations.

I think that the mandates, the rules of engagement
and international legislation have never forbidden the
use of force for self-defence or the defence of a third
party. It is a universal law.

We need to refine certain mandates. But in my
opinion, more than that is necessary. We need, in
parallel, one interpretation from a practical point of
View. Normally the mandates and principles have
different interpretations - one is more classical,
one is more academic and one is more philosophical.
Maybe it is time for a more practical interpretation,
when guidance does not provide freedom to the troops
executing, in a practical way, the mandate to protect
civilians, and when there is such a broad interpretation
of the principle on the ground. On the ground we deal in
real life, and we need to be focused on that.

With regard to guidance, we need to state very
clearly what effect we want on the ground. I think that
according to the environment in which we live right
now, guidance must be very clear. What attitude, what
mindset, does the Council expect on the ground? That
is very important.

We need more technology and more means.
However, those means must be supported by the will
and the commitment to take action, to report what we
did yesterday, and not only what happened yesterday,
because iftechnology is not used and the will is lacking,
we will report what happened yesterday.

With regard to troops, obviously a strong posture
demands more risk for them. But the risks are not
difficult to manage. There are combat procedures. The
military combat procedures need improvement. We
need to use more of the tactics we have for night combat
and counter-ambush techniques and tactics. We have
means to compensate for risks that may be assumed on
the ground.

It is unfortunate that we live in an environment
where, for hundreds of years, neither French nor English
was understood, but only force. We must therefore be
strong. We need a strong image on the ground. It is
safer for us.

On the Intervention Brigade, I think it is a useful
experience, exactly because of the behaviour based on
the assumption that if one is stronger, one is better. It
is very difficult and very sad, but that is the reality in
which we live.

I think that all troops should have the same
obligations. From a practical perspective, it is
not possible to say that "I am doing something to
neutralize, or to protect civilians, or sometimes to
protect myself". We need all troops to have the same
conduct. In one intervention brigade of 20,000 troops,
perhaps 17,000 will follow one interpretation while
3,000 follow another. If 20,000 take one step forward,
it is a major event; it is not only 3,000 acting. I think
all troops should have the same commitment and same
obligations. Obviously, that is a much more political
posture. Why, then, is it not possible? Obviously, it is
political; we will build one rapid-reaction force or a
type of intervention force. That is my opinion.

Then there is the mandate, which is not an obstacle
to the actions we need to take. We have the means.
Sometimes there may be improvements, but we have
the means. Then, really, things depend on our attitudes
on the ground.

