Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif
for his briefing on developments in Kosovo during
the reporting period. I also thank Prime Minister
Ivica Dacie of Serbia and Mr. Hashim Thaci for their
statements.

The current report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/68) shows that, while progress has been made in
several areas, challenges still remain. Our contribution
to today's debate will focus on three issues, namely,
human rights, key political developments and the return
of internally displaced persons.

On human rights, we welcome the organization
of a technical meeting on 2 December to discuss the
new draft Kosovo strategy on human rights for the
period 2014 to 2018. We support the revitalization
of non-judicial human rights institutions in Kosovo
and acknowledge the vital role of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and other international organizations
in that process. The report indicates that the Kosovo
authorities have not made progress in implementing
the recommendations contained in the 2012 report
of the Ombudsperson Institution in Kosovo as those
recommendations pertain to culture, education and
other rights of minority communities. We urge the
authorities to do more to promote and protect the
rights of minorities in order to foster inclusiveness
and strengthen cohesion. We commend UNMIK for its
continued efforts, together with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and other stakeholders,
to promote respect for human rights in Kosovo.

Concerning the key political developments, we
welcome the continued implementation of measures
to normalize relations between Serbia and Kosovo.
We urge both sides to maintain their high levels of
commitment to the process. The establishment of new
democratic institutions through free and fair elections
has been described as one of the key aspects of the
First Agreement of 19 April 2013. That is why we take
special note of the mayoral and municipal elections that
took place in Kosovo on 3 November and 1 December.
We furthermore note that the elections were peaceful,
with the exception of those in North Mitrovica, where
unidentified masked men ransacked two poling centres,
and Pasjan, where ballot boxes were vandalized.

We applaud the zeal of the people of Kosovo for
democracy, as evidenced by the increased turn-out of
voters as compared to 2009. We consider it significant
that voters residing outside Kosovo, in Serbia and
Montenegro, were able to participate in the elections.
We commend the OSCE for its efforts in that regard.
We would also like acknowledge the positive role
played by the Serbian leadership in support of mass
participation in the elections in northern Kosovo and
that of the OSCE in facilitating logistical arrangements
for the elections despite the challenging circumstances.

With regard to displaced persons, we welcome the
commitment of the Kosovo authorities to facilitating the
return of Kosovo Serbs to their properties. We believe
that is an important step in the overall integration of
Serbs into Kosovo. We would, however, like to see
the same commitment in the case of other minorities
that have been displaced. We note from the report that
displaced persons who return face certain challenges,
some of which amount to a violation of their human
rights. In that regard, we call on the authorities to take
measures to end the discrimination faced by returnees
and to grant them better access to education.

We welcome the improvement in the policy
framework for managing the integration of returning
displaced persons with the approval, in October, of the
strategy on the reintegration of repatriated persons for
the period 2014 to 2018. We acknowledge the role that
UNMIK has played in the return process in Kosovo and
urge the Mission's leadership to remain engaged with
authorities in Kosovo on that important issue.

I would like to conclude by commending UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif, for the admirable manner in
which it is carrying out its mandate.

