Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July. I also
wish to thank you for having organized this debate at
this crucial moment, which affords the wider United
Nations membership an opportunity to address the
challenges facing the Middle East, particularly the
people of Palestine. This debate is taking place one
year after Israel's devastating attacks on the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip, which resulted in the worst
escalation of hostilities and loss of life in Gaza since
1967, requiring urgent international action.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

As we commemorate the barbaric massacre of
more than 2,000 Palestinians, including 1,462 civilians,
the injury to more than 11,000 and the destruction of
homes in the Gaza Strip during the summer of 2014, my
delegation joins others in condemning the violations,
the continuous provocations and the escalation of the
aggressive measures that continue to be carried out
by the Israeli occupying forces, aimed at collective
punishment of the Palestinian people.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its concern at the
continuing turmoil in and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, due to the illegal provocation policies being
carried out by the Israeli regime against the Palestinian
people. The Israeli occupying forces continue to carry
out airstrikes in the Gaza Strip, injuring more and
more Palestinians and causing great fear and distress
among the population, which continues to suffer from
deplorable living conditions as a result of the unlawful
blockade.

Israel is continuing to perpetrate grave violations
of international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law, threatening to further destabilize the already
fragile situation and seriously undermine the future of
the peace process, which it suspended by its unilateral
decision to halt negotiations. Therefore, the international
community, including the Security Council, cannot
continue to fail to hold Israel accountable for its flagrant
breaches of the international law. Such continued
failure by the international community has only further
emboldened the occupying Power and bolstered its
impunity, which has resulted in the continuation of

the aforementioned Israeli violations and the failure to
secure ajust and lasting peace.

As recognized unanimously by the international
community, this unjust situation and the consequent loss
of hope is unsustainable and highly volatile, requiring
urgent remedy to prevent further deterioration and the
explosion of another cycle of violence.

While condemning the indiscriminate rocket fire
emanating from Gaza targeted at Israeli cities and
civilian infrastructure, we contend that such attacks
do not justify the disproportionate use of force and the
collective punishment of the 1.7 million Palestinians
living in Gaza, including the killing of children and
attacks on civilian facilities, including schools.

Israel's actions are in clear violation of its
obligations, as an occupying Power under the Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, to protect the civilian
population under its occupation. Israel, the occupying
Power, cannot be allowed to remain immune from the
provisions of international humanitarian and human
rights law governing such situations. If Israel continues
to reject the demands for respect for international law,
then measures aimed at ensuring an end to the violations
and that the rule of law prevails must be undertaken in
response.

While supporting the steadfastness and resolve of
the Palestinian leadership in the face of this unprovoked
aggression against their land and people, we reiterate
our condemnation of all of the illegal actions and
crimes being perpetrated by Israel, the occupying
Power, in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, which are dramatically raising tensions
and destabilizing the situation on the ground.

We call once again on the international community,
specifically the Security Council, to assume its
responsibility as accorded by the United Nations
Charter, to act collectively to address this crisis so as to
prevent its exacerbation and to put an end to all human
rights violations against the Palestinians.

We reiterate our call for the unconditional removal
of the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which has caused
and continues to cause so much suffering for the
Palestinian people. The blockade is inhumane and
violates international law.

We reiterate our strong support for the resumption
of the peace process, and appeal to Israelis and the
Palestinians to commit themselves to it. Both parties
should abide by their previous agreements and
obligations in order to achieve a lasting peace and live
side by side within secure borders. At the same time, I
wish to reaffirm Namibia's support for the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, its
unconditional admission as a full Member of the United
Nations and its agencies, and its taking of its rightful
place among the community of nations.

I would conclude by reiterating Namibia's
unwavering support for, and solidarity with the people
of Palestine in their just cause for obtaining freedom,
independence and social justice.

