Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome to today's
Security Council meeting Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube,
Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain. It is a particular pleasure
because at this time Mr. Rodriguez Zapatero, President
of Spain, is visiting Russia. We welcome the balanced
and constructive role of Spain in the post of Chairman-
in-Office of the OSCE and support the desire of our
Spanish colleagues to enhance the meaningfulness of
the OSCE and to strengthen its role in European policy.

Russia has introduced, for the consideration of
the members of the OSCE several documents aimed at
helping to achieve those goals. Above all, we
emphasize the need for the speedy adoption of a
charter, without which it is impossible to translate the
work of the organization into a unified code of distinct,
collectively agreed rules and to turn the OSCE into a
fully fledged international organization.

We are convinced that the OSCE must play a
stronger role in the consideration of military and
political problems and questions of countering new
challenges and threats, including the prospect of arms
control and putting forward confidence- and security-
building measures in Europe. We are in favour of
constructive dialogue within the OSCE, which would
foster a balanced strengthening of security throughout
Europe.

Russia hopes that at the forthcoming meeting in
Madrid, on 29 and 30 November, of the Council of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the States members of
the OSCE, that concrete steps will be taken to intensify
the reforms of the organization. In Russia, we know
how much Spain, and Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube
personally, are doing to ensure the success of the
Madrid meeting. Russia will continue to cooperate
most closely in order to help them achieve those
results.

The Russian delegation consistently supports
comprehensive development and the improvement of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Security Council, on the one hand, and the regional and
subregional mechanisms, on the other. They should
harmoniously complement each other, relying on the
solid foundation of the United Nations Charter, and in
particular Chapter VIII, with due account being paid to
the comparative advantages of each.

It is of course essential to have a clear division of
work, with full respect for the primary responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security. This would make it
possible to expand the collective crisis-countering
capabilities of the international community.

We note with satisfaction that, as a regional
mechanism, the OSCE has established close and
fruitful relations with the United Nations in a range of
key areas, chiefly linked to security and the settlement
of regional conflicts. We note the contribution of the
OSCE in the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
of the Security Council on Kosovo (Serbia). The OSCE
mission to the area as part of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
plays an important role, especially in the
encouragement of respect for human rights, the
preparation and holding of regional elections and the
monitoring of local mass media.

During the Council's mission to Kosovo this year,
Council members witnessed some significant gaps that
remained in the implementation of key provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999) relating to international
standards. In that situation, the OSCE still has much to
do, including ensuring that human rights and the rights
of national minorities are duly observed in Kosovo. We
expect that work to be done in cooperation with the
United Nations and all interested parties.

I wish to touch upon another important issue.
During the statement of Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube, we
had to do some linguistic research. As we established,
in the original Spanish text where Mr. Moratinos
Cuyaube mentioned the situation in Georgia, the report
noted that in recent years some serious incidents have
been witnessed in the areas of the Georgia-Abkhazia
and Georgia-South Ossetia conflicts. The English text
distributed at this meeting noted that the OSCE had
"aided" Georgia during certain serious incidents. I
think members would agree that that is not exactly the
same thing. But we would like the translation of the
statement of Mr. Moratinos Cuyaube in all the official
languages to reflect that correctly.

Secondly, regarding assistance to Georgia, we
believe that the OSCE, acting in a balanced manner
could help Georgia avoid provocative policies aimed at
increasing tension. We have already given our
evaluation of the incident on 6 August. As a result of
another provocation in the Georgia-Ossetia conflict
area, on 29 August 2007, the Georgian side detained
two Russian soldiers. They were in a North Ossetia
battalion of mixed forces. A precedent was created in
that force was used against peacekeepers and they were
detained, which is unheard of. We again call on the
current Chairman-in-Office to take urgent measures so
that those who have been detained can be released as
soon as possible. That demands a swift reaction.

