The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Bulgaria, Cuba, Germany, Iraq, Italy, the Libyan
Arab J amahiriya, New Zealand, Pakistan, Portugal, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Wensley
(Australia), Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria), Mr. Dausa
Cespedes (Cuba), Mr. Kastrup (Germany), Mr. Hasan
(Iraq), Mr. Vento (Italy), Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Powles (New Zealand), Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan), Mr. Monteiro (Portugal), Mr. Norstro'm
(Sweden), Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and Mr. Goktu'rk (Turkey) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to
the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United
Nations to participate in the discussion, without the right to
vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: Unless I hear any objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to Mr. Kieran Prendergast, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

I should like to draw attention to document
S/2000/3l9, which contains the text of a note by the
President of the Security Council concerning general
sanctions issues, by which the members of the Council
decided to establish on a temporary basis an informal
working group of the Council to develop general
recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of
United Nations sanctions.

I now give the floor to Mr. Kieran Prendergast,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.


