Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Burkina Faso for
having taken the initiative to organize this high-level
Security Council debate on the issue of mediation and
settlement of disputes.

States Members of the United Nations, an
Organization which was established to save mankind
from the scourge of war, commit themselves through
the Charter to settling international disputes by
peaceful means. Also through the Charter they define
concrete means of pacific settlement of disputes, which
include mediation, and they entrust the Council with
the responsibility to promote the use of those means.
Mediation, a customary mode of dispute settlement,
has been codified in contemporary international
law and has been developed through practice at all
levels - bilateral, regional and multilateral -
particularly under the sponsorship of the United
Nations.

Viet Nam notes with appreciation that mediation
has been increasingly employed as an effective tool in
resolving disputes and conflicts. Many successful
mediation efforts have been made by the United
Nations and by regional and subregional organizations.
In recent decades, the search for solutions to the
conflicts in the Middle East, Cambodia, Haiti, Angola,
Kenya, Mali, Mozambique, the Sudan and, most
recently, South Ossetia and Zimbabwe, to mention a
few, has vividly testified to the effectiveness of these
good-offices and mediation activities.

With the establishment in 2006 of the Mediation
Support Unit within the Department of Political Affairs
of the Secretariat, the United Nations has devoted
further attention to mediation activities. We welcome
the appointment by the Secretary-General of
Mr. Djibril Bassole, former Foreign Minister of
Burkina Faso, as joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator for Darfur, and we hope that
Mr. Bassole, with his rich knowledge and experience,
will, by means of mediation, make a substantial
contribution to bringing about a peaceful,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the Darfur
conflict.

As a Member of the United Nations, Viet Nam is
steadfastly committed to the principle of the peaceful
settlement of international disputes. We support every
effort to settle disputes by peaceful means, including
mediation, in accordance with national law and the
United Nations Charter. We hold that, to produce
lasting solutions, mediation must be conducted with
full respect for national independence and sovereignty
and the territorial integrity of States. It must be
impartial and non-coercive and must have the consent
and full participation of all parties concerned.

As a member of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), whose success owes much to
its adherence to the principle of the peaceful settlement
of disputes, Viet Nam is doing and will continue to do
its utmost to contribute to mediation efforts aimed at
finding peaceful solutions to situations of dispute
among ASEAN member States, in accordance with the
Association's Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in
Southeast Asia.

My delegation believes that this debate provides a
timely opportunity for the Council to take stock of the
successful and failed experiences of mediation
endeavours in various parts of the world, to assess the
significance and conditions of United Nations activities
and mechanisms related to mediation as well as the
roles of existing subregional and regional mediation
mechanisms, and to explore avenues for improving the
effectiveness of mediation efforts and the role of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council, in
mediation processes. We therefore support the agreed
conclusions of the Security Council contained in the
draft presidential statement on this topic.

