Mr. Gone (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like, first of all, to congratulate the French
presidency of the Security Council for holding this
open debate on the important issue of the role of the
protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations. As
in the previous debate, my delegation wishes to reassure
you, Mr. President, of its support for the successful
mandate of your presidency.

Civilians, in principle, are not fighters but
nevertheless count among the largest number of
casualties in armed conflict. They are subject to mass
killings, rape and often forced displacement - in
a word, all types of Violence. Such Violence against
civilians prompted the Security Council, in 1999, to
confer on a peacekeeping mission for the first-time
a mandate to protect civilians - the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Sierra Leone.

Since then, the issue of the protection of civilians
in times of conflict has been regularly debated,
including of course in the Security Council. As part
of the progress made, my delegation places special
emphasis in this debate on the adoption of the principle
of the responsibility to protect at the 2005 World
Summit of Heads of State and Government. Based
on that principle, the Council aided my country in
avoiding the worsening of the security situation of the
civilian population during the armed conflict in 2005
in the country. By way of resolution 1975 (2011), the
Security Council gave the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire the mandate necessary to ensure the full
protection of civilians in the face of the unacceptable
atrocities recorded regularly throughout the country.
Nevertheless, the implementation of the principle
of the responsibility to protect remains subject to
significant challenges, such as the obligation to respect
the sovereignty of a country and the need to reach
consensus within the Security Council.

Having mentioned the issue of consensus within
the Security Council, I cannot but help to address the
question of the right of the veto. The use of the right
of veto over time has shown how that instrument was
sometimes the source of much inertia in the face of
unsustainable tragedies and unbearable humanitarian
crises. Faced with that major obstacle consisting of
the inappropriate use of the veto, France and Mexico
proposed, as part of the reform of the Security Council,
an initiative that wouldentail the permanent members
to voluntarily and collectively suspend their right to the
veto in cases of observed mass crimes. My delegation
is convinced of the enormous benefit to humankind
that such an initiative could bring about, and therefore
lends its full support for that proposal. Similarly, my
country supports the code of conduct relative to the
response of the Security Council to genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes, proposed by the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency Group.
We hope that the code will become more binding.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict in the context
of peacekeeping operations also implies addressing the
role of each actor. The deployment of a peacekeeping
mission involves many actors. It is therefore important
to undertake an organized effort and embrace shared
responsibility. To that end, the Security Council must
define its mandates in sufficiently clear and precise
terms. The host Government should prioritize the
protection of civilians and facilitate its implementation.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Field Support should ensure that
sufficient resources are deployed to carry out the
mission well. Troop-contributing countries should
ensure that their troops are not only well trained for
the mission, but also in the areas of humanitarian law,
international human rights law, refugee law and other
international conventions dedicated to the protection of
civilians in times of conflict. Ongoing evaluations of
those responsibilities should also be an essential part
of the protocol for the implementation of peacekeeping
missions. In that context, my delegation welcomes the
efforts of the Council, the Secretariat and the General
Assembly in regularly reporting and taking initiatives
on those issues and encourages them to continue to
expand their commitment.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to say
that the protection of civilians is the essence itself of
peacekeeping operations in that it incorporates the goals
of the Charter of the United Nations and is perceived
by many citizens throughout the world, especially
in countries in situations of conflict, as a mirror of
efficiency and legitimacy, as well as the United Nations
credibility as a defender of peace in its promotion of
freedom and progress worldwide.

