Mr. Aman (Malaysia): On behalf of the Malaysian
delegation, I thank you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Japan for having convened this timely and important
debate. This meeting is an excellent opportunity to
take stock of and assess the various plans and measures
aimed at supporting the peacebuilding agenda as well
as the broader peace and security agenda in Africa thus
far, as well as the decisions taken by the Council, the
United Nations and the wider international community.

The outcome of these discussions should contribute
to future efforts in support of the peacebuilding agenda
in Africa especially, but also in other regions more
generally. As such, we are pleased to note Japan's
intention to do so for the sixth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development.

We greatly appreciate the Secretary-General's
briefing, which we believe highlighted his perspective
on the key issues and areas that require greater focus
and attention. As a concurrent member of both the
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Malaysia welcomes the participation of Ms. Amina
Mohamed in her capacity as the Chair of the PBC,
demonstrating Kenya's strong support and commitment
to peacebuilding, and I thank her for her statement,
which we fully endorse.

I wish also to thank his Excellency Ambassador
Smail Chergui for presenting the message ofthe African
Union Peace and Security Commission, which we heard
very carefully and with much interest. In aligning with
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations statement
to be delivered shortly by the Ambassador of Thailand,
I wish to make a few additional points to contribute to
this discussion.

Mr. President, as you have rightly stated, a
sustainable peacebuilding agenda must place a
strong emphasis on institution-building and national
ownership. From our own experience as a developing
country, I can say with absolute certainty that faithful
adherence to these two key principles have contributed
significantly to strengthening national resilience. At
one point in the not-too-distant past, many observers
were certain that a country with a population as diverse
as Malaysia's could not have achieved coherence or
unity, much less peace and stability, which consists of
socioeconomic development and progress. However,
instead of seeing diversity as a potential security
threat, the Government took concrete and sustained
measures to ensure that all could enjoy a place at the
table. Therefore, we succeeded in turning the perceived
disadvantage of our diversity and harnessing it into
what it should be rightly taken for, which is strength.

Another important lesson we learned was that
developing countries required support and assistance.
For many, the natural choice would be to seek out
the bigger and rich countries and donors. However,
what perhaps may be overlooked is the role that other
developing countries can play in supporting fellow
developing countries. In that regard, Malaysia's foreign
policy includes a commitment to the principle of
"prosper thy neighbour". Despite the inconvenience
of distance, Malaysia very much considers Africa as a
close neighbour. We remain committed to contributing
to Africa's continued peace and security, political
stability and economic growth, and we endeavour
to support this as best as we can, despite our modest
resources.

Over the past few decades, Malaysia's engagement
with Africa has been increasing steadily, specifically
on institution-building and support in areas such as
peace and security, trade, investment and holistic
development. The primary vehicle for such efforts
is through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation
Programme (MTCP), established in 1980. In addition
to the direct bilateral engagement through the MTCP,
Malaysia also extends cooperation through the MTCP-
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
Africa programme. To date, 29,000 participants, many
hailing from Africa, have participated in courses and
programmes offered under the MTCP.

Our commitment to continued support and
assistance to partners in Africa is also premised on
the belief that attaining higher levels of development
is dependent upon the quality of the human capital,
resources and institutions in place. To that end, Malaysia
pioneered the concept of smart partnership dialogues
with African countries, beginning with the inaugural
Langkawi International Dialogue in 1995, which has
been held biannually since then. The dialogues aim to
promote partnership through engagement at all levels
of society, including political leaders, the civil service,
business, labour, the media and populations, including
women and youth. We are pleased to note that this
dialogue concept has gained traction within Africa,
which now convenes a similar process of its own,
known as the Southern Africa International Dialogue.

At the multilateral level, the outcome of the
recently concluded peacebuilding architecture review
paves the way for the United Nations to better address
fragmentation issues, as well as to promote better
synergy, coordination and complementarity in the
work of the relevant United Nations bodies - anchored
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council - agencies and mechanism towards achieving
the core objective of promoting and sustaining peace.

I wish to conclude by welcoming presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/12, which was just adopted.
I would also like to emphasize that Malaysia remains
committed to Africa over the long haul, with a view to
contributing towards the region's aspirations for peace,
security, economic development and prosperity.

Finally, I wish Japan, Kenya and all participants
success at the sixth Tokyo International Conference on
African Development, to be held later this month.

