Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Sir, allow me, like those who have spoken
before me, to congratulate Mr. Alvaro de Soto on his
recent appointment as Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process and to thank him for the
detailed briefing he has just given us.

As we consider today the situation in the Middle
East, including Palestine, we feel obliged first to pay
tribute to the leadership and initiatives of the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, and in particular His Majesty King
Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al Saud, that led to the
agreement signed in Mecca by Mahmoud Abbas and
Khaled Meshaal to establish a Government of national
unity in Palestine. We trust that the implementation of
the agreement will reduce violence and create
conditions for a better future for the Palestinian people.
We also trust that the formation of the new
Government will be accompanied by political decisions
that will bring an end to the financial and other
restrictions afflicting the Palestinian people today.

As we have said before, the establishment of a
lasting peace between Palestine and Israel requires
leadership and commitment within and beyond the
region. In that context, we welcome the Quartet's
decision to support the parties' current efforts and we
await the outcome of the efforts of United States
Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice, who will meet
with the Prime Ministers of Israel and Palestine this
month.

The formation of a Government of national unity
in Palestine is a significant event, but if progress of a
similar magnitude is to be achieved in the peace
process, all the Palestinian political forces will need to
commit to dialogue, reject violence and accept earlier
agreements. We are, however, concerned that, while the
construction being undertaken by the Israeli
Government near the Al-Aksa Mosque in Jerusalem
may be fully within the scope of the law, that does not
mean that it is wise. We feel that, regardless of the
justifications adduced, the present moment should be
exploited by all to promote peace. We therefore urge
the Government of Israel to suspend the construction
so as to promote a climate favourable to peace
negotiations.

Moreover, we deplore the fact that attacks by
non-State actors continue against civilian targets in
Israel. The political commitment of the Palestinian
Authority will not be credible until it can prevent such
acts. We also regret the ongoing actions of the Israeli
Government and armed forces in violation of the
resolutions of the Security Council, international law,
and international humanitarian law in particular. We
appeal to the leaders of Israel and Palestine not to
squander this opportunity to build a realistic platform
on which they can move towards lasting peace.

In that context, we recall the words of Mr. Alvaro
de Soto. The basic principles of a peace agreement are
known to all: the existence of two democratic States
living in peace and security; the creation of an
economically viable Palestinian State; and respect for
the 1967 borders. Panama believes that the
international community must waste no opportunity to
exert its influence in favour of that process.

As regards Lebanon, Panama deplores the recent
incidents of violence along the border with Israel. It
appeals to all political and social actors to resolve their
differences through dialogue. We also urge the
international community to support such a dialogue.
Panama understands that, while there is no peace
between Israel and Palestine, there will be no peace in
the region.

