Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
At the outset I should like to thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen
for his briefing and for his steady commitment to the
stabilization and development of Kosovo, as
demonstrated by the considerable progress that we
have seen today. I wish to join my voice to all those
who today have paid a well-deserved tribute to him as
he is about to leave his post.

I am pleased to welcome here Ms. Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, and, in Mr. Jessen-
Petersen's delegation, Mr. Ceku, Prime Minister of
Kosovo.

The representative of Austria will make a
statement as President of the European Union, with
which I associate myself fully. I will make a few
remarks of my own.

First, I wish to stress the fresh impetus given by
the authorities of Kosovo - particularly by the new
Prime Minister, Mr. Ceku - to implement the
standards concretely and swiftly. Tangible progress has
been made in accordance with the demands by the
members of the Council. Dialogue with minorities,
beginning with the Serbian minorities, is encouraging.
We fully share the positive evaluation by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in this respect.

The Kosovo authorities must continue to make
determined progress along that path. Many concrete
measures remain to be adopted - and swiftly -
particularly as regards the 13 priorities identified by
UNMIK and the Contact Group relating to the
protection of minorities and the rule of law. Progress in
that respect will be an essential criterion when the time
comes to determine the status of Kosovo.

No lasting stabilization will be possible without
the reconciliation of the communities. The violence
directed at minorities referred to in the report of the
Secretary-General shows that such reconciliation is
still a long way away. The transfer to the Provisional
Institutions of competencies in the areas of justice and
the police should lead to the creation of an impartial
administration capable of combating such violence.
But that necessary reconciliation will require the
Kosovo Serbs to agree to participating in the
Provisional Institutions - which is in their own
interests - as the authorities in Kosovo have invited
them to do. In this respect, we share the concerns
expressed by the Secretary-General regarding the
pressure on Kosovo's Serbs to discourage them from
doing that. The Belgrade authorities must encourage
such participation, not hold it back.

The evolution of the situation on the ground is
linked to the development of the political process
regarding future status. Direct dialogue under the
auspices of Mr. Ahtisaari has intensified, thanks to the
active participation of both parties. The Kosovo
negotiating team has made constructive proposals in
terms of decentralization. Despite the difference in
positions, it seems that it would be possible to find
common ground on certain concrete questions, and in
that area in particular. As the report of the Secretary-
General stresses, the parties must display flexibility
and a spirit of compromise.

Lastly, the international community must remain
present one way or another in Kosovo, both to ensure
the implementation of future status and to guarantee
the stability of the entire region. That presence should
no longer be through UNMIK, because we feel that its
mandate will be concluded once status has been
defined. The European Union will have a role to play,
particularly in terms of justice and the police, and
France is ready to make its contribution and to play its
part.

