The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for his kind words addressed to the Chinese presidency.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of China.

(spoke in Chinese)

The question of the former Yugoslavia has dragged on
for a long time without resolution, and little progress has
been achieved in the process of finding an overall political
settlement. In two Republics, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the conflicts continue unabated, the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate and great
losses of life and property have been incurred. The Chinese
delegation wishes to express its profound concern in this
regard.

China has no self-interests whatsoever in the region of
the former Yugoslavia. We have consistently maintained
that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States of
the region should be respected. We hope that these States
will recognize each other as soon as possible and seek a
political settlement, acceptable to all sides, through
negotiation. In particular, we appeal to the parties to the

 

conflict to consider the fundamental interests of the
people, immediately cease all hostilities, and implement
in earnest agreements already reached - particularly the
cease-fire agreement - in order to create conditions for
building confidence and pursuing political negotiations.

At root, the settlement of the conflict in the region
of the former Yugoslavia will ultimately depend on the
peoples of the region themselves and must be achieved
through peaceful means. United Nations peace-keeping
operations can play only a complementary role.

We note that, since its establishment, the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has played a
positive role in containing the conflict, protecting the
security of the local civilian population and carrying out
humanitarian relief activities. However, for various
reasons, UNPROFOR has not fully met expectations in
fulfilling its mission. As requested by the parties
concerned, the Secretary-General has proposed the
division of UNPROFOR into three parts in those three
States of the former Yugoslavia, and has offered revisions
to their mandates. We hope that this will help create an
appropriate atmosphere and give further impetus to the
political settlement process.

For all these reasons, the Chinese delegation voted
in favour of the three resolutions just adopted. United
Nations peace-keeping operations should conform strictly
to the purposes and principles of the Charter. The consent
and support of the parties concerned are important
preconditions for the deployment of such operations. We
urge those parties to cooperate fully with United Nations
peace-keeping operations in order to ensure that they can
accomplish their missions effectively.

In conclusion, the Chinese delegation reiterates that
it has reservations about taking enforcement action and
about the use of force in peace-keeping operations under
Chapter VII of the Charter.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on the agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

 

Statement by the President

