Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I also
thank Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Antonio
Guterres, Executive Director Ertharin Cousin and
Special Envoy Angelina Angelina Jolie Pitt for their
briefings.

Today's briefings and the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2015/264) indicate to us that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire. The
conflict continues to take a toll on the civilian
population. Non-combatants, especially women and
children, face grave hardship. Large numbers of people
are trapped in besieged in hard-to-reach areas. The
difficult security situation in Syria is exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis. UNICEF has been unable to
deliver water treatment materials to Deir ez-Zor, Raqqa
and other areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq
and Syria. The World Food Programme had to halt food
deliveries to the same areas, leaving 700,000 people
without the food aid they desperately need. Nigeria
urges the parties to the conflict, as a matter of urgency,
to lift sieges and facilitate the delivery of humanitarian
supplies to those in need. That is indeed their obligation
under international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

Inadequate funding has been a major factor
hampering the 2015 Strategic Response Plan for
Syria. It is in that light that I welcome the generous
pledges made by participating countries at the third
International Humanitarian Pledging Conference for
donors, held in Kuwait on 31 March. We look forward
to the expedited disbursement of the funds to the
humanitarian organizations operating in Syria. It is our
expectation that the injection of funds will in time bring
about an improvement in the humanitarian situation in
the country. We also see a need for increased support
to countries hosting large numbers of refugees from
Syria. We pay tribute to the humanitarian actors for
their efforts in executing the 2015 Strategic Response
Plan. We note the important role that international and
national non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are
playing in the delivery of aid inside Syria. We encourage
the Syrian authorities to continue to cooperate with the
humanitarian agencies and NGOs.

The long-term solution to the humanitarian crisis
in Syria lies in ending the conflict. That point has been
made by various delegations around the table in the
Chamber today. We therefore encourage the parties to
lay down their arms and return to negotiations, based
on the Geneva communique of June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex).

