Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation once again regrets the
insistence of certain members of the Security Council,
notably the humanitarian co-penholders, on adopting
the unconstructive approach reflected in their draft
resolution S/2019/961, the content of which is a
departure from the stated humanitarian purposes.

Regrettably, they continue to take an unbalanced
approach to drafting and submitting such draft
resolutions, based on the brinkmanship deployed
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) every time it comes to renewing the
resolution on the cross-border mechanism. OCHA
officials manipulate data and statistics, ignoring the
flaws and negative aspects of those processes that
until this very today continue to lead to assistance
falling into the hands of armed terrorist groups and
to not reaching those who need it. That is the current
situation in Idlib and in its surrounding area, controlled
by the terrorist Al-Nusra Front group. The survival of
the Al-Nusra Front actually depends on the support of
the Turkish regime, which commits aggression, and on
controlling the humanitarian assistance delivered from
the Turkish territory.

The behaviour of the co-penholders is a dangerous
and unprecedented departure from reality. They have
bent to the will and pressure of the Turkish regime. In
the first version of draft resolution S/2019/961, they
attempted to add a new border crossing, which would
have been used, of course, to support the objectives of
the military aggression of the Turkish regime against
my country.

In more explicit terms, I affirm that the terrorist
Turkish regime - an aggressor that has facilitated
the entry of foreign terrorist fighters into Syria and
continues to direct and support the criminal activities
of the terrorist Al-Nusra Front in Idlib - wants the
United Nations pay today for the damage incurred by
its aggression in north-eastern Syria. That is one of the
many examples of the erratic behaviour of sponsors of
this draft resolution.

We ask their delegations the following questions.
If they claim to be concerned about helping the Syrian
people, why have they remained silent and turned a
blind eye to the pillaging of the gas and oil wells in
Syria? Why are they ignoring their occupation by
American forces? Those who wish to help the people
of Syria must be honest, show courage and demand that
the Syrians be allowed to reclaim the resources that the
terrorists and the so-called international coalition have
pillaged and destroyed.

My Government rejects draft resolution S/2019/961,
submitted by the humanitarian co-penholders, in its
entirety, owing to its fundamental flaws in both form
and substance. We explained its shortcomings in a
letter dated 15 December, addressed by the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs to Mr. Mark Lowcock, and
in a letter dated yesterday, addressed by the Permanent
Mission of my country to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council in response to the
sixty-fourth report on the humanitarian issue in Syria
(S/2019/949), as well as in the statement we delivered at
yesterday's Security Council meeting (see S/PV.8694).

For us, it is important to underscore the fact that
the focal point for taking humanitarian action in
Syria is the capital, Damascus, in accordance with the
fundamental principle underlying respect for national
sovereignty. Anything else would simply be an example
of a new, pathetic attempt to compromise Syria's
national sovereignty and undermine the political status
of the State of Syria.

We call on Member States that are committed
to respecting international law and maintaining
international peace and security to keep the humanitarian
issue sheltered from politicization. We also call on them
to support the role and status of the Syrian Government
as the main and true partner on humanitarian and
development issues. We call on all Member States to
reject the political conditions and dictates imposed
by certain Governments to hamper efforts to rebuild,
recover and return displaced persons. Above all, we
call on Council members, especially the co-penholders,
to immediately lift the coercive unilateral measures
imposed on the people of Syria. Such measures amount
to collective punishment, the negative consequences of
which belie the claims of those imposing them that they
seek to serve the interests and well-being of the people.

My Government thanks all who helped to prevent
the adoption of draft resolution S/2019/961, presented
by the humanitarian co-penholders, for the sake of
safeguarding the principles of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations, chief among which
is respect for the sovereignty of States and the rules
governing humanitarian action.

In conclusion, I remind everyone in this Chamber,
without exception, that ending the humanitarian
repercussions imposed on my country by terrorism,
as well as support for the political process under
way, requires a different approach that goes beyond
humanitarian assistance, enables the lifting of
restrictions imposed on the Syrian Arab Republic and
facilitates genuine reconstruction and relief efforts in
the economic, industrial, agricultural, investment and
service sectors. It is nothing other than unadulterated
hypocrisy for certain people to come to the Council
and talk about the humanitarian crisis in Syria while
their policies of collective punishment, blockade and
military occupation run contrary the interests of the
Syrian people

