Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): This is my first
report pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 1617
(2005). Since my last briefing to the Security Council,
11 individuals and one entity have been added to the
list, and one individual has been removed from the list.

The Committee considered in great detail the
third report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, published as document S/2005/572.
The Committee agreed with a number of its
recommendations. Some recommendations will be
referred to the Counter-Terrorism Committee, as we
see them as valuable but outside the scope of our
mandate. Also, there are some recommendations which
will require further consideration by the Committee,
including on important matters such as listing and
delisting. Pursuant to paragraph 18 of resolution 1617
(2005), I can inform the Council that consideration of
the revised draft guidelines has begun and that the
agreed work programme contains a clear outline for
our discussions.

Pursuant to paragraph 8 of the same resolution,
the Committee has substantively increased cooperation
with Interpol. A resolution adopted at the Interpol
General Assembly in September will enable us to
initiate a number of practical steps, including the
issuance by Interpol of a new notice indicating that an
individual has been placed on the Consolidated List. It
is our expectation that this will significantly improve
the implementation by Member States of the sanctions,
in particular the travel ban. Here, I would like to
express the Committee's appreciation for the efforts
made by the Monitoring Team and by the Interpol
Special Representative in New York, Mr. Klaus Ulrich
Kersten, in advancing cooperation between the
Committee and Interpol.

The Committee also considered a request from
the Principality of Liechtenstein to make available the
Consolidated List maintained by the Committee
pursuant to paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1452 (2002)
to interested Member States. After extensive
consultations, the Committee did not grant that request.
Nonetheless, at the Principality's request, the letter has
been forwarded to the Council for issuance as an
official document.

The Committee took note of the participation of
four listed individuals in the Afghan parliamentary
elections held on 18 September 2005. The Committee
decided to contact Afghan representatives in New York
to remind them of their country's obligations regarding
resolution 1617 (2005), and requested the Monitoring
Team to clarify with the Afghan Government how this
issue will be dealt with.

I turn now to the activities of the Monitoring
Team. Since the appointment of its members in
September the Team has attended and held various
meetings in New York and abroad, including the
already mentioned Interpol General Assembly; a
conference of East African intelligence and security
heads, where it was able to explain and promote the
work of the Committee; and a conference on terrorist
use of the Internet. In addition, the Team has visited
three countries in Southern Africa, and a Team member
accompanied me on my recent travels. In New York the
Team has met various visiting counter-terrorism
experts and has held discussions with the Action
against Terrorism Unit of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe as a result of my trip to
Vienna, and with the European Commission Legal
Service.

The Committee continues to greatly appreciate
the work of the Monitoring Team and looks forward to
the consideration of its next report, to be submitted at
the end of January 2006.

Let me now speak of my visit to selected States.
Between 8 and 19 October I undertook a visit to
selected countries pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 1617 (2005). I visited Nigeria, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Permanent Council in Vienna and Chad.

As discussed in the Committee, we have found an
increasing need to focus on visits to Member States
where there may be concerns about capacity, the need
for technical assistance and the requirement for the
submission of reports pursuant to resolution 1455
(2003). I found the trip useful in terms of better
understanding views of the effectiveness of the
sanctions regime and the possible improvements that
can be made to it, including as a result of regional
threat assessments.

In both Nigeria and Chad we were honoured to
meet a number of ministers and other authorities
dealing with the implementation of the sanctions
measures, and I had an opportunity to convey the
Committee's strong interest in receiving reports
pursuant to resolution 1455 (2003). I should, at this
point, note that 48 Member States have yet to report to
the Committee; we continue to urge all non-reporting
countries to submit their reports as soon as possible.
Chad and Nigeria are among those countries, and their
authorities assured me that the reports would soon be
forthcoming.

Again, the visits to Nigeria and, in particular, to
Chad were most useful as they gave me an insight into
the effects of a lack of technical capacity to implement
the sanctions regime. I have no doubt that the political
will is present in both countries; this was clearly
displayed by the authorities at all levels. But the
Committee and the Security Council need to consider
what can be done to further assist countries with a need
for technical assistance.

In response to an invitation from the Permanent
Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, I briefed the Permanent
Council in Vienna and met with relevant officials. I
also briefed Permanent Representatives there and met
with the Director General of the United Nations Office
at Vienna and Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime. The discussions I had at
the OSCE were very useful, and I hope they will be a
first step in what should be a very fruitful process of
enhancing our cooperation with regional organizations.

I turn now to the future work of the Committee
and the Monitoring Team. Security Council resolution
1617 (2005) provides the very clear guidance to the
Committee with regard to its future activities. First of
all, its work should be focused on the adoption of the
Committee's revised guidelines, including listing and
delisting procedures and the implementation of
resolution 1452 (2002).

Secondly, it reiterates the need for regular
dialogue with Member States through oral or written
communications regarding effective implementation of
the sanctions measures, including through involvement
in the improvement of the Committee's list.

Thirdly, the resolution urges the Committee to
maximize its performance by benefiting from the work
of the relevant specialized agencies and international
organizations.

Fourthly, the resolution reiterates the need for
close cooperation and continuous information-sharing
among all three counter-terrorism bodies. It is my firm
intention to intensify the work of the Committee in
forthcoming months to achieve those objectives.
Members of the Committee and I will continue to rely
on the professional assistance of the coordinator and
members of the Monitoring Team.

In conclusion, the sanctions targeting Al-Qaida
and Taliban members and their associates are an
effective, although not yet perfect tool in the fight
against terrorism. It is the responsibility of the Council
to constantly sharpen and improve that tool. In order to
render sanctions as effective as possible all States must
contribute to their implementation. Only then will
United Nations sanctions play their intended role and
function as a significant preventive measure that will
assist, working together with other counter-terrorist
measures, in combating terrorist activities rather than
merely reacting to their tragic consequences.

