Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Allow
me to lead the chorus that I am sure will come from
colleagues in thanking Ambassador Nishida for his
final briefing as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). As he leaves, the
Committee is well equipped to continue to fulfil its
important mandate. Its role will be of vital importance
as we pursue the dual-track strategy to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue.

For the dual-track strategy to succeed, rigorous
implementation by States of the measures contained in
resolution 1929 (2010) and the Council's previous
resolutions is essential, particularly in view of the two
new reported violations that have come to light
recently. They are correctly identified in today's report
as part of a pattern of violations. The transfers of the
goods seized - illegal arms and RDX high
explosives - are both flagrant violations of paragraph 5
of resolution 1747 (2007) by Iran. The latter is also a
violation of paragraph 8 of resolution 1737 (2006). We
encourage the Committee to consider making
additional designations to prevent further violations
and sanctions evasions.

These violations demonstrate the importance of
the 1737 Committee in ensuring implementation both
by monitoring implementation and advising States
when necessary. They also emphasize the vital role of
its newly appointed Panel of Experts. The Panel will
have a full agenda investigating reported violations and
travelling to various regions to focus on
implementation.

We also support the Committee's wider outreach
efforts to promote implementation. The recently
produced hand-out and fact sheet will be helpful to
Member States seeking to implement measures more
effectively. In future, and with the Panel's assistance,
the Committee might also consider organizing open
briefings to the wider United Nations membership,
setting out clearly what is expected of Member States.

While many Member States have acted promptly
to adjust their laws and procedures, we remind those
yet to report to the 1737 Committee on measures taken
to do so as soon as possible, as Ambassador Nishida

 

has underlined again today. The Committee should
make a renewed push on this matter. More complete
reporting would help the Panel of Experts to identify
gaps as they prepare their comprehensive survey of
implementation.

Today's briefing follows the publication on
24 November of the latest report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran. That report
provides a clear benchmark by which to judge Iran's
non-compliance with its international obligations.

First, the report states that Iran is not suspending
enrichment-related activities or heavy water-related
projects as required by Security Council resolutions
and as requested by the IAEA Board of Governors.
Secondly, it shows that the IAEA still awaits a
substantive response from Iran in relation to the
announcements that Iran also intends to construct
10 new nuclear enrichment facilities. Thirdly, the
report reiterates that there has been no Iranian
cooperation with the IAEA on possible military
dimensions to their programme since August 2008.
Fourthly, the report also indicates that Iran, contrary to
Security Council and Board resolutions, is continuing
heavy water-related activities and denying the IAEA
the access it would like to locations related to heavy
water production sites. Finally, the report concludes
that "Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation
to permit the Agency to confirm that all nuclear
material in Iran is in peaceful activities" and that

"Iran is not implementing the requirements
contained in the relevant resolutions of the Board
of Governors and the Security Council which
are essential to building confidence in the
exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran's nuclear
programme and to resolving outstanding
questions".

We are meeting a few days after the talks in
Geneva between Baroness Ashton, the E3+3 and Mr.
Jalili. This was a welcome step, and the agreement to
meet again in Turkey in January is positive, but we are
clear that the next talks should include a candid
discussion of the many international concerns relating
to the Iranian nuclear programme, and that Iran needs
to show real progress in addressing these concerns.

We remain determined to resolve these matters
through dialogue and diplomacy. We hope that the
January meeting will help to achieve that goal.
 

