Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): The
delegation of the Congo would like to express its
gratitude to the Presidents of the two International
Tribunals, Mr. Pocar and Mr. Byron, as well as to the
Prosecutors, Ms. Del Ponte and Mr. Jallow, for their
briefings, which have given us the opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to international criminal
justice.

Their progress reports highlighted encouraging
indicators for the continued work of the two Tribunals
and took note of real progress in the implementation of
the completion strategies that the Council has defined
for them. There are grounds for welcoming the
activities of the Tribunals, given the stepped-up pace of
their work during the period under consideration,
particularly regarding trials and appeals, in which
significant progress has been achieved. Therefore, it is
important to provide them with all the support they
need to continue their work diligently and to complete
their mandate in 2010, as recommended by the Security
Council.
It seems to us ever more clear that, in pursuing
that goal, cooperation with national jurisdictions is of
particular importance; beyond helping to attain the
goals, this contributes to building the capacities of
those jurisdictions. To be sure, an assessment of such
cooperation yields a somewhat mixed, even
contradictory, picture: a rather active picture as regards
Rwanda, which has continued to insist that the
perpetrators of genocide be brought to trial; and a
variable picture with respect to certain countries of the
former Yugoslavia.

We cannot fail to deplore the lack of cooperation
demonstrated by certain States. We hope that this will
not further hamper the momentum and the pace at
which the Tribunals are working to complete their
mandates. This is why we endorse the appeal made for
greater firmness regarding those States that bear
responsibility for the apprehension of fugitives. Even if
it is acknowledged that no one is guilty until guilt is
proven, we cannot help harbouring a serious
presumption of guilt as regards fugitives - knowing as
we do exactly what causes them to flee. This is,
therefore, a legal obligation that derives from the rules
of international law and, above all, from the moral duty
of States and the international community to impose
justice that is credible and that applies to all.

By effectively combating impunity, ad hoc
tribunals are serving higher objectives in terms of
national reconstruction and peacebuilding -
something of which the Security Council, the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council have a great need within the framework of
their mandates.

Whatever the outcome so far, we believe that it is
useful to welcome the effort at the codification and
development of international criminal law that has
resulted from the work of the criminal tribunals to date.
This is a valuable legacy for the future. It is a legacy
whose gains - both technical and in terms of human

expertise - we must preserve. A wise African,
Mr. Amadou Hampate Ba, has said that the loss of a
savant - an expert who is a repository of

knowledge- is inevitably like a fire in a library.
Hence our interest in paying particular attention to this
issue, all the more so since departures have been
announced, such as those of Ms. Carla Del Ponte and
of other experts.
In conclusion, I would like to ask one or two
questions. Mr. Byron, the President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), told us that
there had been some difficulties in finding countries to
receive a number of those acquitted, while there was a
rather positive assessment of cooperation between
Rwanda and the ICTR. How can we assess the current
relationship between the Tribunal and Rwanda, which
is being extremely active internally, making use of the
local tribunal system known as gachacha?

Along the same lines, regarding the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the involvement of governmental institutions with
respect to these trials is clearly variable. Could either
the Prosecutor or the President - with, of course, all
the circumspection called for by their judicial
functions - tell us how we might continue the process,
given the greater participation required by
Governments and States to ensure the credibility of the
objectives of justice - which are not at all in question,
but the need for which is so understandable, at least
from the standpoint of history? We in the Security
Council know that any intergovernmental body is
always subject to contradictory influences. To what
extent, then, do they expect that intergovernmental or
governmental institutions will provide adequate
cooperation for the successful completion of their
missions?

