Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for preparing the latest
biannual report (S/2017/515) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). We note the professional work
of Mr. Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and his team. For us, one thing
is clear. The arrangements concluded two years ago on
the Iranian nuclear programme must serve as a basis for
cooperation and not a source of confrontation. In that
regard, we note that, compared with the two previous
reports, we see a serious attempt by the Secretary-
General to give the text a more calibrated nature.

At the same time, we would like to flag some
specific provisions of the report, so as to avoid
repetition of such mistakes in the future. For example,
the calls upon Iran to avoid ballistic missile launches
carry far-reaching political ramifications that could
potentially increase tensions in the region. Such
statements have no place in that kind of report, which is
devoted exclusively to the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). The resolution includes a call that allows
no misinterpretation, namely, a call upon Iran to refrain
from launching ballistic missiles that are built in such a
way as to carry a nuclear warhead.

We also find it dubious that the weapons found on
the vessel seized in the summer of 2016 were of Iranian
origin or were being transported from Iran. Nor is there
proof of other cases quoted in the report. In the cases of
some of the incidents a number of States have carried
out investigations in accordance with their respective
legislation without reaching any result. Unproven,
unsubstantiated facts have no place in the report. It
is unacceptable to use in the report information that
is unsubstantiated by concrete information, even if
such information comes from a Member State. Such
information must first be conveyed to the Security
Council, which is authorized to take decisions on follow-
up steps, including the carrying out of professional,
objective and impartial investigations.

We do not understand the allegation that the
Iranian vessel Bushehr, which stopped for repairs in
a South African port, could have been in violation of
any obligations under resolution 2231 (2015). We note
the statement from Pretoria and would like to read it
out loud.

"[T]he assistance provided to the Bushehr related to
emergency repairs undertaken in accordance with
South Africa's international obligations to assist a
vessel in distress". (S/2017/515, para. 28)

All of the actions undertaken were in line with South
Africa's international commitments, since the ship was
forced to stop owing to an emergency.
I Wish to devote further attention to the following
circumstance. With regard to the leaks that appeared
in the media some time ago from parts of the then still
unpublished report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), we would
stress the fact that such actions are unacceptable. The
Secretariat must hold the report closely under review,
and members of the Security Council must not resort
to such irresponsible actions. It is our belief that such
publications are aimed at exerting pressure on the
Secretary-General.

We see that even the slightest attempt to give the
text a more balanced nature tends to incur the wrath of
some of our colleagues. We trust that in this matter a
due level of integrity will prevail. It is unacceptable to
turn the report into a political document. That defeats
the whole purpose and thrust of resolution 2231 (2015)
and will inevitably lead to the undermining of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. In accordance with
the note of the President of the Security Council dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/57), the Secretary-General's
report should relate exclusively to implementation of the
resolution, without any kind of political connotations.

In conclusion, I would like to note Russia's
commitment to categorical, comprehensive
implementation of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which represent outstanding achievements in the world
of diplomacy that have allowed us to tackle one of the
most complex issues. The importance of this nuclear
deal is recognized by the vast majority of the members
of the international community. That arrangement
can serve as a template when tackling other pressing
problems. The agreement showed that, in the presence
of political will, agreements of that kind can serve as
a fundamental pillar for forging inclusive international
and regional cooperation, which will open the window
of possibility for sustainably addressing the numerous
conflicts in the Middle East.
It is within our power to achieve the successful
implementation of the agreement. It will require
refraining from the language of threats and sanctions
and focusing on scrupulous implementation of the
commitmentsvoluntarilyundertakenbyallparties-bar
none - in line with the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.

