Ms. Taj El Dine (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, above all, we would like to thank you
for having given us the floor once again.

Like the delegate from the Republic of Cuba, we
wish to reiterate our firm position with regard to the
question of terrorism. When the representative from
the United States Mission took the floor, she said that
the main objective of this meeting was to evaluate
measures to eliminate international terrorism and to
assess the work of the Committees. We want to say the
following: if we are evaluating measures and if the
Committees are assessing their work, then how can we
allow members, in a body such as this one, to have a
double standard when dealing with the question of
terrorism?

We wish to reaffirm our position - all States
must abstain from providing shelter to terrorists. The
United States must refuse to protect any terrorists on
its territory, and it must apply the principle of either
extraditing them or bringing them to trial.

We have a number of doubts with regard to the
comments made in this Chamber that there is an
independent justice system in the United States, when
we see that a court can arrive at a decision that the
terrorist Luis Clemente Posada Carriles should not be
deported to Venezuela because, supposedly, he would
be tortured in our Republic.

There is absolutely no foundation for that
assertion. Moreover, up to now we have complied with
all international norms, and we are party to all
conventions against torture. To date, Venezuela has not
been called to task by any international organization in
connection with cases of torture.

Now, my question would be the following: is a
court independent when a decision is being taken with
regard to a person who has served as an agent of the
Central Intelligence Agency of the United States -
could there be a link with the fact that individual needs
to be protected and is being protected, by the United
States Government?

In Venezuela, we take a diligent, responsible and
consistent approach to such matters, and we would
request that, in the Committees, each State be studied
with the same diligence. We must avoid terrorism
being used by some States. We must make sure that
States stop supporting terrorists, as we have seen
repeatedly throughout the world. For this reason, we
are asking the United States Government here, before
the three Committees and their Chairmen present here,
to show us if we are wrong, if we are not right in what
we are saying, and then to extradite the terrorist Luis
Clemente Posada Carriles or to try him on this territory
for what he is - a terrorist, an assassin and a torturer.

We would like to be shown that we are mistaken,
and that the United States at present, and in the future,
can show us that all of those terrorist practices and
policies it uses with regard to other States and peoples
will no longer be applied. We also request that the
United States shows us that its actions, including the
financing of groups to destabilize a State, are not trying
to force socio-political changes, destabilize or
overthrow Governments under the pretext that they are
terrorists or that they protect terrorists.

We reaffirm that we want each and every Member
of the United Nations to be consistent in this area, in
condemning terrorism, without distinction. Terrorists
can be either State or non-State actors. We would like
the United States to abandon its terrorist practice and
policies in its relationship with other States.

