Mr. Inzko: In my remarks today, I want to talk about
two trends that are developing in parallel in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, one positive and one quite negative.

To begin with, the open and helping hand extended
to Bosnia and Herzegovina by the European Union
(EU) has led to further progress, with the adaptation
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement and a
domestic EU Coordination Mechanism finally agreed.
State and entity-level authorities have also continued to
make certain progress on economic reforms. Following
these steps, on 20 September the EU General Affairs
Council invited the European Commission to submit
an opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovina's application
for EU membership, which is a truly momentous
development. Bosnia and Herzegovina is not a member
of the EU, and not even a candidate yet, but it has taken
a decision about its future. It has taken a decision about
its direction. This is wholeheartedly supported by a
large majority of the population.

Anotherpositive developmenttook place in] une with
the publishing of the first post-war census, an essential
tool for socioeconomic planning. While arguments over
the census soured the political environment, tensions
increased significantly, first with the decision by the
Republika Srpska National Assembly in July to hold
an entity referendum, in defiance of an earlier decision
of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court,
and then with the actual holding of the referendum in
September, in direct contravention of a second decision
suspending the referendum until the Court could decide
on disputes concerning its constitutionality.

The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which is also annex 4 of the Peace Agreement, states
explicitly that decisions of the Constitutional Court, as
in our own countries, are final and binding, and that
the entities are bound to comply with the decisions of
the State authorities. For this reason, I consider the
referendum of 25 September to be a grave violation of
the Peace Agreement and the rule of law. It was held
in contravention of decisions of the Court, including a
direct order suspending the referendum.

The positive diplomatic role played by neighbouring
Serbia and Croatia during the crisis is worth noting.
Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar Vueic' declined
to support the referendum - he did so twice, in
public - while Prime Minister designate of Croatia
Andrej Plenkovic' condemned it outright.

With this unprecedented step, the authorities of
Republika Srpska established that they do not consider
themselves bound by Constitutional Court decisions
with which they do not agree, effectively opting out of
the country's judicial system. For example, the President
told media that he would also order Republika Srpska
institutions not to follow a final decision of another
institution, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
a case related to the ownership of military property.
Similarly, the President publicly rejected a summons
to give a statement to the State Prosecutor regarding
the referendum.

In addition to being a fundamental challenge to the
State's sovereignty, the constitutional order and the rule
of law, the September referendum should be seen in the
context of the long-standing policy of the ruling party
in the Republika Srpska, and its President in particular,
to deny the authority of the common State institutions
and to advocate openly for the dissolution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In their public statements during
the reporting period, the Republika Srpska President
and other officials of his party clearly linked the
referendum with possible future secession, describing it
as the first in a series, to possibly include referendums
against the State institutions or NATO, on the status
of the Republika Srpska, and on independence. Would
we tolerate similar moves for secession in our own
countries?

However, in recent weeks we have witnessed
another staggering development in the Republika
Srpska. This was the move by the Republika Srpska
National Assembly and its speaker Nedeljko Cubrilovie
to decorate a number of convicted war criminals,
including Radovan Karadzic', who was sentenced by
a United Nations tribunal in the first instance to 40
years' imprisonment for genocide, crimes against
humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war.
This deeply offended the survivors of ethnic cleansing
and many others. This act of officially decorating and
glorifying war criminals who have been sentenced by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
is unprecedented in modern and civilized history. For
me, those who have initiated the decoration of those
internationally convicted war criminals, and who are
thereby glorifying genocide, are barbarians and outside
the orbit of civilized society. They do not belong to it
any longer. They are on the wrong side of history.

On 2 October, citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
voted in the country's sixth local elections since the
war. Unfortunately, parties that focused on polarizing
rhetoric and ethnic division generally saw the greatest
gains at the ballot box. While the conduct of elections
was largely peaceful, electoral irregularities and unrest
in the southern town of Stolac resulted in a suspension
of the vote, which will need to be repeated as soon
as possible.

In Srebrenica, a place of genocide in 1995, as
confirmed by two United Nations tribunals, legal
challenges still dominate the media. It is therefore of
the utmost importance that the mayor of Srebrenica
be a mayor working in the interests of all citizens of
the town. In Mostar, citizens were again unable to
participate in elections due to the failure of political
parties to agree on needed changes to the election law.
The fact that the citizens of Mostar have not elected
local representatives since 2008 is a stain on democracy
and another demonstration of how the rule of law
continues to deteriorate. Compounding these political
difficulties, some prominent Croat leaders more
persistently advocated for internal territorial changes
during the reporting period, calling for federalization
or the creation of a third entity, which did little to help
the overall political environment.

As I mentioned earlier, we as the international
community need to take an honest look at two trends
developing in parallel in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
first is one of positive steps taken by the Government
in Bosnia and Herzegovina towards reforms aimed
at EU integration - which I wholeheartedly
support - culminating in the truly significant fact that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has now taken a decisive step
towards candidacy status with the European Union.
This is a truly historic act that is seen only once in a
lifetime. This positive trend cannot be denied, and I
believe that it is the duty of all of us gathered here today
to fully embrace it.

The second trend, however, is the tendency of
some political actors to return to the divisive and
destructive agendas of the past and, in the case of the
Republika Srpska referendum, to assert that neither
the Dayton Peace Agreement nor the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can limit their actions. With
this referendum, I believe that we as the international
community, need to ask ourselves how long these
two dynamics can be sustained before the second
overwhelms the first. Or to put it another way, can
we accept that some of the country's leaders work
for European Union integration and the internal
disintegration of the country at the same time? Can we
accept that some speak about European values but at
the same time glorify war criminals and thus genocide?

Moving forward, I believe that the answer for
us as an international community is to send a strong
message to those authorities and leaders in Bosnia and
Herzegovina who openly reject the rule of law and
seek to reopen the wounds of the past that they will
not lead their constituencies to prosperity or integration
with Euro-Atlantic structures. Instead, they will lead
themselves into isolation. The leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina - with the help and guidance of the
international community - must recommit to making
Bosnia and Herzegovina a peaceful, stable, functional
and multi-ethnic country that is fully and irreversibly
integrated into European structures.

