Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
again welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
express our appreciation for her briefing on the twelfth
annual report on the situation in Libya in accordance
with resolution 1970 (2011).

We reiterate the full support of Uruguay for the work
of the Prosecutor and for the role of the International
Criminal Court in strengthening the rule of law at the
international level by the establishment of judicial
processes for those responsible for serious crimes
against humanity as defined in article 5 of the Rome
Statute. In order to make that work more effective, we
call on all Member States that are not yet parties to
the Rome Statute to adhere to it with the objective of
fighting impunity and defending all inhabitants of the
planet against atrocity crimes that pose a serious threat
to the peace and security of humankind.

On the other hand, my delegation's message will
not be directed solely to those that are not parties to
the Rome Statute, but also to those States that recently
decided to reject it. It is important to safeguard and
strengthen the International Criminal Court, which has
shown itself to be an effective instrument in providing
justice when when national courts are incapable of
doing so.

With regard to Libya, the latest report does not
provide very encouraging signs. The authority of the
Presidency Council of the Government of National
Accord continues to be challenged at the national
level, and the blockade imposed by the Tobruk House
of Representatives has not allowed for the Cabinet to
be established. The multiple challenges facing Libya
five years after the civil war require swift and efficient
responses from its new authorities, who face the threat
of Islamist terrorism, a persistent migrant crisis and a
severe economic crisis, among other problems.

It is necessary to achieve progress in the
reunification and reconciliation of the country, while
avoiding further bloodshed among the population and
putting end the institutional crisis and the military
conflict that has ravaged the country during the past
five years. It is necessary to advance towards the goal of
a genuine democratic transition and lasting peace and
stability, as a basis for more effectively investigating
the atrocities committed in the country and to avoid
a continuation of the situation of widespread violence
and impunity.

We trust the new Libyan authorities will fulfil
their commitment to bring justice to the victims of
these crimes, in cooperation with the Prosecutor of the
Court in order to identify the perpetrators, no matter
who they are. In particular, we encourage the new
Libyan Government to make Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
available to the Court and to ensure that Abdullah
Al-Senussi and other individuals receive trials that
include full international safeguards.

We are concerned that the Prosecutor will have
to face budgetary limitations next year in order to be
able to expand her investigation into the crimes taking
place in Libya, which the report identifies as one of
the Prosecutor's priorities for 2017. For that reason, we
support her request to access the necessary resources to
be able to comply with her, and we call on States parties
able to provide the necessary financing to do so.

Finally, we reiterate our recognition of the work
of the Prosecutor in her investigations into crimes
committed in Libya, which will undoubtedly contribute
to strengthening the rule of law and the establishment
in Libya of a more just and inclusive society where there
is full respect for basic rights and guarantees for all
citizens, who have seen those rights violated for years.

