Mr. Mohd. Radzi (Malaysia): My delegation
thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/310) on the ending of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) and the preparations for the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), whose establishment
was authorized by Security Council resolution 1599
(2005), for a one-year period until 20 May 2006.

My delegation also thanks Mr. Hedi Annabi, the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his clear presentation of that report
earlier this afternoon. We commend Special
Representative Hasegawa and members of the civilian,
military and police components of UNMISET for their
dedication and invaluable contribution to the process of
nation-building in Timor-Leste. Malaysia takes special
pride in the fact that we were able to actively
contribute to UNMISET by having a Malaysian
assigned as a Force Commander and by contributing
military and police personnel, among others, to serve
under the banner of the United Nations in Timor-Leste.

Malaysia fully appreciates the important roles
played by UNMISET in providing security and
facilitating the country's advancement towards
progress and development. We must acknowledge that
UNMISET has made tremendous contributions toward
the development of political, economic, social, legal
and judicial institutions in Timor-Leste. In particular,
the Mission has played crucial role in assisting in
building the capacity of Timorese State institutions
during the consolidation phase of UNMISET. These
advances could not have been achieved without the full
commitment, determination and strong resolve of the
country's leadership and the support of the Timorese
people in general, coupled with sustained assistance
and cooperation from the international community.

We recall that the previous report of the
Secretary-General (S/2005/99) indicated that
international assistance would continue to be required
beyond the expiration of UNMISET's mandate on
20 May 2005 to ensure that the underpinnings of a
viable State are firmly in place. We share the view that
more remains to be done. We therefore urge that
continuing support be channelled to the Government of
Timor-Leste to sustain the remarkable gains achieved
thus far and to enable the young nation to continue to
build on its progress. As the ending of UNMISET's
mandate will open another chapter in the nation-
building of Timor-Leste, Malaysia welcomes the
Council's decision to remain engaged by maintaining
an operational presence on the ground through
UNOTIL until 20 May 2006.

My delegation notes that even though UNOTIL
may not be able to secure all of the resources suggested
by the Secretary-General in his previous report, we
share his optimism that the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste will nonetheless be in a position to assist
in the key areas - notably the judiciary, public
administration, law enforcement, security and stability
of Timor-Leste - through the generous cooperation
and contribution of the international community.

In that connection, we all should seriously
consider the Secretary-General's call for the
international community to seek alternative ways to
meet crucial requirements that will remain following
the withdrawal of UNMISET. In consolidating the
gains achieved thus far, it is essential that the transition
from the phase of peacekeeping operations resolving
conflicts to the next phase, development, be conducted
with the cooperation and contribution of all bilateral
and multilateral partners. In that regard, Malaysia
remains committed to do its utmost within its modest
capacity to contribute towards further assisting Timor-
Leste in fulfilling its nation-building endeavours,
including through the continuation of bilateral
technical assistance.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that it is incumbent
upon the international community to continue to lend
its vital assistance to ensure the success of UNOTIL as
it undertakes its one-year follow-up mission, until
20 May 2006. As it focuses on the transfer of skills and
knowledge to build the capacity of the public
institutions in Timor-Leste, there will be areas where
the international community can contribute to further
the development and strengthening of the rule of law,
including justice, human rights and support for the
national police and other aspects of public
administration.

The assistance of the international community
will also be needed in areas beyond the support
provided by UNOTIL, including security needs to
promote stability and ensure the safety of United
Nations personnel. Malaysia is convinced that, with the
efforts of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, along with the support of the United Nations and
the international community, Timor-Leste will continue
to make progress in its nation-building endeavours.

