Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela welcomes
the convening of this open debate on the political
situation in Haiti and highly value the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/157), as presented by
his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms. Sandra Honore. On behalf of my delegation,
I should like to congratulate Ms. Honore for the
constructive and very important work that she has been
carrying out together with her team to ensure stability
and reconstruction in Haiti.

During their recent visit to Haiti, in January,
the members of the Council reiterated the Council's
commitment to support the people and the Government
of Haiti in their efforts to strengthen peace, democracy
and stability. The mission enabled Council members
to learn about the important role of MINUSTAH in
support of the efforts made by the Haitian Government
to strengthen its institutional capacity, which in turn
will contribute to the economic and social recovery
of this sisterly nation, in the framework of sustainable
development.

We warmly welcome the efforts made by
Haiti - efforts that must be expanded - to combat
poverty and rebuild the country. We call on the
international community to provide resolute support
to such humanitarian and development efforts. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will maintain and
strengthen its assistance to and cooperation with the
brotherly people of Haiti, especially in the area of
social development, humanitarian assistance and the
reconstruction of the country's infrastructure done
through our Petrocaribe programme.

Our cooperation is based on the historical solidarity
and friendship between our peoples. Despite all of
the efforts made by the international community and
the Government of Haiti, as well as the advances that
have made in several important areas, such as the fight
against cholera, enormous challenges remain in terms
of promoting recovery and sustainable development,
which would make it possible to overcome the serious
economic, social and structural problems in the country
stemming from colonialism, foreign interventions, the
despotic dictatorships that have ruled Haiti and the
continued political instability.

Haiti requires political stability and the strengthening
of its institutions in order to successfully fight poverty.
In that regard, we would like to reiterate what is stated
in the report of the Secretary-General with regard to
minimizing tensions and the normalization of consular
relations between the Dominican Republic and Haiti,
two brotherly countries that share the same territory.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela welcomes
the fact that the provisional Electoral Council is fully
operational, and we welcome the agreement reached
among the Haitian parties to re-establish an atmosphere
of political trust in the lead-up to the legislative,
municipal and presidential elections this year. We
believe that the successful and peaceful conduct of the
elections will be key for the future stabilization and
development of Haiti.

While there have been encouraging developments,
we believe that an ongoing dialogue between political
stakeholders and the Government of Haiti is necessary to
overcome all of the obstacles ahead. Once the elections
have been held, it is politically imperative that there be
respect for the results and the necessary commitment
to the stability of the people of Haiti. In that regard, the
international community must support this brotherly
country in this very important event, bearing in mind
that the Haitian people and the country's institutions are
responsible for the successful conduct of the elections.

After 10 years of work by MINUSTAH, we have
witnessed the increased stability of Haiti. We would like
to acknowledge and commend the contribution made
by the troop-contributing countries to MINUSTAH and
that made by all countries that have contributed to the
strengthening of the Haitian National Police. However,
efforts to consolidate the rule of law in the country
and its institutions must continue. The drafting of the
penal code, the strengthening of the principal oversight
institutions in the country, such as the Superior Council
of the Judiciary, progress in the legislative reform
process and the progress made in the training of the
Haitian National Police, as well as the convening of
eletions, inter alia, are positive indicators with respect
to the preservation of the political and social integrity
of Haiti.

Venezuela attaches particular importance to ensuring
improvements in the capacity and professionalization
of the Haitian National Police, in keeping with the
strategic plan for 2012-2016, as it will be one of the
institutions that will take over public-security tasks
once MINUSTAH's mandate has been completed.

Venezuela wishes to highlight the work carried
out by MINUSTAH in helping to stabilize the
country. We therefore believe that the MINUSTAH
drawdown strategy should be closely coordinated
with the Government of Haiti, and that this will be a
year of critical importance to the country's efforts to
consolidate its institutions through the smooth conduct
of elections. In that regard, MINUSTAH's presensce
should be maintained.

We support the request, made by President Martelly
in the letter he sent to the Secretary-General and that has
been was distributed to Council members (S/2015/191),
that MINUSTAH be drawn down in a gradual and
orderly fashion, beginning in 2016 once a President
has been elected. Any decision on the drawdown of the
MIssion should be adopted on the basis of a prudent
approach and in accordance with security conditions
on the ground and and taking into account the capacity
of Haitian national institutions to run the country's
political, economic and social affairs.

Finally, Venezuela continues to encourage democratic
development and political and social stability in a free
and sovereignty Haiti, and reaffirms its resolve to
continue supporting that brotherly Caribbean country
so as to ensure that it enjoys full sovereignty and social
justice and eradicates poverty, which are the main
challenge it will face in the future.

