Mr. Matjila (South Africa): South Africa welcomes
the convening of today's open debate on the challenges
we face in addressing the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), their means of delivery and
related materials. The subject of today's open debate is
very important and relevant, particularly in the wake
of the continuous threats to international peace and
security posed by the continued possession, use and
threat of use of WMDs and their means of delivery.
Such threats are further compounded by the ever-
increasing chances that such weapons could end up in
the hands of non-State actors.

South Africa associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I would like to share South Africa's
perspective on the topic before us.

Since 1994, South Africa has been steadfast in its
commitment to multilateralism in addressing the peace
and security challenges facing the global community,
including the horizontal and vertical proliferation
of WMDs and their means of delivery. South Africa
reaffirms that no cause could ever justify the use or
threat of use of weapons of mass destruction anywhere,
by anyone or under any circumstances.

While significant progress has been achieved in
the elimination of biological and chemical weapons
through the universalization and implementation of
the conventions prohibiting biological and chemical
weapons, progress towards a world free of nuclear
weapons continues to lag behind. Significantly, nuclear
weapons remain the only WMDs yet to be subject to
a global prohibition. Regrettably, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which
constitutesthefoundationofthenuclearnon-proliferation
regime, continues to be subject to significant tensions
resulting primarily from the non-implementation of the
nuclear-disarmament obligations under article VI of the
Treaty and the related commitments made at the 1995,
2000 and 2010 NPT Review Conferences.

The three international Conferences on the
Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons held since
2012 and the Open-ended Working Group of the
General Assembly to develop proposals to take forward
multilateral nuclear disarmament negotiations for
the achievement and maintenance of a world without
nuclear weapons, which was convened in Geneva this
year, provided inclusive platforms for the international
community to explore options for taking forward
multilateral nuclear-disarmament negotiations aimed
at achieving and maintaining a world without nuclear
weapons. In that context, the Open-ended Working
Group has now recommended to the Assembly
that it convene a conference in 2017 to commence
negotiations on a treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons.
While such a treaty may not achieve immediate results,
it could, as an interim step, address a glaring gap in
the international legal architecture on the legality of
nuclear weapons. Such a treaty would also strengthen
the NPT and underline the urgency of accelerating the
implementation of nuclear-disarmament obligations
and related commitments.

With regard to biological and chemical weapons,
South Africa remains committed to the universalization
of the relevant instruments and to the full implementation
of all legally binding obligations. With the upcoming
2016 Review Conference of the Biological Weapons
Convention, South Africa will work constructively
towards an outcome that would strengthen the
Convention and its balanced implementation, including
through an enhanced inter-sessional process and an
appropriately resourced implementation-support unit.

In terms of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
South Africa welcomes the progress made towards
the destruction of chemical weapons around the
globe. In that regard, we welcome the progress made
in the elimination of the Syrian chemical weapons
and facilities. We furthermore welcome the progress
made by the Russian Federation and the United States
of America, which are scheduled to complete their
destruction activities in 2020 and 2023, respectively.

We share the concern of the international
community with regard to the threat posed by non-State
actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction. In that
regard, we remain committed to the strengthening of
transfer controls, as called for in resolution 1540 (2004).
We recognize the need for international assistance and
cooperation, especially for States that may not have the
requisite resources to give effect to their obligations.

South Africa participated in the formal consultations

on the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004),

which were ably organized by Spain in June. We look

forward to the review outcomes, which we hope will

strengthen the resolution and provide an added dynamic

in tackling the challenges of WMD proliferation,
particularly with regard to non-State actors.

Over the years, South Africa has strengthened
its implementation capability through comprehensive
national legislation focused on WMDs and their
means of delivery, which includes the establishment
of the Council for the Non-Proliferation of Weapons
of Mass Destruction. That Council is responsible
for coordinating the national implementation of our
international WMD obligations and regulations and
for monitoring compliance across all the relevant
stakeholders. Our domestic legislation is subject to
continuous review, which takes into account new
technological developments and experiences in
national implementation. South Africa remains ready
to continue to play its part in assisting countries
in our region and beyond in strengthening national
controls over sensitive items that may contribute to the
development of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery.

While dealing with the the challenges I have
mentioned, it is imperative that no unwarranted
restrictions be imposed on the inalienable right of
Member States, particularly developing countries, to
use any related materials, equipment and technologies
for peaceful purposes. In that regard, the opportunities
provided by nuclear technologies in the implementation
of the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in
areas such as food security, public-health technologies
and clean energy, cannot be overlooked. Furthermore,
the exchange of scientific information, equipment and
materials for peaceful purposes is greatly needed in
Africa to deal with the spread of infectious diseases,
which could derail socioeconomic growth and
development if not adequately addressed.

South Africa's experience with the implementation
of WMD regimes has demonstrated that the challenges
of WMDs and their delivery systems can be addressed
through the following ways. First, we must strengthen
national legislation and implementation capabilities.
Secondly, we need to accelerate the provision of
capacity-building and technical expertise, especially
to developing countries, including those in Africa.
Thirdly, we must strengthen international cooperation
with other related international organizations.
Fourthly, we need to ensure adequate and predictable
funding for the relevant international organizations and
implementation-support structures to enable them to
implement their mandates. Fifthly, we must strengthen
cooperation between regional organizations and the
relevant multilateral organizations. Sixthly, and lastly,
we need to enhance cooperation with civil society and
the private sector.

In conclusion, the threat of WMD proliferation
can be dealt with effectively only through increased
international cooperation and assistance and the
strengthening of the relevant multilateral instruments
and institutions. Non-proliferation is not a goal in itself,
but a means towards the goal of a world free from the
threat posed by weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery. Selectivity and discriminatory
practices will not serve our collective interests in
strengthening international peace and security. What is
required is a faithful and balanced implementation of
the various international legally binding instruments.

