Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We appreciate
the comprehensive briefing by Judge Claude Jorda on
the work of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 (ICTY). We find his presentation very
engaging and full of substantive elements which need
the Council's close attention.

Bangladesh strongly believes that the ICTY,
along with the Tribunal for Rwanda, have a historic
responsibility to perform. Therefore every effort should
be made to enable the two Tribunals to be credible and
functional in the best possible way. We also believe
that the performance of these Tribunals will have a
serious implication for the proposed International
Criminal Court.

We commend the improvements made in the work
of the ICTY since it was established. We also note that
work is under way to address areas where further
improvement is needed. We agree with the View that
the time is right to examine the future of the ICTY. The
reform proposals presented by President Jorda and the
recommendations of the Expert Group, constituted by
the Secretary-General upon the request of the General
Assembly in resolutions 53/212 and 53/213, are
relevant and important in designing improved practices
and procedures of the International Tribunals. The
prospective plan, as presented by President Jorda on
behalf of the entire bench of ICTY judges, has
presented very focused reform proposals and
recommendations. These, particularly the proposal for
ad [item judges and the Appeals Chamber, should get a
positive nod from this Council. The comments of the
Secretary-General and the observations of the
Prosecutor on the recommendations of the Expert
Group are valuable additions. The Council will look
into all these documents.

I would like, at this point, to highlight the
following four aspects for consideration. First, we
attach importance to the need to ensure justice without
delay. President Jorda has presented this aspect most
strikingly in his statement. The enormous magnitude of
the task and the need for prompt and effective delivery
of justice has necessitated that the Tribunal should
have adequate capabilities. We should look favourably
at recommendations 20 and 21, on the increase in the
number of judges and legal assistance personnel. We
would like to emphasize that resources should be
commensurate with responsibilities.

Secondly, we support the recommendation of the
Expert Group that the indictees having a major
responsibility be brought to justice in the first place,
rather than minor perpetrators. We are seriously
concerned that some major political and military
figures have remained at large. The Council should
consider ways and means to secure their surrender or
arrest for trial. The humanitarian laws will certainly be
better protected if individuals in the higher chain of
command are brought to justice.

Thirdly, the outreach programmes of the
Tribunals to develop public information programmes in
the former Yugoslavia and elsewhere throughout the
world regarding the work and objectives should be
strengthened. We agree with the Prosecutor that a most
effective form of outreach would be the hearing of
ICTY proceedings in the former Yugoslavia.

Fourthly, we need to firm up the process for
taking our decisions on the ICTY reform proposals and
on the recommendations of the Expert Group in the
Council. In order to consider these, we would support
the formation of an informal working group, which,
within a stipulated time period of, for example, three
months, would submit its recommendations for
approval by the Council.

Finally, this meeting has afforded us an
opportunity to discuss the future of the ICTY. We hope
that we will have similar occasions to discuss the
Rwanda Tribunal in the near future.

