Mr. Haryono (Indonesia): The delegation of Indonesia
wishes to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
to the other members of the Security Council for convening
this meeting at a critical juncture for the continent of
Africa.

As in the past, we welcome the initiatives taken by the
Security Council to consider issues of importance in the
format of an open debate, including the current debate on
the situation in Africa. We remain confident that this
openness and transparency will also be seen in the near
future in the Council's main discussion on the maintenance
of international peace and security. We continue to believe
that such practices are essential in stimulating new ideas
and approaches and in resolving the numerous issues on its
agenda.

Our deliberations today reflect the continuing
significance that the international community accords to
the issues concerning Africa, particularly those relating to
security and socio-economic development.

Let me take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his progress
report on the implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa. It provides a unique opportunity to take stock
of the significant achievements and progress made by the
people of Africa and, concurrently, to focus attention on
the need for enhanced international cooperation for the
establishment of a partnership in the continent with the
rest of the world based on mutual benefit and prosperity.

Africa today stands at the threshold of the next
millennium closer to attaining its goals of stable peace
and economic prosperity. It is gratifying to note that the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and subregional
organizations in Africa are playing an increasingly
important role in the resolution of conflicts. These
endeavours were bolstered by the appointment of special
envoys, representatives and contact groups and by the
holding of special conferences whose task it was to
examine the sources of conflict and to recommend
practical solutions.

Thus the Lome Peace Agreement on Sierra Leone,
the OAU Framework Agreement on the conflict between
Eritrea and Ethiopia and the ceasefire agreement for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo demonstrate the
determination of these countries to seek solutions to their
problems, and the resolve of regional and subregional
organizations to assume primary responsibility for the
resolution of conflicts. They also show the indispensable
role that the United Nations can play in facilitating the
attainment of these objectives, especially in peacekeeping.

Notwithstanding its inherent difficulties,
peacekeeping remains a vital component in assisting
African States to resolve conflicts. Therefore, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in enhancing and strengthening African
capacity for peacekeeping - particularly in the areas of
training, dissemination of information, civilian police and
logistical support - remains crucial. It is worth noting
that, while the reinforcement of the African countries'
capacity in peacekeeping is a priority, it should not
relieve the Security Council of its obligation under the
Charter for the maintenance of peace and security, nor

 

does it constitute grounds for discouragement or
disengagement.

The Secretary-General's progress report also touches
upon the need to reinforce the ongoing debate on targeted
sanctions, with particular reference to arms embargoes and
violation regarding arms trafficking. As a follow-up, we
look forward to the detailed recommendations.

My delegation shares the concern of African States
caused by the illicit and covert arms trade, involving a
circuitous network of manufacturers, buyers, suppliers and
distributors, often operating outside the control of State
authorities. The easy availability of weapons and munitions
has been a disincentive to the peaceful political settlements
that are sorely overdue in many protracted cases of civil
strife in which civilians have become targets. On the other
hand, it is important to recognize that civil wars are not
entirely an internal phenomenon, as weapons to fight such
conflicts often originate from external sources.

Numerous initiatives taken in Africa have not only
promoted a greater understanding of the consequences of
illicit arms flow, but have also developed a strategy for
addressing the scope and approaches that may be
envisioned on an issue that is admittedly complex. These
include addressing the root causes of conflicts and non-
interference in areas of tension by States in pursuit of
specific interests. We are gratified to note that several
African countries have taken steps in this regard. The
resumption of debate last week on these and related issues
by the Security Council was both timely and appropriate in
raising consciousness on the causes and global
consequences of the unchecked flow of illegal arms.

The struggle to bring about peace and security in
Africa is intrinsically linked with economic growth and
development. We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
statement in his progress report that conflict prevention and
post-conflict peace-building are meaningless unless they
enable a society to develop. For years the promotion of
peace and development in Africa has been a major concern
of the international community. This is manifest by the vast
numbers of initiatives launched by the United Nations and
other organizations. The stakes are high - a whole
continent yearns to lift itself out of underdevelopment and
poverty and in many cases to overcome social and ethnic
tensions and conflicts. Absolute poverty, which still afflicts
44 per cent of the population of the continent as a whole,
with 51 per cent of those people living in the sub-Saharan
countries, is unacceptable. Likewise, more must be done for
the approximately three-quarters of all people infected by
the HIV/AIDS Virus who now live in Africa.

The past decade has been a mixed one, with, at
times, virtual economic stagnation and at others
significant progress. Africa still faces horrendous
development constraints. In this context, the Secretary-
General's report made recommendations on a number of
critical core issues on which progress must be achieved.
While some efforts have shown results, others, such as
the endeavour to increase market access for African
exports, including of the developed countries, in the
framework of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and
of the Lome Convention, still need to be pursued.

Likewise, financial flows for development to Africa
have been negatively affected by globalization,
particularly regarding multilateral financial flows. Since
only a very small percentage of foreign direct investment
flows to Africa, many African countries that are unable to
tap into such flows have become increasingly
marginalized.

Closely associated with appropriate development
financing, and an unbearable constraint on revitalizing
African growth and development, is external indebtedness.
Despite the many initiatives undertaken, particularly the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative,
Africa's debt stock continues to increase. In this regard,
we look forward to the implementation of the recent Koln
debt initiative, adopted by the Group of 8 in June this
year, as a significant step towards cutting the debt burden
of some of the world's poorest.

Debt relief and cancellations, while critically needed,
represent only one of a number of major requirements
within the integrated framework approach necessary to
ensure sustained growth and sustainable development.
Indonesia therefore supports the call from the OAU for an
international agreement to clear the debt stock of the
poorest countries in Africa. This would represent an
important step in the effort to revitalize the economic
performance of these countries and put them back on the
path of development. Likewise, we see merit in the
proposal for creditor countries to convert into grants the
remaining official bilateral debt of the poorest African
countries.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General,
Africa today reveals a remarkable combination of
accomplishments and unresolved problems, of
opportunities seized and chances missed. In the endeavour

 

to overcome the problems of Africa, the countries of the
region and continent cannot act by themselves. A wider
concrete participation of the international community is
definitely necessary.

In this context, we would like to add that if the
international community, just recently, was able to act in a
concerted and comprehensive manner to resolve an issue
which had received so much global attention, we firmly
believe that if the same concerted and comprehensive
approach were applied to Africa, it would surely resolve
many of the major problems facing that continent.

Finally, in the context of the new dialogue and
relationship between the international community and the
African continent, Indonesia - following the example it set
back in 1955, in Bandung, which contributed to the birth of
the Non-Aligned Movement - is still firmly committed to
assisting its partners in Africa in achieving their vision of
a peaceful and prosperous Africa. That support has been
consistently reflected in Indonesia's support of Africa's
objectives; through our active participation in many
international and regional forums, including our
participation in various peacekeeping operations and South-
South cooperation; and also through the strong bilateral
relations that Indonesia maintains throughout the continent.

