Mr. Jevremovie (Serbia): Serbia welcomes the
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding.

Before I proceed to make my statement, I would
like to point out that Serbia has aligned itself with the
statement made by the Representative of the Republic
of Slovenia on behalf of the European Union.

Also, I would like to present the views of my
country based on its experience in respect of the
subject of our debate today, which can be useful in
identifying the critical gaps that hamper international
efforts to stabilize post-conflict countries and to build
sustainable peace.

By and large, today's conflicts are caused by
ethnicity and religion and are often exacerbated by
social and economic antagonisms. Solutions to violent
conflicts always necessitate a complex process with an
uncertain outcome.

Reconciliation is a critical aspect of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Nowadays, the United Nations plays a
vital role in that process, especially in creating
conditions necessary for reconciliation. Ethnic
conflicts are a cause of population displacement, of
which the worst aspect is ethnic cleansing. Therefore,
the safe return of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs) can be taken as a yardstick of the
reconciliation process. The return of property and
compensation are equally important. In our own
experience, especially in the case of the province of
Kosovo and Metohija, the results of the rehabilitation
and IDP returns are very disappointing. The
rehabilitation of refugees from conflicts in other parts
of the former Yugoslavia is equally discouraging. If
those problems are not addressed properly,
reconciliation and peacebuilding will remain uncertain.

The essential framework for the rehabilitation of
post-conflict countries is respect for human rights,
particularly those of minorities and other disfavoured
communities. The indispensable dimension of respect
for human rights is the rule of law. That is of
paramount importance for lasting peace and stability,
whereas its absence is a great threat to conflict
resurgence.

The rule of law in today's world, characterized by
a process of globalization and unprecedented
integration, has an international dimension as well. To
be more specific, it means full respect for the United
Nations Charter and other international legal standards
that guarantee equality and mutual respect among
States and their sovereignty and integrity. In the past,
the arbitrary redrawing of national borders and the
recomposition of territories have generated
unprecedented violence and tragedies. The recent
experiences of our region provide ample evidence in
that regard.

However, the simple truth is that the
redistribution of territory cannot be substituted for
human rights and the rule of law. Of late, we have been
repeatedly told that the unilateral declaration of
independence of the province of Kosovo and Metohija
is the final act of the dismemberment of Yugoslavia. In
essence, that original notion amounts to diverting the
issue and sweeping the problem under the carpet. After
all, the story of the tragedy that followed the
dismemberment of Yugoslavia is yet to be told.
However, if we have learned anything from that bitter
experience, we, the countries of the region, should
spare no effort to be admitted under the secure
European roof.

Regional organizations play an ever more
important role in peacebuilding. However, their role
must not run counter to the role and the primary
responsibility of the United Nations for safeguarding
international peace and security. Furthermore, there has
to be not a modicum of doubt that a Security Council
decision must underpin each and every activity of
regional organizations. That conforms to my country's
position on the European Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, the European Union mission to Kosovo and
Metohija, an extremely important project that requires
very careful elaboration firmly embedded in the United
Nations monitoring and decision-making process.

Several years ago, Mr. Kofi Annan, the then
Secretary-General of the United Nations, said in his
report on the implementation of the Millennium
Declaration that the international community "can
ill-afford to declare victory prematurely". Indeed,
post-conflict societies are unstable and early positive
results should not justify an early reduction or
withdrawal of international presences. A change in the
scope of the engagement of international actors must
be carried out only on the basis of an objective,
consensual and realistic assessment of the capacity of
local actors to assume the functions of those presences.
The role of the United Nations in those processes, let
me reiterate, is and remains indispensable.

