Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I wish at the outset to thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate on children and armed conflict. Let me take this
opportunity to commend your country's chairmanship
of the Security Council Working Group on children and
armed conflict. Ijoin other speakers in welcoming the
appointment of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and express
Italy's support for her mandate. Lastly, I thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Herve Ladsous, and UNICEF's Executive Director,
Mr. Anthony Lake, for their commitment to defending
and promoting the rights of children victims of armed
conflicts, as well as the President of the International
Center for Transitional Justice, Mr. David Tolbert, for
bringing his organization's important perspective into
our discussions.

Italy endorses the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union. It also supports the
comments made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends on Children and Armed
Conflict, of which Italy is a member.

As a constant advocate of greater Security Council
action to address the scourge of children in armed
conflicts, Italy welcomes the progress made in recent
years in strengthening the protection framework.
Resolution 2068 (2012), adopted today and of which
Italy was a sponsor, confirms this trend. Yet much
remains to be done, and there is no time for setbacks.
We thus call on Security Council members to remain
committed to advancing this critical agenda.

Italy welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/261), which remains an essential instrument
for guiding the action of the international community.
We appreciate this year's adoption of new action plans
by a number of Governments, including those of South
Sudan, Myanmar and Somalia. Action plans have
proved instrumental in putting an end to violations
against children. In particular, we congratulate the
Somali authorities on the recent signature of an action
plan against the killing and maiming of children. We
call on all Governments to give concrete follow-up to
their commitments, since sustainable funding for the
release and reintegration of children associated with
armed forces and armed groups is also critical.

Despite those positive notes, the picture is
worrisome. In too many parts of the world, violations
against children are carried out in a climate of impunity.
I wish to highlight in particular the situation of girls,
who are often exposed to unspeakable violence. We
are also extremely concerned by the grave violations
against children committed in Syria. The international
community must not remain silent or inactive. The
perpetrators of those crimes must know that they will
be held accountable for their actions.

That brings me to the alarming increase in the
number of persistent perpetrators, which is cause for
great concern. Impunity undermines the credibility of
the protection system created by the Security Council.
The Council must step up its political engagement in
this field. Cooperation with national and international
courts is also crucial. The convictions of Thomas
Lubanga by the International Criminal Court and of
Charles Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone
highlight the leading role that courts can play in
furthering child protection and promoting deterrence.
We recommend more targeted measures against
individual perpetrators; existing sanctions committees
should be asked to consider Violations against children
in their mandates. The Council should also regularly
invite the Special Representative to provide briefings
on situations of armed conflict that affect children.

The engagement of the entire United Nations
system is critical to ensuring the implementation of the
architecture created by resolution 1612 (2005). That is
why we commend the efforts made by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, in cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, UNICEF and Save the Children,
to develop a comprehensive and systematic training
programme on child protection and child rights for
all peacekeeping personnel, an initiative Italy has
supported since its inception.

Let me conclude by repeating the call for firm
and united action by the international community and
by the Security Council. We have a solid protection
framework to implement. Any boy or girl that we save
from the scourge of war represents hope for a better
future. Let us never forget this when we discuss the
situation of children affected by armed conflict.

