Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Having voted against the
draft resolution today, I would like to briefly share with
the Council the reasons that compelled us to do so.

Turkey's persistent objection has always been to
the method through which these resolutions have been
adopted and to the language they have contained. Since
the adoption of resolution 186 (1964), which set up the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), all Council resolutions extending the
mandate of the Force are unfortunately still being
formulated as if there were only one side on the island.

We all know that, since 1963, there has not been a
joint and constitutional Government representing the
whole of Cyprus. Considering the Greek Cypriot
Government to be the Government of the whole island
has been the main obstacle in the way to finding a just,
lasting and comprehensive solution for over 46 years.
Therefore, the open consent of the two parties on the
island should have been sought.

We wanted this situation to be corrected in
today's resolution. Yet, we see once again that that did
not happen.

We welcome the elements concerning the
Secretary-General's good offices mission contained in
today's resolution. Despite misquotations, such as that
in the sixth preambular paragraph, where the phrase "if
possible" has been added to the wording of the original
statement made by the two leaders on the island on
21 December 2009, we believe that the resolution still
carries the right messages. Above all, it confirms the
common expectation that 2010 will be the year of a
solution consistent with the hope expressed by the two
leaders and shared by the Secretary-General and most,
if not all, of the international community.

I would like to reaffirm that the Turkish side has
implemented and will continue to implement the
provisions of this and related resolutions. We believe
that achieving a mutually acceptable and
comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem
10-40538
within established United Nations parameters, which
will safeguard the fundamental and legitimate rights
and interests of the two peoples on the island, is
possible and within reach. Therefore, Turkey will
continue to fully support the Secretary-General's
efforts and cooperate with UNFICYP.
