Mr. Yuchengco (Philippines): First of all,
Mr. President, I convey our appreciation in seeing you
chair today's meeting. I wish also to thank you and
members of the Security Council for the opportunity to
address this body on this historic day. It is fitting that
the celebration in Dili is extended today in this
Chamber by the members of the United Nations, who
have been instrumental in steering the events that now
culminate in the declaration of independence of East
Timor.

The Philippine delegation welcomes the newest
independent State, East Timor, into the family of
nations. We extend our hand of friendship to the people
of East Timor, who, after years of struggle, are taking
the rewarding journey towards independent
nationhood. The Philippines looks forward to fruitful
cooperation with East Timor, and we eagerly anticipate
welcoming this young nation into the United Nations
family.

As we take time to deliberate and contemplate on
what is a United Nations success story in East Timor, I
wish to make the following points.

First, the efforts of the international community
in resolving the problem in East Timor would have
been found wanting and short on results had it not been
for the courage, the vision and the commitment of the
people of East Timor to achieve independence.

Secondly, with principles and values overcoming
force and violence in East Timor, we have learned that
independence and freedom can be pursued through
peaceful and democratic means. Despite adversities,
the Timorese people have triumphed and achieved their
goal of independence. By staying the course, the
international community has helped found East Timor
on the principles of democracy and the rule of law. A
precious legacy has been left to the freedom-loving
people of East Timor.

Thirdly, the success of the United Nations in East
Timor has been a collective one. Countries big and
small have contributed personnel and resources to
reach the goals set by the United Nations. Moreover,
the remarkably short transition period towards East
Timor's independence has also been due to the
professionalism and dedication of the international
civil servants from the top leadership to the rank and
file, who served tirelessly in Dili, New York and other
parts of the region.

Finally, the United Nations Mission in East Timor
was one of the first, if not the only, mission to date for
which a clear exit strategy has been established. Not
unlike a solitary lighthouse that guides ships in the
expanse of a dark ocean, the well-defined exit strategy
in East Timor has served as a robust incentive to help
the United Nations achieve its goals. We commend the
Security Council for its leadership in this regard.

While nothing should distract us from
contemplating our success in East Timor, we should
maintain our focus on the enormous tasks that lie
ahead. The Timorese people will continue to require
assistance from the international community to ensure
the stability and viability of their country. We thus
support the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), especially its goal
to help East Timor attain full self-governance at the
earliest possible time. Just as we supported the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor at
its inception, having deployed troops and provided its
first Force Commander, we shall participate in
UNMISET in the same spirit.

The Philippines will also remain engaged in the
capacity-building efforts of East Timor. I thus wish to
inform this meeting that the Philippine Government
will co-sponsor a package of human resource
development projects for East Timor within the
framework of the Philippines-Japan Partnership
Program. We wish all the best for the Government of
President Gusmao and, in this regard, I wish to quote
the message to him of Philippine President Gloria
Macapagal-Arroyo:

"East Timor can count on the continued support
of the Philippines for that country's efforts to
achieve peace and prosperity, in the same manner
that the Philippines stood by and supported East
Timor in its quest for democracy."

