The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Fall
for the clarifications he has provided and wish him
every success in his mission.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council commends the
countries of the Great Lakes region for the
successful conclusion of the Second Summit of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, in Nairobi, Kenya, on 15 December
2006.

"The Security Council congratulates
regional leaders on the signing of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region and welcomes their commitment to
its implementation.

"The Security Council further welcomes the
decision to establish a regional follow-up
mechanism, to include a Conference Secretariat
headed by the first Executive Secretary,
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula of the United
Republic of Tanzania, as well as the decision to
establish the offices of the Conference Secretariat
in Bujumbura, Burundi.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
joint African Union/United Nations Secretariat,
the Friends of the Great Lakes Region co-chaired
by Canada and the Netherlands, the United
Nations lead agencies, the African Union, the
European Union, the African Development Bank
and the international community for their support
and assistance to the International Conference
process.

"The Security Council also pays tribute to
the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative Mr. Ibrahima Fall for their
support, commitment and effective facilitation of
the process leading to the convening of the
Second Summit and the signing of the peace Pact.
06-67407

"The Security Council supports the request
of the regional inter-ministerial Committee to
extend the mandate of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for a
final period of three months, until 31 March
2007, with a view to ensuring regional ownership
of the follow-up mechanism and completing
successfully the transition to the Conference
Secretariat.

"The Security Council appeals to the
countries of the region, the Group of Friends,
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
and the international community to consider
providing assistance to the Conference Secretariat
and the Special Fund for Reconstruction and
Development in the Great Lakes Region to
support implementation by the parties of the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/57.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.
29
