Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Abou Moussa for his briefing, and
we note the progress in consolidating the democratic
processes in a number of States of Central Africa,
including the peaceful holding of elections this summer
in Angola and the Congo.

We welcome the efforts of the Central African
countries to advance their integration processes and
cross-border cooperation. We support the focus of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
on building partnerships with subregional bodies
and assisting them in capacity-building. We note the
growing engagement of the Office with the countries
of the subregion on issues of counter-terrorism and the
illegal trafficking of small arms and light weapons.

We are concerned by the growing threat of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. Support must be maintained
for the increasing efforts of Central and West African
countries to implement the provisions of resolution
2018 (2011) on maritime security. An important step to
that end will be the regional summit on counter-piracy
issues to be held in April 2013 in Yaounde.

We cannot help but be concerned by the ongoing
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army. Because
of those thugs, 450,000 people remain refugees and
internally displaced persons. The activities of that
group seriously destabilize the military, political and
humanitarian situation in the affected countries, and
undermine efforts towards their post-conflict recovery.

We advocate a comprehensive approach to
addressing this challenge. In that regard, we support
efforts to implement the comprehensive United Nations
regional strategy to address the threat and impact of
the activities of the Lord's Resistance Army. The
priority tasks include assisting in the establishment
of the African Union Regional Task Force. We share
the View on the need to speed up its deployment
and to promptly agree and adopt the concept of
operations for the African Force. Of equal urgency is
the implementation of tasks with regard to protecting
civilians, the provision of humanitarian assistance,
and the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of LRA fighters, as well
as providing the countries of the subregion with support
in terms of peacebuilding and establishing Government
authority in remote regions.

We note the contribution of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in the collective
efforts to fight the Lord's Resistance Army, and its
importance in preventing conflict, ensuring peace and
security, and strengthening the coordination of United
Nations activities and the regional and subregional
organizations in Central Africa.

