Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, at the beginning of my statement,
I would like to extend to you my best wishes for a
successful German presidency of the Security Council
and to thank you for organizing this briefing on the
challenges of international humanitarian law and the
strengthening of international peace and security. I
also extend my warm congratulations to France for
its outstanding leadership of the Council's work over
the past month, and welcome the continuing presence
among us of Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs, who has been with us, I
believe, for five days, demonstrating the importance
of our work here in the Security Council. Finally,
allow me to thank the distinguished briefers, whose
relevant briefings and recommendations further inform
the Council on the correlation between respect for
international humanitarian law and the strengthening
of international peace and security.

The presence of new entities, in addition to State
actors, in crises around the world has fundamentally
changed the typology, motivations and thus the very
meaning of the notion of "conflict" that prevailed at
the time of the creation of the United Nations. These
new actors, whose methods of combat pay very little
attention to the norms of international law and the
values of humanism that underpin our common action,
operate outside the agreed codes of the law of war. In
this way, the various forms ofviolence against civilians,
schools, hospital infrastructure and humanitarian
personnel are nowadays part of the sad range of warfare
methods used by parties to some current conflicts.
Furthermore, rather than waiting for these horrors to
occur before repressing them, the collective conscience
of humankind is called upon to promote the preventive
dimension of international humanitarian law through
the establishment of mechanisms aimed in particular
at the prevention of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity.

cote d'Ivoire considers that the recurrent violations
of the rules of international humanitarian law now
constitute obstacles to the restoration and preservation
of international peace and security. Indeed, respect for
this legal corpus governing hostilities and reconciling
the aims of war with the principle of humanity is today
the instrument par excellence for protecting victims
against abuses and atrocities committed during armed
conflicts. That is why my country is of the opinion that
scrupulous respect for the principle of distinction, the
cornerstone of international humanitarian law, must
be imposed on all belligerents. All parties to an armed
conflict must, at all times and in all places, distinguish
between civilian populations and combatants on the
one hand, and between military objectives and civilian
objects on the other. In the light of the foregoing, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the decision of the Security Council
to make the prevention of armed conflict an integral
part of its primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Violations of international humanitarian law in
armed conflicts around the world have caused many
tragedies to humankind, whose collective conscience
still bears the wounds. That is the case particularly in
Africa, the Balkans and the Middle East.

In the context of the principle of the responsibility to
protect, it is therefore incumbent on States, individually
and collectively, to act in order to promote the rule of
law and respect for international humanitarian law with
a view to maintaining international peace and security.
In accordance with that obligation, Cote d'Ivoire has
signed all the relevant international legal instruments,
in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their Additional Protocols.

In implementation of its international commitments,
in 1996 Cote d'Ivoire established the national
interministerial commission for the implementation
of international humanitarian law, which, among other
work, is entrusted with the following tasks: to ensure
compliance with international humanitarian law and
its effective implementation; to consider and develop
laws and regulations in areas where national legislation
needs to be supplemented or amended and submit them
to the Government; to ensure the implementation of
international law; and to encourage the promotion,
dissemination and teaching of international law.

As part of its peacebuilding strategy, my country
has also worked to strengthen the national legal and
institutional system for promoting the rule of law
through the establishment of the national human rights
council, which monitors and supports State action in
the area of human rights.

In addition, Cote d'Ivoire pays the greatest
attention to the awareness-raising and training of its
police and military contingents with a view to their
deployment through training modules on human rights
and international humanitarian law.

During its term on the Security Council, in
partnership with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Cote
d'Ivoire worked for the adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), which condemns the use of hunger as a weapon
of war and calls on all parties to conflict to protect
civilian infrastructure, including that which is critical
to the delivery of humanitarian aid.

With regard to the action of the international
community, my country believes that the inclusion and
primacy of international humanitarian law, in particular
respect for civilian infrastructure and the protection
of humanitarian personnel, in ceasefire and peace
agreements should ensure the greater responsibility of
their signatories to respect human rights.

Finally, it is incumbent on the Council to ensure
the implementation of the principle of accountability
in combating human rights violations and mass crimes.

At this point in my remarks allow me to pay
a warm tribute to the United Nations specialized
agencies, in particular the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food
Programme, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and all the other humanitarian agencies around
the world.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire would like to recall
that the Charter of the United Nations has provided
for valuable instruments to strengthen the rule of
law, particularly through the powers entrusted to
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
International Court of Justice. We therefore encourage
all Member States to promote an international order
based on multilateralism with a view to ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law, which
represents the last layer of protection for humankind
against barbarism, thereby helping to make this world a
haven of peace and security.

