I thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo, Lacroix and Khare for their briefings. I would like to welcome Ambassador Barbara Woodward, Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, to her new position and to this meeting. The past three months have seen important progress in the Sudanese peace process and political transition and the positive momentum maintained in the range of reforms undertaken by the Government. On the other hand, economic difficulties, the coronavirus disease and widespread floods continue to pose serious challenges to the country's governance and its people's lives. The international community should pay more attention and do more to help the Sudan move towards peace and development. In that context, I would like to underscore the following three points. First, the peace agreement should be fully implemented. China welcomes the signing of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan between the transitional Government of the Sudan and the other parties and commends South Sudan's important contribution to that end. This has been a key step forward in the transition process and an important opportunity for the Sudan to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace. China encourages the signatories to the agreement to fulfil their commitments in earnest and to push for the full implementation of the peace agreement and calls on the parties that have not yet signed the agreement to join the peace process as soon as possible. China looks forward to all parties working together to achieve the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in the Sudan. China supports the United Nations in adjusting the disbursement of the multi-donor trust fund to scale up funding for peacebuilding purposes. Secondly, addressing socioeconomic challenges should be prioritized. The Sudan is faced with a dire economic situation, a lack of fuel and other basic commodities and a record level of inflation. The pandemic and the floods have exacerbated the current difficulties, with more than a fifth of the population facing food shortages and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. China supports the Sudanese Government's economic and financial reforms, welcomes the adoption of the debt-relief package by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank and calls on the international community to prioritize the easing of the country's debt burden, increase investment in and humanitarian assistance to Sudan and support its socioeconomic development and capacity-building for governance. We also call on the countries concerned to genuinely lift their unilateral coercive measures against the Sudan without delay. As the situation in the Sudan and Darfur gradually improves, the Council should promptly review the sanctions imposed on the Sudan and work out a road map for lifting them. China has provided the Sudan with many shipments of supplies for combating the pandemic and sent medical teams to the country. We will continue to do what we can to help the country achieve sustainable development. Thirdly, an orderly transition from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) must be ensured. Over the past 13 years of its deployment, UNAMID has played an important role in promoting the peace process, maintaining stability in Darfur and supporting the reconstruction of that region. It has been an example of the United Nations and the African Union successfully cooperating to solve African problems, and we should draw upon that experience going forward. As the UNAMID mandate ends on 31 December, we should remember all its staff members, who have contributed to the improvement of the situation in Darfur over the past 13 years. They have every reason to be happy that UNAMID will have completed its mission so successfully. China looks forward to the handover and orderly transition from UNAMID to UNITAMS. China calls on the Secretary-General to appoint a Special Representative for the Sudan as soon as possible. UNITAMS should fully take into account the views of the Sudanese Government when performing its duties, act in strict accordance with the resolutions of the Security Council, focus on supporting the core tasks of the Sudan's political transition process and avoid interfering in the Sudan's internal affairs. At the same time, it should actively respond to requests of the Sudanese Government, assist the country in promoting sustainable development and mobilize the international community to increase assistance. We have taken note that the advance team for UNITAMS is formulating a comprehensive strategic framework for UNITAMS and other United Nations agencies on the ground. We hope that those entities can work closely together to increase efficiency and avoid stepping on each other's toes.
