Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, Mr. President, to warmly welcome you and to take
this opportunity to underscore the long-standing
interest your country takes in the maintenance of
international peace and security in various parts of the
world. Allow me also to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste and
the Vice-Minister for Political Affairs of the Ministry
of External Relations of Brazil.

My delegation would like to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT), for her detailed and truly
comprehensive briefing, which helps us to understand
the main events in that country since the renewal of the
Mission's mandate in January. We highlight her
ongoing leadership and commitment, which are
apparent too in the UNMIT staff. Her continued efforts
to promote peace, stability and development in Timor-
Leste have our full support.

We are delighted by what we have heard today.
When the Security Council meets and sees progress on
the issues on its agenda, we feel that the United
Nations system is getting stronger and that our work
has been worthwhile. This is one of those instances.
We welcome the progress in peacebuilding, stability
and development that we have hoped for in Timor-
Leste.
In that context, we appreciate the willingness
expressed by political leaders to guarantee stability
during the 2012 electoral process and to maintain
national unity and focus their efforts on long-term
socio-economic and development strategies. There is
no doubt that conducting free, transparent and peaceful
elections will be a milestone for Timor-Leste. We
therefore express our full support of the electoral
process. We stand ready to cooperate in any way that
Timor-Leste thinks would be helpful.

The interest shown by the various sectors in the
country in preserving space for ongoing and broader
dialogue - the "Maubisse II" initiative stands out in
that regard - is the proper path to take, for it allows
for an exchange of views on lessons learned and best
practices in maintaining security and stability during
and after next year's elections. Respectful dialogue, an
outgrowth of real peace, is the path to genuine
reconciliation, harmony and well-being.

It is also encouraging to learn that the Timorese
police force has now taken over full responsibility for
police operations throughout the country, that the rate
of reported crime continues to drop and that stability
has been achieved. Although the 2012 election period
will be a significant challenge for the logistical
capacities of the Timorese national police force,
particularly in remote areas, we are nevertheless
confident that they will be able to respond to the
challenges that may arise. The support provided by
UNMIT in those areas will be critical.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our support for
the transition process being enacted by UNMIT and the
Government to enable the Mission to withdraw by the
end of 2012. Strengthening national capacities will
enable the leaders and people of Timor-Leste to
continue to move towards the achievement of common
goals aimed at fomenting an inclusive model of growth
that is fair and sustainable in the long term.

