Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join my
colleagues in warmly welcoming Baroness Ashton,
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy of the European Union.

High Representative Ashton's briefing to the
Security Council comes at a good and timely moment.
Recent developments in Tunisia and Egypt, both
neighbours of the European Union (EU), are of
immediate relevance not only to the European Union
and its member States but also, ultimately, to the
international community as a whole. Northern Africa
and the Middle East are in a crucial phase of transition.
Civil societies claim fundamental political and human
rights and a new economic perspective for the future.
Reforms are the only way forward. We have to adapt
our policies with regard to the entire region. The
European decision to grant special support to the
transformation process is the right initiative to respond
to Egyptian requests.

Baroness Ashton also informed us about the
meeting of the Middle East Quartet in Munich, which
she chaired three days ago. Our common goal is very
clear: we all want to see the State of Israel and a
sovereign, independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.

The Munich statement, in which the Quartet
highlighted the urgency of meaningful negotiations on
all final status issues and their conclusion by
September 2011, committed to playing an active role
and scheduled the next principals' meeting for March,
is an important contribution to creating much-needed
momentum.

The close contacts between the High
Representative and the Secretary-General over the past
week is yet another indicator of the high level of
cooperation between the EU and the United Nations.

Let me underline that this cooperation is built on
a fundamental convergence of views. It is based on the
idea that relations among States should be subject to
the rule of law and founded on universal values and
mutual respect. The EU believes in a multilateral,
rules-based approach to world affairs. The EU itself
was built by a process of negotiation and consensus
among its current 27 member States, which has led to a
considerable pooling of sovereignty. Germany has been
part of that unique peacebuilding and
institution-building exercise from the very beginning.

With a newly created External Action Service
implementing the Treaty of Lisbon, the EU is about the
further improve its joint diplomatic capabilities and
will become an even more effective international
partner for the United Nations and for other regional
organizations. While holding the European Union
presidency in 2007, Germany promoted the adoption of
a joint declaration on United Nations-European Union
cooperation in crisis management. Exchanges between
senior United Nations Secretariat officials and the
Political and Security Committee of the EU on areas of
cooperation have since become regular practice.

By definition, the European Union firmly
believes in regional cooperation. The African Union
(AU) and African subregional organizations are
strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture and are working actively to settle
conflicts in Africa through their peacekeeping missions
and good offices. The EU supports those efforts, and
not only with financial means. The African Peace
Facility has helped to enhance AU peace support
operations and its institution- and capacity-building.

In Somalia, just to give one example - and I
could name others - the United Nations, the African
Union and the European Union are closely cooperating
and complementing each other in their efforts to help
rebuild sound State institutions, thereby creating
conditions for peace and stability, and to combat piracy
off the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean.

Through its Operation Atalanta, the EU
contributes successfully to the protection of World
Food Programme shipments, thereby saving the lives
of many ordinary Somalis. Atalanta also plays an
important role in protecting African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) transports and international
shipping, which are so vital for the economies of the
broader region. Furthermore, following calls from the
Security Council, the European Union is conducting a
programme in Uganda to train soldiers for Somalia's
Transitional Federal Government. The objective of that
military training mission is to improve the security
situation in Somalia. AMISOM, which receives
substantial support from the European Union, has the
same objective.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that my country
remains committed to a strong partnership between the
United Nations and the EU that builds on shared values
and common goals. We welcome the Security Council's
recognition of the need for closer cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations in its
presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/ 1) last year. We
are confident that the cooperation between the EU and
the United Nations will remain fruitful and look
forward to the further deepening of that relationship.

