Mr. Vargas Maldonado (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. It is a
pleasure to meet again in this Chamber to discuss
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional bodies in combating the international
terrorist threat.

We are particularly grateful to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his briefing, which provided
us with important information. We also extend our
thanks to the other speakers here today for their
informative briefings.

Terrorism is a latent threat with cruel and inhuman
effects that can destabilize international peace and
security. The problems of foreign terrorist fighters and
their return home, radicalization, recruitment through
the Internet and the financing of terrorist activities
continue to pose a terrible threat to the development
and well-being of our peoples. That is why it remains a
priority issue, not only for the members of the Council
but also for the various multilateral discussion forums.

Bilateral and multilateral cooperation has proven
to be key in the fight against terrorism. As a State, we
recognize the importance of cooperation with regional
and subregional bodies for the monitoring, seizure,
confiscation and recovery of assets derived from illicit
activities. Our country is actively working with the
Financial Action Task Force of Latin America on the
ongoing improvement of policies on preventing and
combating money-laundering, as well as on the recovery
of assets through the Asset Recovery Interagency
Network for the Caribbean.

In addition, in July the Dominican Republic
formalized its accession to the Egmont Group,
represented by our financial intelligence unit. These
organizations undoubtedly contribute significantly to
the creation and implementation of regulations at the
national level with regard to the development of State
capacities, the creation of tools and the implementation
of international, regional and subregional regulations.

The fight against terrorism is also a fight for
political stability and the defence of human rights,
development and prosperity. We therefore applaud
the work of regional and subregional organizations,
especially that of the Inter-American Committee
Against Terrorism, which provides the States members
of the Organization of American States with legislative
assistance in the areas of terrorism and its financing,
as well as in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), maritime and port security, cybersecurity and
tourism security.

We believe that in order to ensure the continuity
of a successful collaborative relationship, these
organizations with shared objectives should always
rely on the United Nations, international human rights
law and international humanitarian law as a point of
reference. It is imperative that these bodies observe
and abide by the resolutions of the Council and the
General Assembly, and that they work closely with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism; the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban; and
the Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings
and entities.

The Dominican Republic reaffirms its commitment
to the struggle for a world ofpeace in which our peoples
can develop within the framework of societies that are
inclusive, just, full of opportunities and respectful
of fundamental freedoms and rights. We urge the
international community, especially the members of the
Council, to continue to pool their efforts and develop
strategic alliances to eradicate terrorism in order to
build a better world for future generations and to render
honour and justice to those who have lost their lives in
these cowardly acts.

