Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): The Security Council debate on the situation in
Afghanistan is most timely, as we are seeing an upsurge of
violence in that country as war rages ever more furiously.
The international community cannot be a silent witness to
the deterioration of the situation, nor can it be unaware of
the dangerous consequences of the conflict in Afghanistan.
One glance at a map of the world is enough proof. We
would like to express our gratitude to the representatives of
the Russian Federation and to the four members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States for requesting a
meeting of the Security Council on this subject.

The delegation of Guinea-Bissau expresses its deep
concern at the scale and intensification of the fighting,
which has claimed many victims among the civilian
population and led to a new wave of refugees and displaced

 

persons. We are also dismayed at the violations of the
most fundamental human rights, particularly those of
women and young girls, who are now facing all kinds of
obstacles that prevent them from reaching their full
potential.

We note and deplore the fact that the consequences
of the war in Afghanistan are increasingly affecting
neighbouring States, directly threatening their national
interests and security. It is clear that the conflict in
Afghanistan is having a destabilizing effect throughout the
region.

The delegation of Guinea-Bissau would like to
reaffirm its commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.

We urge all parties to cease hostilities and end the
fighting. We invite them to cooperate with the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, whose tireless
efforts we applaud, to reach a comprehensive political
settlement to the conflict that is tearing the country apart
and causing great suffering to the Afghan people. The
conflict in Afghanistan cannot be settled by fighting.
National reconciliation should, most certainly, be
encouraged through negotiations among all the parties
involved, free from any outside interference. It is essential
that an immediate ceasefire be declared and conditions
created that are conducive to the formation of a
government of national union that would incorporate all
elements of the Afghan population. It is also important to
cut off the flow of arms at its source.

We call upon the parties to the conflict to respect
their obligations and to honour their commitments
regarding the security of the personnel of the United
Nations and related bodies, in particular of the
humanitarian organizations that are attempting to satisfy
the many urgent needs of the Afghan people, a people
that for several years has been suffering the torments of
a war fuelled by endless rivalry. The humanitarian
assistance provided by the United Nations and other
international and non-governmental organizations, in
highly precarious security conditions, to alleviate the
suffering of this people deserves our deepest gratitude.
But we have to point out that the effectiveness of
humanitarian assistance continues to be hindered by the
lack of a political settlement of the conflict, and to hinge
on such a settlement.

The situation in Afghanistan demands rapid and
concerted action by the international community. The

 

Security Council must be in a position to act along these
lines, taking into account all aspects of the Afghan issue
and the views of all the parties concerned.

We hope that today's debate will contribute to a
correct understanding of what is at stake, taking into better
account the serious consequences of this conflict for the
Afghan people, as well as for the countries of the region
and for international peace and security.

