Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We attach particular importance to today's
debate on the working methods of the Security Council.
The fact that it is being held in an open format for
the fifth year in a row now shows the unswerving
attention that the Council pays to Member States'
proposals on improving the procedural aspects of
the work of the Council, with the understanding that
the working methods themselves and any potential
possible modifications to them are the responsibility
of the Council itself. That is a very sensitive issue in
the context of the reform of the Council, and discussion
on that topic should not be subjected to populism. The
Council's procedures are constantly evolving, as can be
seen from the information contained in the statement
just given by the Chairman of the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions, Ambassador Jose' Filipe Moraes Cabral.

In order to improve and change the work of
the Security Council, we must seek to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of its functioning with
regard to its task of maintaining peace and security.
That is the Council's primary responsibility. In the
discussion on the Council's working methods, broader
topics have often been raised, namely, how successfully
and appropriately the Security Council manages to
cope with the tasks conferred upon it by the Charter.

We sometimes hear the Council criticized for
infringing on the prerogatives of other United Nations
organs. We share that concern. Our colleagues know
of our reservations regarding the initiatives under
discussion in the Council in terms of various topical
subjects, in particular generic issues. We believe that
the Council should focus on country-related topics
and on issues where it must and should take specific
decisions.

We also understand the concern as to whether
the Council uses Chapter VII of the Charter too
often in imposing sanctions, which have, of course,
clear humanitarian implications, to put it mildly. We
would like to underscore that the Russian Federation
is in favour of the Council using the tool of preventive
diplomacy and of its investing in measures aimed at
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. Fuller and broader
use should be made of the provisions of Chapters VI
and VII. Sanctions measures, in particular scenarios
in which force is used to settle conflicts, should only
be employed when all possibilities for the peaceful
settlement of disputes have been exhausted, the threat to
international peace and security is clear and a decision
to make use of Chapter VIII is supported as broadly as
possible by members of the Council. I repeat that all
of these are important topics, but in our view they do
not fall within the rubric of the working methods of the
Council. Of course, the fundamental provisions of the
Charter pertaining to the right of veto do not pertain to
the working methods of the Council.

In order to make the Security Council more effective
and reflective of the realities of our time, we must work
painstakingly to improve its working methods. To that
end, we have established the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions. We
commend the efforts of the Portuguese chairmanship,
under whose leadership the work of the Working Group
has taken on a new dynamism. With its specific nature,
we note that the Working Group is systematic in its work
and undertakes appropriate, constructive interaction
with all interested delegations of the Members of the
Organization.

We believe that improving the quality of the
Council's interaction with other United Nations bodies
on issues beyond its remit is a key area for improving
its working methods. A current challenge is to further
improve the effective forms and methods of dialogue
between the Security Council and the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, other
United Nations structures, regional organizations and
international partners. We must develop the practice
of holding effective consultations between members
of the Security Council and countries that contribute
troops to peacekeeping operations. We advocate a
reasonable increase in the number of open debates of
the Council, while recognizing the great importance
of closed consultations. The Arria Formula can play a
useful role in that regard.

We are convinced that the aim of improving
both the transparency and the democratic nature of
the Council would be furthered by a better division
of responsibilities of the informal leadership of
the so-called penholders. We deem unfounded the
prevailing opinion that the so-called penholders have
some kind of right to always take the floor first when
discussing relevant issues. In our opinion, that is
justified only when they are introducing draft decisions
to the Council and therefore representing them. In all
other cases, discussions should be more informal and
there should be no so-called mentoring.

In conclusion, I wish again to underscore that no
innovation to improve the transparency of the work
of the Security Council should harm its effectiveness
or decrease its efficiency. Dialogue on this important
topic requires a balanced, professional approach
without politicization of the substance of the topic
being discussed.

