Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) (interpretation from French):
First of all, allow me to express to you, Mr. President, the
appreciation of the Group of African States for your
initiative in organizing a public debate on such an
important subject, which, as current events are showing,
represents one of the major challenges facing the
international community today. This initiative alone
illustrates the steadfast dedication of your country,
Canada, to strengthening the protection and the promotion
of human rights and of international humanitarian law.

Just a few months before the advent of the third
millennium and on the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions - which also coincides with the centenary
of the first International Peace Conference of The
Hague - it is very distressing to note that civilians today
constitute the vast majority of victims of armed conflicts,
and that among those civilians, women, children and other
members of vulnerable groups are deliberately used as
priority targets by the combatants.

Given that state of affairs, it seems natural to us that
the Security Council should seek additional measures
likely to lead to an improvement of the physical and legal
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.

In taking the floor at this stage of the debate, I will
limit myself to those aspects that in my view need to be
analysed and to which we need to attach priority if, as
Members of the United Nations, we want to improve the
plight of civilian populations in armed conflicts.

At the normative level, it is important to emphasize
that, despite the specific nature of today's armed conflicts,
the international community seems to have at its disposal
a sufficient arsenal of legal instruments to protect civilian
populations. Aside from the lack of a framework, as has
been noted, to deal with displaced persons - a gap that
should be filled as quickly as possible - now seems to
be the time to stress the promotion of broad adhesion to
and the effective implementation of the rules that have
been laid down by existing instruments.

 

Greater respect for the norms can be guaranteed only
if the parties to a conflict, whoever they are and regardless
of the nature of the conflict, can no longer enjoy impunity.
To that end, everything possible must be done to bring
those guilty of massive and systematic abuses to justice for
their crimes. In this context, the establishment of the
International Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda and the statute of the International Criminal Court
are definite steps in the right direction.

But the actors in conflicts, be they inter- or intra-State,
will not really feel bound to abide by limits in waging
hostilities unless they are aware that the end does not
always justify the means and that, at the end of the day,
their military victory, their revolution or the cause they
champion will not obtain the approval or the recognition of
the international community as a whole, if on the way to
achieving their goal, they have flouted humanitarian
principles and rules.

It is in this context that the idea of finalizing a code
of conduct for the business community seems worthy of
interest to us. It is clear that the swarming that takes place
in business circles, often seen during conflicts, contributes
in one way or another to fuelling the machine that makes
women and children victims of abuses. Often in the minds
of the actors in a conflict, the image to be cultivated and
proper conduct in operations are of little importance, once
these actors are certain that control of the timber sector, of
oil wells or of diamond mines guarantees them resources
and the acquisition of weapons.

Moreover, in particular regarding the situation of
children in armed conflicts, it is urgent that everything he
done to assure them greater protection. Children are the
future of any society, and therefore there can be no
hesitation in strengthening norms promoting protection of
children, in agreeing to put an end to the use of children in
conflict situations and in accepting that they cannot be used
in military operations before the age of 18.

The African Group, for its part, hopes that the report
expected from the Secretary-General will fully take into
account the essential points of the guidelines laid down on
12 February 1999 by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the protection of children in armed
conflict.

Finally, the promotion of the security of civilians,
including the personnel of humanitarian organizations, also
depends on concrete, decisive and courageous measures
designed to halt arms flows towards zones of instability and
conflict, be they light and small-calibre weapons, more
sophisticated and heavier weapons or anti-personnel
mines.

Here, too, there is a need to draw up a code of
conduct that the arms-producing countries should impose
on themselves and see that it is respected by their
industries and corporations working in this domain. Such
measures are not at all out of reach if they are based on
a genuine political will.

Likewise, when we are aware of the zeal with which
alleged terrorists are tracked down, in every corner of the
globe, it is difficult to understand why, despite the tireless
appeals launched by the overwhelming majority of States,
nothing significant has ever been carried out at the
national level to prevent the recruitment and use of
mercenaries, which, as has been proved, contributes to the
flouting of the rules of international humanitarian law.

These are the elements that, according to the Group
of African States, deserve to be taken into account in any
effort aimed at providing greater protection to civilians
during armed conflicts.

