Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): On
September 7 last year, the heads of State of the
members of the Security Council met to exchange
views on mechanisms to strengthen the collective
security system, and they raised several concerns that
were reflected in resolution 1318 (2000). As President
De la Rua stated at that time, if the Security Council
does not fully exercise its responsibility in maintaining
international peace and security, none of the remaining
activities of the United Nations can be successfully
implemented.

Six months after that summit, your proposal, Mr.
President, to assess what has been accomplished since
then seems appropriate. We think that this evaluation
must be done at two levels. The level is stipulated in
the resolutions and presidential statements adopted by
the Council in response to the concerns raised by our
heads of State in resolution 1318 (2000). The second
level is geared toward examining the impact that those
resolutions and presidential statements have had on the
conflicts that are before the Council.

The fact that the Security Council has adopted
decisions on subjects such as the need to develop an
exit strategy for every peace-keeping operation; the
strengthening of the relationship between the Council
and troop-contributing countries; the importance of the
peace-building tasks in the integral solution of a
conflict; the creation of groups of experts to identify
the link between the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and armed conflicts in Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; the creation of the
Working Group on peacekeeping operations; and
having a greater interaction with regional and
subregional organizations, as shown by the meetings
held in February 2001 with the members of the
Political Committee of the Lusaka Agreement in the
case of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and with the Committee of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the
case of the conflicts in Sierra Leone and Guinea - all
of this allows us a positive assessment of the activity of
the Council since the adoption of resolution 1318
(2000).

However, we cannot but state our concern about
the lack of progress in adopting a resolution on Sierra
Leone that has remained in draft form for several
months. The prolongation of this situation, in a
regional framework which is deteriorating, certainly
does not contribute to the credibility of the Council.
Now, having said this, I must acknowledge the fact that
efforts have been undertaken by the United Kingdom to
overcome this difficult situation, which the Council has
been tackling without any results to date.

This assessment, however, would not be complete
if it were done in an abstract framework. The political
will of the members of the Council to take action in a
specific conflict and the support of the other Members
of the Organization are essential factors to make
operative the principles contained in those resolutions
and presidential statements and, eventually, for the
Council to be effective.

We believe that this political will is shown in
providing enough resources to finance a peace-keeping
operation; with logistical support, especially from
those countries which are in a better position to offer it;
and with the willingness to contribute with troops,
including in those operations which involve a higher
level of risk. Political will goes even beyond the
existence of appropriate financial and human resources.
It is also reflected in the willingness of the Security
Council to hold substantive consultations with the
troop-contributing countries and making more
transparent its decision-making process on the
establishment, modification or termination of the
mandate of a peace-keeping operation.

The political will of the Security Council and the
international community to assist the parties to a
conflict must be accompanied by equal political will
from those parties to find a peaceful solution to the
conflict. By way of examples of such political will, we
might cite respect for ceasefire agreements; guarantees
of the freedom of movement and reasonable guarantees
for the security of United Nations and associated
personnel and humanitarian staff; and adherence to the
commitments undertaken with respect to disarmament
and demobilization.

Since resolution 1318 (2000) was adopted, there
have been two specific cases in Africa demonstrating
that the role of the Security Council can be effective
only when the Council has the political will to act and
the parties show the political will to resolve the
conflict. In the case of Eritrea and Ethiopia, on the one
hand, both parties respected the ceasefire agreement
and cooperated with the United Nations while, on the
other, the international community contributed enough
troops and resources. These two factors allowed the
successful deployment of the 4,200 troops of the

Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the political will of
the parties to implement the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement seemed to be coming together at the
meetings held with the Security Council in February
2001, opening the way to the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which had been authorized a
year earlier but had been paralysed by the parties' lack
of will.

Any debate on the mechanisms to strengthen the
collective security system established in the Charter
must include the issue of humanitarian intervention.
The question is: Can the Security Council remain
inactive when serious and systematic violations of
human rights are committed within the borders of a
State, while at the same time it and the Organization as
a whole advocate the defence of those very rights and
freedoms? I am referring to cases of extreme violations
of human rights. As President De la Rua said in his
statement before this Council on 7 September last year:

"There is no simple answer to this question,
because it is linked to values such as the
sovereignty of States and to the principle of non-
intervention.

"We believe that the principle of non-
intervention must be respected [because it is the
very foundation of the relationships among
independent States], but at the same time we
believe that a complementary value should be
added: the principle of non-indifference."
(S/PV4194, p. 6)

Just as there is a chapter devoted to lessons
learned in peacekeeping operations, we believe that it
would be useful for the Security Council to make a
periodic and critical assessment of its own work. This
is a complex task because, among the criteria applied
to assessing the effectiveness of the activities of the
Council, we must take into account that political,
military, economic, social, ethnic and geographical
circumstances vary from one conflict to the other. The
lessons learned in one case cannot always be applied to
others. That is why we would consider it useful for the
Council to complement the general assessment with a
critical examination of its work on individual conflicts.

Finally, with respect to Security Council reform,
we feel that it is necessary in order to make the
Council's work more democratic, transparent,
representative and harmonized to the realities of our
time. We believe that such reform should be carried out
by consensus.

