Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
to say, Sir, what a pleasure it is to see you take up the
presidency of the Security Council and to reiterate to
you the full support of my delegation.

The choice of the theme of security sector reform
(SSR) clearly demonstrates the relevance of this
issue that has become central to the peacekeeping
and international security architecture. I should like
to take this opportunity to express my satisfaction at
the forthcoming adoption of the draft resolution on
this matter, which clearly illustrates the Council's
commitment to so essential an issue.

I should also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, whose report (S/2013/480) provides abundant
information on the support of the United Nations to
SSR efforts and sheds light on what to expect in future.

The reform of the security sector seeks to
restore the effectiveness, the professionalism and the
legitimacy of the institutions in charge of providing
security to civilian populations as part of an inclusive
and participatory approach. In practice, however, its
implementation reveals a profound complexity that
is both linked to the need to convince military and
paramilitary personnel of the need to reconfigure the
security forces, as well as the need to mobilize various
types of resources so that the process has a chance of
success. The success of the reform process is based on
the premise that increasing the operational capacity of
defence forces, law enforcement bodies and penal and
immigration administration must be founded on the
need to respect the rule oflaw.

Such reform also has to take into account the
emergence of transnational threats that require the
pooling of efforts of the various stakeholders involved. I
am thinking, inter alia, of such threats as the trafficking
of people, the trafficking of narcotics and weapons,
terrorism and organized transnational crime.

It is also just as important that the reform of the
security sector be firmly rooted in the triad of political
consultations, national reconciliation and social and
economic recovery.

At a time when peacekeeping missions have
completed their transformation to take on a
multidimensional character, it is more important than
ever to incorporate the reform of the security sector
in a sustainable process with a particular focus on the
prevention of conflicts.

It is for all the reasons I have just outlined that the
delegation of Senegal is happy to embrace the statement
of the Secretary-General in the summary to his report
that "the viability of security sector reform efforts
depends on the political environment in which reform
is carried out."

Furthermore, I welcome the significant
contribution of the United Nations to national efforts
at security sector reform, which is a fundamental
pillar essential to development. The establishment of a
special inter-agency SSR Task Force in support of the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission is a positive response to the need to
coordinate in a harmonious way the activity of various
stakeholders.

The establishment of partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations such as the
African Union, as well as subregional organizations,
Member States and civil society, also contributes to
translating into practice the kind of comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated approach that we all call for.

It seems to me that that is the very thrust of the
proposed fundamental principles that were suggested
by the Secretary-General, principles to which the
delegation of Senegal fully subscribes. Their aim is to
do away with insufficient harmonization and to orient
the various interventions on the basis of priorities
defined by States in post-conflict situations.

I should also like to welcome the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, adopted by the Group of
Seven Plus, which seeks to deal with the deep-rooted
causes of conflicts.

The advances we have just outlined are positive,
but to be consolidated they need the Security
Council to closely involve the States concerned when
elaborating the mandates for peacekeeping operations
or special political missions when dealing with SSR.
Furthermore, the viability of funding for the reform
process as well as the relative failure related to activities
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) remain important issues that need to be taken
into consideration.

In conclusion, Senegal, would like to reiterate its
commitment to elevating the reform of the security
sector to the status ofa major pillar in the prevention of
the resurgence of conflicts and an essential foundation
of development.

Faithful to our tradition as a country that has
contributed to maintaining international peace and
security ever since we achieved our international
sovereignty, my country will continue fully to
support, responsibly of course, all initiatives aimed at
peacebuilding.

