Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to also offer our thanks to your predecessor,
His Excellency the Permanent Representative of
Uganda, for his distinguished efforts during his
presidency in the month of July. Our sincere
congratulations and appreciation also go to Mr. Ad
Melkert as he assumes the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq and to
the team of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in Iraq and in New York, for their
tireless work in assisting the Government and the
people of Iraq.

Having reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on UNAMI's work in Iraq (S/2009/393), my
delegation would like to present the following
comments.

I turn first to political and security matters. The
date 30 June 2009 represented a historic day for the
Iraqi people, as it witnessed the withdrawal of United
States forces from Iraqi cities in accordance with the
Status of Forces Agreement signed by the Governments
of the Republic of Iraq and the United States of
America. Under that agreement, Iraqi forces assumed
command of 150 military bases formerly under
American control in various parts of Iraq.

The withdrawal of United States forces from Iraqi
cities initiates a new stage in Iraqi-United States
relations, which will focus on economic, cultural and
social areas rather than solely on political and security
issues, thereby building a strategic partnership
contributing to the accomplishment of mutual interests.

The day 25 July 2009 witnessed the elections to
the Kurdistan parliament as well as the election of the
President of the Kurdistan region, Mr. Massoud
Barzani, which took place in an atmosphere of
transparency in the presence of international observers.
These elections followed the provincial elections held
earlier in the rest of the country, indicating the unity of
the Iraqi provinces in their commitment to the
democratic process and the expression of the Iraqi
people's will to choose their representatives.

Iraq today is a democratic State that respects
freedoms and is governed by a constitution. The
principle of peaceful rotation of power forms the basis
of an open and transparent political process. All Iraqi
political forces operate within that process and rely on
constructive dialogue to reach all important
agreements, including on the key issues of building a
federal system, legislation on the distribution of natural
resources, constitutional amendments and internally
disputed borders. We are confident that this
cooperation will lead to a political settlement resolving
most of these issues and will preserve the gains
achieved through the political process.

The security situation in Iraq has continued to
improve since Iraqi security forces received security
responsibility from the American forces. The abilities
of the Iraqi forces in Iraqi cities were tested for the
first time during the annual pilgrimage of millions of
visitors from around the country to the Khadhimain
shrine in Baghdad, which took place peacefully and
without incident. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank the United States Government and
the American troops, as well as the Governments and
troops of other friendly countries, for their ongoing
efforts and commitment to promoting security and
democracy in Iraq.

The improved security situation has facilitated
the Iraqi Government's central plan encouraging the
return of displaced Iraqis to their country. Mr. L. Craig
Johnstone, United Nations Deputy High Commissioner
for Refugees, recently stated that "the security in Iraq
is encouraging the return of Iraqi refugees to their
country". During the past few months, 1,030 Iraqi
refugees from Syria, 449 from Jordan, 980 from Egypt,
111 from Yemen and 506 from Lebanon have returned
to Iraq.
The Iraqi people's enjoyment of their
constitutional rights is fundamental to the ongoing
political process. In this context, the Ministry of
Interior has dismissed more than 60,000 employees
accused of corruption and has decided to try 40 police
officers accused of violations in prisons.

On 2 August 2009, the Iraqi Prime Minister,
Mr. Nuri al-Maliki, began a visit to Kurdistan, where
he met with both Iraqi President Jalal Talabani and the
President of the Kurdistan region, Mr. Massoud
Barzani, to work together to resolve the pending issues
between the central Iraqi Government and the
Kurdistan region.

I turn now to social and economic issues. With
the direct sponsorship of the Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri
al-Maliki, on 29 June 2009 the Iraqi Government
received the first round of offers for service contracts
for Iraq's oil and gas fields. The Prime Minister
stressed that the Government will grant all possible
facilities to companies that win the initial oil licenses.
This first round represents a significant turn in the
reconstruction process. An open and transparent
investment of oil resources will serve the interests of
the Iraqi people after decades of ineffective oil
investment policies under the former regime. Oil
exports increased to 1.923 million barrels a day during
the month of June 2009. The Iraqi Government is
working to increase oil exports to 2.15 million barrels a
day in 2010.

As part of the Iraqi Government's ongoing efforts
for the reconstruction of Iraq, the Iraqi Council of
Ministers has approved a comprehensive plan to
reconstruct the service sector and infrastructure with an
estimated budget of approximately $65 billion. Under
this plan, the housing sector will be allocated 38 per
cent of the budget, the agricultural sector 27 per cent,
the transportation sector 14.2 per cent, the water and
sanitation sector 8.4 per cent, the education sector
8.5 per cent, the health sector 5.7 per cent and the
communications sector 0.9 per cent.

The Iraqi Government and the World Health
Organization have organized a working group on the
role of the media in responding to the pandemic of
swine flu (HlNl). A budget of approximately
$30 million has been allocated to prevent the spread of
this pandemic.

I now turn to regional and international matters.
Within the framework of regional and international
openness, there have recently been several high-level
visits to Iraq, including the following: Mr. Jonas Gahr

Store, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, on
29 June 2009; French Prime Minister Francois Fillon
on 1 July 2009 to sign a number of memorandums of
understanding related to issues of mutual interest to
Iraq and France; United States Vice-President Joseph
Biden on the 2 July 2009 for consultations on the
implementation of bilateral agreements; Mr. Luis
Amado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Portugal, on
7 July 2009; and the United States Secretary of
Defense, Mr. Robert Gates, on 28 July 2009 to discuss
the withdrawal of United States forces and security
coordination with the Iraqi forces.

In return, the Iraqi Vice-President, Mr. Tariq
Al-Hashimi, headed a delegation to the Non-Aligned
Movement summit held in Sharm el-Sheikh on 15 and
16 July 2009. Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki visited
New York on 22 July 2009 to meet with Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. He also visited Washington on
22 July to meet with United States President Barack
Obama to discuss the development of bilateral
relations. Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs Hoshyar
Zebari visited Egypt in July and signed, together with
the Egyptian Foreign Minister, a memorandum of
bilateral cooperation and strategic dialogue on 11 July.
In addition, His Excellency Mr. Zebari visited New
York to meet with the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council from 12 to 16 July
and also visited Washington to meet with United States
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

During their meetings with the Secretary-General
in July, both Iraq's Prime Minister and its Minister for
Foreign Affairs stressed that Iraq no longer constitutes
a threat to international peace and security and that it
has fulfilled many of the international obligations
imposed on it since 1990.

On 25 June, within the framework of Iraq's
efforts to resolve the pending issues with Kuwait, Iraq
delivered 24 boxes containing old Kuwaiti currency,
postage stamps and traveller's cheques belonging to
the Kuwaiti Central Bank. The Prime Minister of Iraq,
Mr. Nuri a1-Maliki, has extended an invitation to
Mr. Ibrahim al-Shaheen, President of the Kuwaiti
Committee for Missing Persons and Prisoners of War
Affairs, and his team to visit Iraq in order to finalize
measures related to finding the remains of missing
Kuwaitis.
In paragraph 67 of his report to the Security
Council on the review of resolutions pertaining

specifically to Iraq (S/2009/385), the Secretary-
General states:

"It is important to recognize that the Iraq of today
is very different from Iraq prior to 2003. It is my
hope that the Security Council will consider this
report with a view to taking appropriate decisions
that would help Iraq to fulfil its outstanding
obligations in a timely manner."

On that basis, the Government of my country hopes
that the Security Council will shoulder its duty and
enable Iraq to restore its international standing to that
which it held prior to the adoption of Security Council
resolutions starting with resolution 661 (1990).
In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for the members of the
Security Council and for the UNAMI team in Iraq and
at the United Nations, as well as for the support
provided by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ad Melkert, at the request of
the Iraqi Government and on the basis of mutually
agreed mechanisms.

