Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa would
like to welcome High Representative Baroness Ashton
to the Security Council and thank her for her briefing
on the European Union's (EU) cooperation with the
United Nations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in the area of
peace and security is a major priority for South Africa.
We welcome all efforts in that regard.

We have noted all the areas of cooperation that
Baroness Ashton mentioned in her briefing today.
South Africa has had an opportunity to share its
positions on many of those issues. As a strategic
partner of the European Union, South Africa
acknowledges and welcomes the EU's significant and
steadfast contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We are of the view that multilateralism is
strengthened through enhanced cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations makes provision for regional
arrangements in the maintenance of international peace
and security. The role of the European Union and the
African Union (AU) in that regard is testimony to the
foresight of the crafters of the Charter, who envisaged
such a role for regional bodies.

Multilateralism will also be strengthened through
enhanced cooperation among various regional
organizations. In that regard, we again acknowledge
and value the strong cooperative relationship between
the African Union and the European Union.

Each regional organization is unique and the
challenges they face in addressing international peace
and security differ. Cooperation with the United
11-22784
Nations should therefore take on characteristics that
reflect its own priorities and comparative advantages.

The 2008 report of the African Union-United
Nations panel on modalities for support to African
Union peacekeeping operations, also known as the
Prodi report, stated that

"There is a need to reaffirm the collective
responsibility for global peace and security in
order to reflect changes that have taken place in
recent years. . . . there is a growing anomalous
and undesirable trend in which organizations
lacking the necessary capabilities have been left
to bear the brunt in terms of providing the
international community's initial response, while
others more capable have not engaged. This
inversion of responsibility is generating a trend of
benign neglect in which interests rather than
capabilities prevail." (S/2008/813, para. 11)

The report further notes, in the following
paragraph, that the complexity of recent and ongoing
conflicts in which Africa has intervened to resolve
creates demands that are out of all proportion to the
availability of resources to address them.

We have witnessed, particularly over the past
decade, that regional organizations have acted when
the Security Council has been unable or unwilling to
act in particular circumstances.

The African Union, for its part, has been
proactive in taking the lead in conflict prevention,
peacebuilding and peacekeeping in countries such as
Burundi, the Sudan and Somalia. Despite the strong
political will to establish peace and security throughout
the African continent, the AU continues to face
enormous resource constraints. In this regard, we
commend the role that the European Union is playing
in meeting these challenges, including through the
establishment of the African Peace Facility to support
peace-support operations mandated by the African
Union.

Meeting in Tripoli in November 2010 on the
occasion of the third Africa-EU Summit, leaders of the
AU and the EU recognized the need for more concerted
action between the AU, the EU and the United Nations
to move the process of implementation of the
recommendations of the Prodi panel and subsequent
reports of the Secretary-General forward. In this
regard, the Summit stressed the importance of follow-
11-22784

up to the Prodi report especially on attaining
predictable, sustainable and flexible funding for
African peace-support efforts. Africa and the EU also
committed to strengthening dialogue and cooperation
with the United Nations to address global threats to
peace and security, both in terms of conflict areas as
well as in thematic areas, such as terrorism and the
protection of civilians.

South Africa will continue to promote effective
multilateralism by working towards enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the European Union. In this
regard, we look forward to working with all our
partners in the Security Council to achieve this aim.

