Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): We thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the humanitarian
programme in Iraq. This report provides a valuable and
detailed, albeit saddening, assessment of the implementation
of this programme, as well as of the work of the parties
involved. We also thank the Secretary-General for the
report by the group of oil experts. The introductory remarks
by the Secretary-General indeed said it all and were most
welcome - especially his remarks with regard to children.
We also take this opportunity to welcome the presence in
our midst of Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Sevan.

Indeed, the oil-for-food programme was not designed
to meet all the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people, but
neither was it meant to maximize human suffering in that
country. It is clear that the programme's effectiveness and
potential positive impact are severely restrained by the
factors elaborated on in the report, most of which can be
corrected with the necessary political will.

I shall start with the grim conclusion of the oil experts
that the lamentable state of the Iraqi oil industry has not
improved, and that the decline in the condition of all
sectors continues. In his remarks earlier, the Ambassador of
Ukraine commented on the responsibility of the Iraqi
Government as well as that of the members of the Council.
We share those Views. While the Government of Iraq bears
its own responsibilities, we are seriously concerned about
the apparent lack of will on the part of the Council to take
proactive steps to prevent a potential massive loss of life
and environmental disaster. The Secretary-General already
recommended in October last year that the allocation for oil
spare parts and equipment be increased, but six months
later it is still not certain that we will heed the warnings.
The state of the Iraqi oil industry was known to us even
before the findings of the oil experts. In these
circumstances, it is not surprising that the Government of
Iraq is to scale down its production and export of oil.
Long-term damage to the oil industry of Iraq, as mentioned
in the report, can only do permanent damage to the welfare
of the Iraqi people.

Therefore it is imperative that long-term infrastructure
requirements and investment needs are indeed addressed,
for only the revival of the Iraq economy can meet the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. An Iraq whose
social and economic fabric has been destroyed will not only
affect the Iraqi people, but will also not serve the interests
of its neighbours.

The United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
representative in Baghdad has recently again confirmed
UNICEF's findings of last year on how children in Iraq
have been disproportionately affected by the sanctions
regime. This situation continues to deteriorate and could
result in an irreversible breakdown of the social, cultural
and economic fabric. Central to this issue and hampering
the effectiveness of the programme is the matter of holds
and delayed deliveries. The high number of holds on and
delays affecting individual contracts is a matter that
certainly needs to be reviewed.

This report again reveals the profoundly negative
effect holds have on sectors crucial to the most vulnerable
groups, such as children. It is particularly alarming that
little or no improvement has occurred in sectors such as
water, sanitation and electricity. For example, the progress
recorded as a result of the arrival of medical supplies has
been compromised by the very high death rate resulting
from acute respiratory disease, as cited in paragraph 138
of the report. Among those severely affected by acute
respiratory diseases are children. Even more frightening,
only one out of 10 children is being correctly treated,
only 9 per cent of pneumonia cases are correctly treated
and only 4 per cent of children are systematically checked
for danger signs. One can therefore ask, are there no
more children in Iraq today? Is everyone considered an
adult?

Truly, the images coming out of Iraq regarding the
situation of children are disheartening. According to
UNICEF, unacceptably high mortality and morbidity rates
persist.

Not long ago many of us might have seen a
programme entitled Cry Freetown, which was about
children in Sierra Leone. Having spoken to many of my
colleagues privately, I know that we were all touched by
what we saw. Last night on ITN another equally sad
programme was shown, this time about Iraqi children.
The messages regarding those children cannot but touch
everybody. One does not need to be a mother or a father
for one's heart to bleed at what the Iraqi children are
going through; one needs only to be human. We cannot
use political concerns to address humanitarian needs. We
therefore look forward to the comments by Ms. Bellamy,
as requested by the delegation of Jamaica.

We support the recommendations proposed by the
Secretary-General to address this matter. In particular we
support looking into an expanded role for the observation
mechanism. I believe, as do some who spoke before me,

 

that indeed it is time for an impact assessment of these
sanctions.

As far back as 1997, it became clear that the
programme as constituted could not prevent the continued
deterioration of the health and nutritional well-being of the
Iraqi people. My delegation welcomes the progress
achieved in certain areas, such as the approval of the lists
of foodstuffs and educational items. We trust that the lists
of pharmaceutical and medical supplies, as well as those for
basic medical and agricultural equipment, will be approved
soon and that all of them will be reviewed regularly to
allow for expansion. However, we also note the references
to the number of instances where the sanctions Committee
failed to reach consensus on matters vital to the
administration of the programme. My delegation supports
the Secretary-General in his call for efforts to be renewed
to resolve the outstanding issues. We further welcome the
recommendations to the Government of Iraq and the
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) aimed at
enhancing the effectiveness of the programme.

My delegation joins those who have expressed
disappointment about the inability of the Council and the
Government of Iraq to reach an agreement on arrangements
enabling Iraqi pilgrims to perform the Hajj this year. We
sincerely hope that the situation will change next year.

Finally, my delegation wishes to see the timely and
full implementation of resolution 1284 (1999). In this
regard, it is important for the Government of Iraq to resume
cooperation with the International Committee of the Red
Cross, the Tripartite Commission and the Technical
Subcommittee, as reiterated by the Council in section B of
resolution 1284 (1999). We look forward to the report of
the Secretary-General on this issue.

