The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany and Italy, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Topie (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Kastrup (Germany) and Mr. F nlci (Italy) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, dated ll June 1999, document
S/ 1999/670. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/ 1999/688, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Canada, France, Germany, Italy, the
Netherlands, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1999/243 and
S/ 1999/253, letters dated 7 and 8 March 1999, respectively,
from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent
Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council; S/l999/270, letter
dated ll March 1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General;
S/l999/263, letter dated 9 March 1999 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/ 1999/524,
letter dated 6 May 1999 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 5 May 1999 from the High
Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the
Secretary-General, and the enclosed report; and
S/ 1999/642, letter dated 3 June 1999 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter dated 3 June 1999 from the
Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) addressed to the Secretary-General,
and the enclosed report.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1999/688)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1247 (1999).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.05 pm.

