Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like first of all to congratulate you, Sir, and the
delegation of Azerbaijan on your country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
current month. I wish you great success in executing
the Council's work. I would also like to reiterate my
warm thanks to Ambassador Susan Rice and the United
States delegation on their very remarkable work at the
head of the Council for the past month, which was very
busy.

Togo welcomes today's adoption of resolution
2046 (2012) on the situation between the Sudan and
South Sudan, which stipulates urgent measures to
restore lasting peace and security to both brotherly
countries. Indeed, after several Council statements,
following the escalating violence seen recently in the
relations between the Sudan and South Sudan and the
communique on the African Union Peace and Security
Council decision ordering both countries to seek a
peaceful solution to the issues dividing them, it was
urgent that the Council adopt a firm position in the
light of that situation, which threatens peace and
security in the region.

My country believes that the various disputes
between the Sudan and South Sudan can be viably
resolved only through dialogue and negotiation. The
Security Council has just indicated exactly that path to
both countries by supporting the road map proposed by
the African Union.

Togo welcomes the decision of South Sudan to
withdraw its troops from Heglig, as it also committed
to do with regard to Abyei. My country urges the
Republic of the Sudan to do the same and to stop the
aerial bombardments. Togo urges both countries to
resume negotiations in a peaceful and calm climate
under the auspices of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel chaired by President Mbeki,
with the support of the Chairman of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

My country remains convinced that such a path of
negotiation remains the only way to achieve a lasting
settlement of such vital issues as oil, the status of
nationals of both countries, the status of the border
areas and the demarcation and the final status of Abyei.
That is why Togo once again calls on the Sudan and
South Sudan to spare no effort in abstaining from
confrontation and to undertake negotiations in good
12-32731
faith in order to resolve the issues dividing them, in
accordance with the African Union road map.

