Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): 1
would like to express my appreciation to Ethiopia for
convening today's debate, the Foreign Minister of
Afghanistan for his statement, and Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing on the
Secretary-General's most recent report, as contained in
document S/2017/783.

As the Secretary-General observed during his
first visit to Kabul, peace and security remain the
challenges to establishing stability and to ensuring
sustained development in Afghanistan. According to
the Secretary-General's most recent report, the conflict
has continued unabated throughout the country. More
than 16,290 security-related incidents were recorded
during the first eight months of the year, representing
a 3 per cent increase against the same period in 2016
and yet another unfortunate highest total ever recorded
since 2001. More than a decade after its invasion,
Afghanistan, the region and the world are not any safer.
I must reiterate once again that deteriorating security in
Afghanistan has deeper roots and cannot be addressed
solely through military build-up, as some suggest.

The Taliban and the self-proclaimed Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant - Khorasan Province continue
their heinous attacks on the civilian population. They
are reinforcing, recruiting and undertaking complex
attacks, such as the attacks on a Shia mosque in Herat
on 1 and 25 August that killed over 90 and 28 people,
respectively or the August attack in Sari Pul province
in which at least 36 people were killed. Like in Herat,
the majority of the documented casualties were Shia.

The proliferation of terrorist groups in the Afghan
territory necessitates a concerted international effort
on counter-terrorism. The world needs to deal with
this increasing threat in a comprehensive manner. The
international community needs to sustain its support
for the Afghan National Unity Government and to
help the Government in its fight against terrorism
and extremism, as well as in its efforts to address the
complex security, political, economic and development
challenges it faces.

Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting. We welcome any
achievement on the path towards an Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led peace process, leading to lasting and
comprehensive peace in the country and the region.
Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour; security in
Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security in
our borders and the region. It was in that context that
Iran welcomed and participated in both the Moscow and
the Kabul peace conferences this year, and continues
its participation in the meetings of the Heart of Asia
process as an active member.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway towards
consolidating peace and economic development
and stability in the region. The Trilateral Chabahar
agreement between Iran, India and Afghanistan and
the Khaf-Herat railway project are two major transit
projects under way. We are confident that these
projects have the capacity to change the regional
economic perspectives of Afghanistan. Such regional
infrastructure initiatives can serve as an important
path towards development and stability in Afghanistan.
We also continue our active role through mechanisms
such as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process. During
the reporting period, we restarted negotiations on
our bilateral comprehensive strategic cooperation
agreement with the Afghan Government, which aims
to improve cooperation in the areas of security, the
economy, refugees, culture and education. The first
meeting of five technical committees was convened in
Tehran to discuss all issues.

On anti-narcotics efforts, we see any increase in
narcotics as a reflection of the prevailing insecurity and
poverty. Iran is a frontline country in the war against
narcotics, we have offered alternative cultivation
and alternative livelihood plans to dissuade Afghan
farmers from cultivating opium. Stronger international
cooperation and support, and the commitment of
donors, the Afghan authorities and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime are essential to deterring
the menace ofnarcotics as a social health challenge and,
more importantly, as a major source of income for the
recruitment of extremist and terrorist groups. In that
regard, we underline the positive impact of strengthened
regional cooperation and joint responses to countering
illicit drugs and transnational organized crime.

Iran has hosted hundreds of Afghan refugees
for more than three decades. They have access to
mostly subsidized services that are equally available
to Iranians, including basic commodities and public
services. This year too, 100,000 Afghan children,
regardless of their or their parent's legal status, were
able to enrol in our schools. By the decree issued
today by the Supreme Leader, no Afghan child in Iran,
not even an illegal immigrant, should be deprived of
education, and schools must enrol them.

We also continue to participate in the work of
Tripartite Commission in order to plan for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and gradual repatriation of Afghan
refugees. Success in voluntary repatriation will depend
first and foremost on providing for the reasonable needs
of repatriated refugees in Afghanistan, and underscores
the need for more international support. Stronger
coordinated approach between the Government, donors
and the United Nations and an overall strategy for
addressing the combined needs of the displaced and
returnees are crucial in making the repatriation of
Afghan refugees more successful.

We support UNAMA and United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment of the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan. We need
to utilize the UNAMA mandate and its good offices
to strengthen national institutions and capacities in
priority areas, as requested by the Government.

