Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador
Nestor Osorio for his briefing to the Council this
morning. Allow me to take this first opportunity as a
new Council member to offer our perspective on the
various Security Council resolutions relating to Iran
and on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.

Pakistan fully supports the internationally agreed
non-proliferation goals. Pakistan is an active partner in
the several global platforms and processes that are
aimed at advancing disarmament and non-proliferation.
It is important for all States to implement in good faith
Security Council resolutions, including those relating
to the Iranian nuclear issue. On our part, we have
complied fully with the provisions of resolution 1737
(2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010), and
have filed the requisite reports with the 1737
Committee.

Over the past several years, the 1737 Committee
has undertaken several activities, including, inter alia,
the adoption of guidelines for the conduct of its work,
the preparation of implementation assistance notices
and several reports and briefings to the Member States.
Similarly, the Panel of Experts has carried out a
number of tasks to assist the Committee in carrying out
its mandate. The scope of activities undertaken by the
Committee and its Panel is vast and requires careful
examination, especially by new members of the
Security Council. We are reviewing the documentation
that has been made available to the new members
recently, and will contribute to the proceedings of the
Committee in the months ahead.

The briefings by the Committee to the Council
serve useful outreach and awareness purposes for the
larger United Nations membership. They are designed
to sensitize the larger membership about the mandate
of the Committee and the activities carried out by it
and its Panel of Experts. We take this opportunity to
underscore the need for the Council to evolve an
institutionalized mechanism to ease the transition of
new Council members into the work not only of this
body, but also of all its subsidiary bodies. We propose
that structured briefings be offered and documentation
made available in a timely manner to the new members
in order to enable them to participate meaningfully in
the proceedings and decision-making processes of the
Council and its committees. We trust that the Council
and its committees shall pursue activities in a balanced,
inclusive and consensus-based manner. We assure you,
Mr. President, and Ambassador Osorio of our
delegation's full support in those endeavours.

We have noted the Views expressed by other
Council members on the need for the publication of the
Panel's final report. We are in the process of examining
that and other reports, and shall express our Views
subsequently. At this stage, we would like to note that
the Panel has an important job in carrying out its work
consistent with its mandate and under the direction of
the Committee. As a matter of general principle, the
Panel's reports should conform to the parameters set by
the Council's resolutions and facilitate an effective and
balanced implementation of the sanctions regime. The
composition of the Panel also needs to reflect a broader
and more equitable geographic representation than is
currently the case. We hope that those considerations
will be taken into account when future reports are
prepared by them and the experts are appointed.

Sanctions regimes created by the Security
Council are, at best, a tool or a means to achieve a
larger objective. There are different perspectives on the
rationale, scope and efficacy of those regimes. Today's
briefing is, however, not the forum to debate on what
the sanctions can or cannot achieve. As far as Pakistan
is concerned, we believe that sanctions should not
become an end in themselves. They should instead be
aligned with the broader objectives of facilitating
dialogue, negotiations and the resolution of outstanding
issues. We have taken note of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) report on the implementation
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) safeguards in Iran. While noting the
programme of work between Iran and the Agency, we
trust that they will remain constructively engaged with
a View to resolving all outstanding issues.

Pakistan welcomes the recent announcement of
the resumption of talks between Iran and the P5+1
group. That is a positive sign and a step in the right
direction. In our View, dialogue and cooperation are the
best means to resolve all outstanding matters relating
to the Iranian nuclear issue. Pakistan, as a
neighbouring country, does not wish any escalation of
tension in an already volatile region. Iran is a party to
the NPT and a member of the IAEA. Accordingly, it
has rights and obligations alike. We believe that Iran
should fulfil its legal obligations while Iran's rights
should also be respected. We hope that the Committee
and Panel's work moves in the direction of facilitating
a peaceful, amicable and fair resolution of the Iranian
nuclear issue.

