Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Equatorial Guinea for convening
today's open debate on a subject that is very relevant to
international security.

Conventional weapons account for the largest
number of deaths and victims throughout the world and
perpetuate armed conflicts, while hindering security,
development and sustainable peace. All Member States
have a responsibility to promote societies free of armed
violence, because the uncontrolled proliferation of
conventional weapons in various regions of the world
poses a threat to international peace and security.

Regrettably, Africa, Latin America and the
Caribbean absorb the greatest human cost of this
problem, although we are not weapons manufacturers.
Mexico is therefore particularly concerned about
the irresponsible and uncontrolled arms trade, which
fosters illicit trafficking across borders and cause
weapons to end up in the hands of criminals.

In order to meet the challenge, it is essential to
recognize that producers, exporters, intermediaries and
recipients of weapons all have a shared responsibility.
Cooperation and multidimensional efforts at the
subregional, regional and global levels must be the
vehicle that enables us to overcome the challenge,
supported by full compliance with, and the proper
implementation of, the arms embargoes imposed by the
Council, as well as the promotion and implementation
of effective programmes and mandates on the collection
and registration of weapons.

Mexico welcomes the fact that the African Union
has developed a vision and a continental strategy to
put an end to armed violence and control the trade and
trafficking in weapons in an effort to spur development.
We in Latin America and the Caribbean have also
promoted and implemented ambitious regional and
hemispheric agreements.

For example, under the chairmanship of Mexico, the
Conference of the States Parties to the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunition, Explosives, and
Other Related Materials held last year agreed on an
innovative approach to action for its implementation
and synergies with other international instruments and
mechanisms in order to align national and regional
efforts with the overall achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.

A decisive fight against arms trafficking and
diversion must be accompanied by strategies that make
development and sustainable peace the top priorities for
States. The achievement of Agenda 2030 is particularly
visible and relevant to the issue, not only as regards
target 16.4 of the Sustainable Development Goals, on
reducing illicit arms flows and combating organized
crime, but also because the reduction of Violence is
imperative to achieving sustainable development,
complying with Agenda 2030 and saving thousands of
lives. We must forge inclusive societies with a healthy
social fabric. Many of our societies are plagued by
firearms, which groups use as tools to threaten the rule
of law and the kind of society we all want.

Mexico urges all members to take full advantage
of the proper implementation of the multilateral
instruments at our disposal in order to achieve the
universality and implementation of the Arms Trade
Treaty and revitalize the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects for the purpose of holding comprehensive
discussions on the issue and the complete cycle of
weapons, including the indivisibility of the equal and
proportional treatment of ammunition.

Within the framework of that discussion, we
reiterate our call not to combine actions taken in
response to organized crime with actions taken
in response to the fight against terrorism, as both
phenomena require dedicated and effective cooperation
efforts that are bound to differ because the two issues
are different in nature.

Mexico reiterates its support for the disarmament
agenda proposed by the Secretary-General.
Disarmament is not an end in itself but a means,
or vehicle, to achieve peace, save humankind, save
lives and save future generations, as proposed by the
Secretary-General. We note the implementation of
the multiparty voluntary fund to combat illicit arms
trafficking and the strategy aimed at young people as
agents for change in their communities.

Similarly, the concrete actions being taken in
different regions are very important - the positive
role of the regional disarmament centres stands out. As
far as the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean is concerned, its activity is indispensable
for the efforts of countries in my region, such as Mexico,
which has benefited from various activities, studies and
diagnostics for the implementation of public policies.

Economic resources that are diverted from
sustainable development to purchase weapons could
undoubtedly help our societies in a more humane and
integrated way. Sustainable peace is the collective
desire of the United Nations. Let us silence the guns
in Africa - but also in other regions that suffer from
armed violence and conflicts that are exacerbated by
the proliferation of conventional weapons.
