Mr. Kutesa (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
briefing.

The dreadful terrorist attacks around the world
have continued to highlight the need for collective and
resolute action to counter and eliminate this evolving
threat to international peace and security. We have
witnessed the indiscriminate impact of callous acts of
terrorism on victims and their families in various
countries. Terrorism is therefore a global threat.

Uganda strongly condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We reaffirm that all terrorist
acts are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation and whoever may commit them. On 11 July,
Uganda was the target of a cowardly attack by
Al-Shabaab terrorists, which resulted in the death and
injury of many people. That attack was a reminder of
the need to stand up against terrorism even more
firmly.

The United Nations has made an important
contribution to counter-terrorism efforts. It was
significant that, in September 2006, the General
Assembly adopted the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy to enhance national, regional and international
efforts to counter terrorism. It was significant because
that was the first time that States Members of the
United Nations agreed to a common strategic approach
to fighting terrorism.

We consider the activities of the three counter-
terrorism Committees valuable to the work of the
Security Council. In particular, we commend them for
their work in developing common strategies to advance
the global fight against terrorism.

In recent times, we have seen an increase in the
sophistication of terrorist networks through their
ability to exploit the benefits of information and
communication technology, as well as linkages with
the transnational criminal networks that finance their
operations. Part of the emerging sophistication
manifests itself in a symbiotic overlap of terrorist
activities with such international criminal activities as
money-laundering, human trafficking and drug
trafficking.

Our collective efforts should fundamentally aim
at denying terrorists any haven, eradicating sources of
terrorist financing, reducing State vulnerability and
enhancing emergency preparedness and response
capabilities. It is in so doing that we can preserve the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States and
ensure the safety of our citizens.

As terrorism and transnational criminal activities
thrive on the same vulnerabilities and utilize very
similar actors, it is necessary for the United Nations to
support the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures that sever the mutually reinforcing and
symbiotic relationships that exist or may emerge.

We are convinced that appropriately crafted
counter-terrorism measures that deal with fundamental
vulnerabilities, such as economic distress and weak
State structures, can effectively deprive terrorists of
havens and recruiting grounds and strengthen the
ability of States to effectively counter terrorist threats.

It is also important to give priority attention to
prevention in the fight against terrorism. We need to
ensure that our collective approach places emphasis on
building national and regional capacities and
facilitating cooperation among States. It is essential to
put greater emphasis on fostering better information-

sharing, operational planning and initiatives that
strengthen regional counter-terrorism capabilities and
cooperation.

Uganda underscores the importance of closer
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in counter-terrorism activities. We are
convinced that such cooperation is an essential and a
necessary approach to developing more effective
counter-terrorism measures.

In their collective resolve and determination to
deal with this common threat, African countries have
adopted instruments and decisions towards creating a
common framework for preventing and combating
terrorism. Members of the African Union (AU) acceded
to the provisions of the 1999 Algiers Convention as a
guiding principle in the collective quest to prevent and
combat terrorism. The AU summit held in Kampala in
July this year underscored the need for renewed efforts
and increased mobilization on the continent to combat
the scourge of terrorism. It also called on member
States to implement enhanced measures for cooperation
and coordination to boost the continent's collective
action against terrorism.

Finally, countering terrorism is in the interest of
all of us. We are convinced that by working together
we can deal with the threat of terrorism. However, in
our counter-terrorism efforts, we should demonstrate
our individual and collective resolve to decisively
prevent and combat terrorism for the peace and
security of us all.

