Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
good to see you, Mr. President, presiding over our
affairs this morning. Thank you for drawing extra
political attention to this subject by your presence.

France will later make a statement in the name of
the European Union, which the United Kingdom fully
endorses, and therefore my own statement will be brief.

We are very grateful to Dr. Peter Piot for his
useful statement and update in our debate this morning
and for the excellent work which the Joint United
Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) is doing
on this subject. As he emphasized, the work of the
United Nations system and of the wider international
community needs to be coordinated, if it is to be fully
effective. UNAIDS has a Vital role to play in this
regard, and we are pleased with its developing practical
proposals for United Nations peacekeeping forces and
other uniformed services.

It is important more generally that we have a
target to work towards on HIV/AIDS. The resolution
before us refers to the international target to reduce the
rate of new HIV infections in the 15- to 24-year-old
range by 25 per cent by the year 2010. This is a
realistic and an achievable goal. But, as the Secretary-
General made clear in his report to the Millennium
Assembly, it will require international action to be
better coordinated and intensified across the board.

It is Vital to see HIV/AIDS as more than just a
public health issue. It is a global crisis which, by
creating environments in which political and ethnic
tensions can worsen, will contribute to the proliferation
of armed conflict. We are now starting to recognize
that security conditions have a direct impact on the
spread of AIDS. For that reason, the Security Council
must continue to focus on AIDS in the peacekeeping
context as part of its primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security.
Developing a more professional approach to the
prevention of conflicts is, in the AIDS context and
more widely, vitally important.

The draft resolution focuses on the link between
the spread of HIV/AIDS and peacekeeping. That is not
to denigrate peacekeepers as agents of the Virus. But
the Council must always recognize that peacekeepers
do not operate in isolation from the local community.
The draft resolution therefore rightly highlights the
importance of peacekeepers from all countries being
made aware of the risks, both to themselves and to
others, of HIV/AIDS.

We welcome the initiatives that have been taken
in the Security Council this year and pay tribute to the
leadership of the United States, and particularly of
Ambassador Holbrooke in this regard. But the Council
does not have the main responsibility in tackling the
HIV/AIDS pandemic. All of our delegations must work
together in the General Assembly and in the Economic
and Social Council to take concrete steps that will
make a difference. The United Kingdom looks forward
to playing a leading role in that vitally important
debate.

