Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
ask you, Mr. President, please to convey the United
Kingdom's condolences to the Government and the
people of the Russian Federation on the double air
disaster that you suffered yesterday.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of the
Netherlands on behalf of the European Union.

I want to start by thanking Jean Arnault, not only
for what I found a very coherent briefing but also for
the enormous efforts that his team and he himself have
made. We are all focused this morning in particular on
the election process, and I think that the high level of
voter registration represents, if nothing else, a huge
technical achievement by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and by
Afghan and international election personnel, who have
displayed considerable courage and skill in achieving
this result.

But it is more than just a technical achievement:
it is a major political development. It is a
demonstration of the remarkable determination of the
Afghan people to exercise their new democratic rights.
It is not perfect, but it suggests that the time of the men
of violence is coming to an end. There is now a
prospect for channelling Afghanistan's development
through peaceful political channels. It is eloquent, I
think, that the Taliban and other undemocratic forces
are, as we have heard this morning, specifically
targeting the electoral process. They know that
successful elections will be their defeat.

The Istanbul NATO summit in June agreed to the
expansion of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF); the subsequent agreement to deploy
resources to assist the Afghans to provide security for
the electoral process is important. But those resources
have to be deployed as quickly as possible. It is equally
important that the momentum behind ISAF expansion
not be lost and that ISAF now push on into the west of
the country.

But Ambassador Akram is not wrong to focus on
the situation in the south and the west of the country in
particular. We are concerned at the lack of political
freedoms there. It is not a question, I think, of asking
some to do more than others, but of asking everyone -
the international community, including Afghanistan's
neighbours - to do even more to support Afghanistan
in ensuring that elections are free from intimidation
and violence. And I think that Mr. Arnault will agree
that it is important to use the remaining days before 9
October to ensure that voter turnout will be high on
9 October among Afghan refugees in Iran and Pakistan
as well as inside Afghanistan.

But as many speakers before me have pointed
out, promising though electoral registration has been,
the security situation remains fragile and very
troubling. Beyond the elections, there will still be
security challenges. That emphasizes the importance of

building capacity to enable Afghans to provide for their
own security, even if in the meantime it continues to
fall to the international community to provide the
necessary security assistance through ISAF and its
provincial reconstruction teams, as well as through
ongoing coalition activity. So we need to focus also on
building the criminal justice system and boosting the
delivery of justice and the rule of law. In other words,
there are long-term challenges as well as the short-term
one of 9 October.

One of those challenges is progress on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
Progress has been slow but, as we have heard this
morning, there is solid progress to report in the context
of the difficult circumstances on the ground. The
United Kingdom sees it as vital that the promises or
undertakings given by presidential election candidates
to disarm or distance themselves from operational
control of militia forces are upheld. We think that the
period between presidential and parliamentary
elections offers a particular opportunity to make rapid
advances on DDR. It is important that that opportunity
should be seized. The international community must
continue to identify ways to offer effective support in
this area.

Given our role as lead nation, the United
Kingdom knows, perhaps better than others around this
table, just how big another long-term challenge is: that
of counter-narcotics. We continue to attach the highest
priority to tackling drugs in Afghanistan. As the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/634) makes clear,
tackling the problem is a daunting challenge. There are
no shortcuts to success in what is a hugely complex
and long-term problem. If the challenge is to be met,
we and others in the international community will need
to continue to work together. The building blocks are in
place, but we need to consolidate our activity on the
ground; of course, increased security across
Afghanistan and tackling corrupting will be key.

I wanted to close with a word on human rights,
which are a cause for concern. We share the Secretary-
General's assessment, and we call on the Afghan
Government to consider seriously the forthcoming
report by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on human rights
Violations and on transitional justice.

We see improvements in human rights as
inextricably linked to further improvements in security
and governance. Once again, concerted international
support for the rebuilding of national security and
police institutions, together with further disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR), will be vital
in this respect. But the Afghan Government can also do
more, including by stopping the appointment of known
human rights violators to Government posts.

