Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the holding of this quarterly open
debate and thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Peru is following with deep concern the
developments related to the question of Palestine.
We can only deplore the persistent hostile climate
and the unacceptable and unsustainable stalling of
the peace process. We note with alarm the serious
and ongoing deterioration of security conditions for
millions of Palestinians and Israelis, as evidenced in
the indiscriminate attacks against civilians by Hamas
and the clearly disproportionate Israeli responses.

Meanwhile, the humanitarian situation is
worsening on the ground, where the lack of basic goods
and services is compounded by the isolation to which
millions of Palestinians are subjected. This is an ideal
scenario for those who promote violence and extremism
and for creating a feeling of oppression and frustration.

Under these circumstances, we wish to reaffirm
our commitment to the only solution that we consider
viable and consistent with international law: the two-
State solution, with internationally recognized and
secure borders, to be negotiated directly between
Israel and Palestine on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, which must lead to the determination of the
final status of Jerusalem, in compliance with United
Nations resolutions.

To that end, we consider it vital to refrain from all
actions that undermine the necessary confidence and to
undertake instead genuine steps aimed at reconciliation
and commitment, beginning with a renewed willingness
to engage in ongoing dialogue.

We strongly deplore the intensification of
settlement, demolition and eviction practices that
have been observed in the occupied Palestinian
territories, which are in violation of the provisions of
various Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016). We are especially concerned over the possible
demolition of a structures in Khan Al-Ahmar, which
would have a very negative political impact.

We also deem it imperative to reject hate speech,
anti-Semitism and all forms of discrimination. In any
society, ethnic, cultural and religious diversity must be
appreciated as a value, and never as a threat. Similarly,
we categorically condemn Hamas's use of violence and
terrorist practices. We stress also the need to alleviate
the tragic humanitarian situation that civilians in Gaza
are facing. We urge continuity in infrastructure and
development projects, and that further efforts be made
to enable the Palestinian Authority to regain effective
control of the area and to ensure the provision of stable
and predictable funding to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

We commend the willingness shown by many
countries to use their good offices, particularly those
that have historically participated in this process. We
underscore the work of the Quartet and the Arab Peace
Initiative and encourage them to continue with their
efforts. In that regard, we emphasize that the Council
must show itself able to reach a minimum consensus
in order to make a decision and outline the steps to
be taken, particularly in relation to the resumption of
political dialogue, in line with the lofty responsibilities
that the international community has conferred upon it.

I want to very briefly comment on the situation
in Yemen, given that it remains highly volatile, which
continues to impact civilians and seriously jeopardizes
the agreements reached in Sweden. Those agreements
are a turning point in the bloody and prolonged conflict
in Yemen, and under no circumstances can potential
delays or breaches serve as justification to abandon
the commitments made. We underline the importance
of preserving the unity of the Council around its
responsibility to protect the people of Yemen and its
remaining attentive to the proper implementation of
the agreement between the Yemeni parties and the
provisions of its resolutions 2451 (2018) and 2452
(2019).

I will conclude by reiterating our appeal to the
Yemeni parties and the various actors involved in
the conflict to reaffirm their commitment to the
inclusive political solution that the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General has been advocating and to address
the difficulties arising in the context of that complex
process with prudence and in good faith.

