Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We would like to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
the Police Commissioners ofthe United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS), the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur,
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their briefings. Today,
more than 13,000 United Nations peacekeeping police
officers are deployed in 13 peacekeeping operations
and five special political missions. They perform their
duties with devotion in trying, complex situations.
China commends their spirit of dedication and sacrifice.

The international situation is currently undergoing
profound changes. Conflicts and disputes are growing
more diverse. The context for United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the tasks they set out
to achieve are increasingly complex. United Nations
peacekeeping police mandates are steadily increasing.
It is time for the international community to consider
in depth the circumstances facing peacekeeping police,
their tasks and a way forward by exploring ways and
means of improving their work. China would like to
share its perspective on the topic as follows.

First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the three peacekeeping
principles - the host country's consent, impartiality and
the non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate - are the cornerstone of peacekeeping
operations. They provide an important safeguard for
effective police work. It is necessary to fully respect the
sovereignty of host countries, carefully listen to their
views and communicate better with them over matters
such as the duration of deployment and adjustments to
mandates. When, as a result of changed circumstances,
the host country demands an exit of United Nations
peacekeeping police, the Secretariat should draw up a
clear exit time frame under the political guidance of the
Security Council in order to avoid indefinite stays in
the host country.

Secondly, any peacekeeping police mandate must
be unambiguous, feasible and focused. Peacekeeping
police components are confronted with a multiplicity
of complex factors in the field with everchanging
circumstances. The design of any given police
mandate should consider in an integrated manner the
host country's priority needs and prevailing realities,
the capacity of police-contributing countries (PCCs)
and other factors, making sure that their mandate is
unambiguous, highly actionable and subject to timely
assessment in the light of changing demands so that
priorities and focuses may be adjusted continuously in
order to serve the core objectives of the peacekeeping
operation concerned.

Thirdly, the Secretariat should comprehensively
consider the new context and challenges confronting
peacekeeping police work by looking at the big picture
and the long-term horizon, stay focused on critical
processes, improve such work in a systematic manner
and make police work more effective and resilient in
the face of complexities. The Secretariat should pay
particular attention to strengthening the emergency
command capacities of the missions and boost
coordination among the police, civilian and military
components. It should elaborate on security rules
for peacekeeping police, coordinate with PCCs and
host countries, improve early warning capacities and
internal information sharing and ensure adequate safety
measures and the availability of medical equipment and
supplies. The aim is to raise the security level across
the board.

Fourthly, the role of PCCs should be accorded due
importance. PCCs and troop-contributing countries
(TCCs) are the main players undertaking peacekeeping
operations. The long-term development of United
Nations peacekeeping operations depends on the efforts
of PCCs and TCCs. Their contributions and sacrifices
must be acknowledged and respected. A failure to do so
would be detrimental to the long-term development of
peacekeeping operations. Communications between the
Security Council and the Secretariat, on one hand, and
PCCs and TCCs, on the other, should be strengthened.
The role of the General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations should be fully leveraged
and PCCs and TCCs should be given a greater voice.

China is the largest PCC for peacekeeping
operations among the permanent members of the
Security Council. China's peacekeeping police,
who are scrupulously devoted to their duties, have
given an outstanding account of themselves and have
received broad accolades from various parties. China
started contributing police officers to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in 2000. Since then, we have
sent close to 2,500 police officers to mission areas such
as Timor-Leste, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan,
Kosovo and Haiti. As we speak, more than 170 Chinese
peacekeeping police officers are operating in the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, UNMISS
and other missions. In September 2015, China's
President, Mr. Xi Jinping, announced several major
initiatives on China's part to support United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including, inter alia, taking
the lead on creating a standby formed police unit and
providing training for peacekeeping police of other
countries. Currently, all of our commitments are being
honoured. China is ready to work with the international
community to contribute positively to the development
of United Nations peacekeeping police and to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

