Mr. Fulci (Italy): Since January 1991, Somalia has
been a country without a Government, without laws,
without public order or public services, and without any
food security. It has become a country in which, alas, life
itself has come to be of little value. The country
disintegrated before the very eyes of the international
community, while a new type of threat to international
peace and security was ushered in, a threat to which the
United Nations has so far been unable to respond. In fact,
a number of missions, in particular the United Nations
Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II), were sent to
Somalia to restore peace, but to no avail.

In the vacuum left, Somali civil society has struggled
to reorganize at the local level on both the ancient and the
new foundations of the communities and on the
foundation of the hard work and heavy sacrifices of its
people, particularly those of women. Luckily, elders have
also continued to be a source of legitimate authority. In
this regard, I believe that the ingenuity and the resilience
of the Somali people deserve to be recognized and
appreciated. These qualities do not, however, supplant the
need for a unified State with legitimate central authority
and a federal system granting local communities broad
powers of self-government.

In the dark years, Italy has not wavered in its
commitment to the rebirth of Somalia. Through our
contribution to the United Nations missions and
throughout our two years as a member of this body, we
have tried again and again to find workable solutions to
the crisis. Above all, we have tried very hard to keep
alive the flame of hope for and trust in a better future for
Somalia.

Since leaving the Council, we have been pleased to
note that it continues to monitor closely the situation in
Somalia. Today's debate is a further confirmation of this.
We are indeed very grateful to the Council President,
Ambassador Monteiro of Portugal, for calling this public
meeting. We hope the meeting will be publicized in
Somalia through the media and through every other
possible means, so that the Somali people may know
directly and personally that the international community
has not forgotten them and cares about their plight.

Developments in Somalia in recent months seem
somewhat more encouraging. As has been said repeatedly

 

around this table, the Nairobi understanding of 15 October,
the Sodere agreement of 3 January and the Mogadishu
meeting of 20 January testify to the efforts of several
countries and also to the renewed focus of the Somali
factions on the need for peace. We welcome the
constructive involvement of the Organization of African
Unity, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the League of Arab States - particularly Egypt - as
well as the more active role played by the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and the contacts its
representatives have made with the Somali leaders in
Mogadishu. Now more than ever, we believe that all these
efforts must be coordinated and intensified.

The National Salvation Council, which was established
by the Sodere agreements, met for the first time from 4 to
8 April in Mogadishu. As has already been noted here,
unfortunately, not all factions attended the meeting, nor did
Hussein Aidid or Egal of Hargeisa. However, the decisions
made at that meeting, particularly the one to convene a
National Conference, seem to move in the right direction.
To be successful, the national conference for which we
hope should be comprehensive, fully reflecting the inclusive
approach that was the hallmark of the original Sodere
agreements.

Nobody can afford to repeat past mistakes and past
absences. Unlike previous gatherings, the forthcoming
Conference must indeed be attended by all the main faction
leaders, as well as by representatives of Somali civil
society. It is indeed high time that all sides, particularly the
National Salvation Council and Hussein Aidid, took one
step back and showed some flexibility so as to reach a
pragmatic agreement on a new institutional arrangement.

Some parties are reportedly considering the possibility
of constituting another provisional government, even before
a comprehensive agreement has been reached. Frankly, this
hypothesis raises concern, since the presence of two self-
appointed governments with conflicting claims to legitimacy
could only increase tensions rather than alleviate them.

In what we consider to be a positive development, the
National Salvation Council instead endorsed the contacts
under way to pacify Mogadishu and widen the national
reconciliation process. Furthermore, we were pleased to
learn that for the second time since the 20 January meeting
arranged by Ambassador Cassini, Aidid and Ali Mahdi
Mohamed met again on 10 April last. More meetings must
follow, because the only way to resolve problems is
through talks and personal contacts, not through
confrontation and, above all, not through continued distrust.
Needless to say, Osman Atto must also join in these
meetings. In the end, when the story of this period of
Somali history is written, these men should be proud to
be remembered as peacemakers and not as warmongers.

Italy is working very closely with two neighbours of
Somalia, Ethiopia and Kenya, to make a tripartite mission
to Mogadishu in the near future. This is another testimony
of goodwill towards the Somali people.
I have referred here mainly to Mogadishu, but,
needless to say, similar efforts must also be made in the
rest of Somalia, particularly in the areas where an
atmosphere of confrontation still prevails.

We now understand that Hussein Aidid and a
delegation of the Sodere group are right now travelling to
several foreign countries. We sincerely hope that all their
interlocutors will impress upon them the need for
dialogue, flexibility and compromise.

On another count, Italy remains committed to
continuing to do its very best to alleviate the humanitarian
plight of the Somali people. There will be a new meeting
of the Somalia Aid Coordination Body on 29 and 30 May
in Rome to examine the humanitarian assistance needed
for Somalia. I would like to recall by way of example
that last year Italy contributed approximately $9 million
worth of emergency aid to Somalia.

I strongly believe that this meeting will be even
more successful if it sends a new and very clear message
that the Somali factions - all of them, without
exception - must carry on the process of genuine
national reconciliation. They must focus on the
resurrection and well-being of the entire country as their
ultimate objective. The international community should
enhance this process by making appeals, exerting
influence and providing all the necessary assistance it can
muster. Of course, having said this, we are very much
aware, as are many others, that in the final analysis the
fate of the Somali people lies in their own hands, in the
hands of their leaders and in the willingness of their
leaders to look beyond past and present differences and
instead look forward to a future of a just peace and
peaceful development.

In closing, Italy fully subscribes to the statement just
made by the Netherlands in its current capacity as
President of the European Union.

 

