Mr. Voronkov (spoke in Russian): I would like to
thank all of the Ambassadors for their words of support.
Furthermore, I would like to note that I understand and
fully grasp the responsibility that has fallen to me. I
will endeavour in my work to rise to such expectations,
as well as those of Secretary-General Antenio Guterres.
I stand ready to work closely with the Counter-
Terrorsim Committee and its Executive Directorate on
matters that are of mutual interest with regard to the
fight against terrorism.
(spoke in English)

I thank the Ambassador of the United Kingdom for
his question on how to better arrange the capabilities
of the United Nations to more effectively combat
violent extremism. We did a preliminary analysis of
the statements made in the General Assembly and all
of the priorities related to counter-terrorism raised by
Member States during the General Assembly session.
Preventing violent extremism and addressing the
drivers was the second most-important priority. There
are several guidelines that help to frame the work of the
United Nations on the prevention of violent extremism.

First, preventing violent extremism is anchored
in the first pillar one of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.
Secondly, our focus is on preventing and addressing
the drivers as identified in the United Nations Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.

Thirdly, our work is based on full respect for State
sovereignty and the principle of non-interference.
Member States take the lead at the national level, and
regional organizations at the regional level.

Fourthly, the role of the United Nations is to
support Member States and regional organizations,
upon their request, in developing national and regional
plans of action.

Fifthly, the plans of action put national Governments
and regional organizations at the forefront of efforts
to prevent violent extremism, and the United Nations
provides support to capacity-building initiatives.

I would also like to recall that the Secretary-General
has established an all-of-United Nations framework to
assist Member States in preventing violent extremism.
At the highest level, the Secretary-General chairs a
high-level action group on preventing violent extremist,
made up of 22 relevant United Nations agencies, funds
and programmes, and spearheads the implementation
of the Plan of Action across the United Nations system.
We at the Office of Counter-Terrorism will report to the
Secretary-General on those issues.

With regard to certain data, I would like to mention
that there are already 224 United Nations projects and
initiatives on preventing violent extremism, carried out
by 15 United Nations entities across all seven priority
areas of the United Nations Plan of Action. Eighty-two
of those projects are global, 67 are regional and 75 are
national. The national and regional projects are being
implemented in 77 countries across all regions upon
their request.

