Mr. Gambari: I would like to express my
appreciation for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the latest developments in Darfur. I also
take this opportunity to welcome the new members of
the Security Council - Colombia, Germany, India,
Portugal and South Africa - and to pledge the same
cooperation of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) with them as
we extend to the other members of the Council.

As Under-Secretary-General Le Roy highlighted
during his briefing to the Council on 6 January, we are
deeply concerned at the renewed Violence that took
place in December in Northern and Southern Darfur as
a result of the deteriorated relations between the
Government and Sudan Liberation Army-Minni
Minawi (SLA-MM). Since then, UNAMID and the
humanitarian community have worked vigourously to
address the humanitarian and protection consequences
of these clashes, which have included the displacement
of an estimated 43,000 people, 15,000 of whom have
gathered around UNAMID team sites in Shangil
Tobaya, Khor Abeche and Shaeria.

While camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), such as Zam Zam and Dar al-Salam, have
registered some new arrivals as a result of this conflict,
the bulk of new displacement is expected to be
temporary. In that regard, UNAMID forces have
maintained a robust presence and have increased
patrolling in the villages affected by the recent fighting
so as to create a security environment that would allow
for the early and safe return of recently displaced
people.

Unfortunately, in what seems to be a continuation
of the events of December, Violence between the
Government of the Sudan and SLA-MM. re-erupted as
recently as 24 January in the village of Thabit, located
along the road between E1 Fasher and Shangil Tobaya.
UNAMID has also received reports of an operation on
the same day by the Sudanese Armed Forces on the
village of Abu Zerega, in the same area. On 25 January,
fighting continued in the general area between El Fasher
and Shangil Tobaya. Reports received indicate that
elements of the Sudan Liberation Movement led by
Abdul Wahid al-Nur (SLM-AW) and the Liberation and
Justice Movement had joined the SLA-MM. in those
clashes. The UNAMID team site in Shangil Tobaya
reported sounds of artillery fire. The Government
blocked the main road between El Fasher and Shangil
Tobaya to all traffic.

Accordingly, UNAMID and the humanitarian
community have not yet been able to access the area;
but we will persist in our efforts to be able to verify the
situation, and in particular the impacts of the ongoing
clashes on the civilian population. As of this afternoon
here in Darfur, fighting in the area has subsided, but
tensions persist and a resumption of violence between
the belligerent parties is possible.

While I am pleased to report to the Council that
the UNAMID staff member who was held hostage for
91 days was released unharmed on 5 January, I am
most saddened by the fact that, since then, we have
suffered yet another hostage-taking incident in Darfur.
On 13 January, three Bulgarian air crew members
working for a contractor of the United Nations
11-21690
Humanitarian Air Services (UNHAS) were abducted by
unidentified armed elements upon landing in Um
Shalaya, West Darfur. The consequent decision by
UNHAS to suspend flights to unsecured landing sites
in West Darfur is likely to impact negatively on access
to deep-field locations. As a mitigating measure,
UNAMID will provide security at helicopter landing
sites at our team sites in order to minimize the
disruption to humanitarian operations.

Meanwhile, I am pleased to report to the Council
that the Mission is taking further steps to improve the
situation of access in Darfur. In a meeting with
UNAMID military and police leaders on 4 January, I
issued firm instructions that henceforth we would
adopt a more robust posture and no longer create the
impression of seeking permission for movement within
our area of responsibility. I reinforced that message in
my meeting in Khartoum on 6 January with
Presidential Adviser Ghazi Salaheddin, who holds the
Darfur portfolio and who reconfirmed to me the
Government's policy of allowing UNAMID freedom of
movement throughout Darfur. Just two days ago, I
repeated the same message to the Walis of South
Darfur and West Darfur.

Since then, UNAMID supply and logistics
convoys to all team sites, as well as humanitarian
convoys to Khor Abeche, Shaeria and Shangil Tobaya,
have faced no impediments. On other occasions, we
were able to push our way through due to the robust
posture and persistent negotiations by the patrol
commanders, as exemplified on 23 January when a
UNAMID formed police unit patrol team and an
integrated UNAMID-United Nations country team
were dispatched to the Zam Zam IDP camp, close to El
Fasher, to verify the situation during and after a
cordon-and-search operation by the Government inside
the camp. They were initially stopped outside of Zam
Zam by military personnel of the Government of the
Sudan, but shortly thereafter were allowed to proceed.
We insisted on proceeding.

However, I also have to report that in other
instances we have not yet been fully successful. For
example, as of today, humanitarian agencies have not
secured access to Dar al-Salam, in North Darfur, which
is another location of recent fighting. As recently as
23 January, Government military personnel denied
access to a UNAMID verification patrol that was about
to enter Dar al-Salam. This issue has been raised again
11-21690

with Government authorities, and we are awaiting their
response.

I have been informed that the Council has
expressed interest in the issue of access to Jebel Marra.
I would like to address this issue and give the Council
an overview of the situation there. Jebel Marra is a
mountainous region at the midpoint between three
Darfur states, namely, North, South and West Darfur.
Significant portions of Jebel Marra have been cut off
from humanitarian and UNAMID access since
February 2010 - slightly less than a year ago - due
in part to fighting, primarily between the Sudanese
Armed Forces and forces of the Sudan Liberation
Movement led by Abdul Wahid al-Nur. On repeated
occasions throughout 2010, UNAMID and
humanitarian agencies attempted to gain access to
points in Jebel Marra in order to assess reports of
fighting and, principally, to deliver aid to affected
communities. On nearly all occasions, those attempts
were prevented by SLA-AW and Government forces.

However, more recently, UNAMID and some
agencies have gained access to certain areas within
Jebel Marra. For example, on 13 November, UNAMID
conducted two patrols to the eastern and western parts
of Jebel Marra, including to Guldo and G010, on the
western side, and Tarny, Gosdor and Turty, on the
eastern side. On 11 December, another verification
patrol visited Guldo and G010 and assessed the
situation as generally calm.

Planned patrols to Eastern Jebel Marra from
Sector South were delayed due to the outbreak of
fighting between Sudanese Armed Forces and SLA-MM
in Khor Abeche. However, on 13 January, a long-range
patrol from Sector South reached Deribat through a
route controlled by the Government. More of these
patrols are planned in the near future so as to further
expand access in the area.

Meanwhile, Eastern Jebel Marra remains a focus
of UNAMID and country team efforts to open space
and allow for the delivery of emergency relief supplies.
On 23 December, a joint UNAMID-UNICEF child
demobilization mission Visited the area of Golombei.
On 11 January, a joint UNAMID-UNICEF-World
Health Organization mission reached Kaguro, in the
Jebel Si area, delivering vaccines and medical supplies
for about 3,000 children as part of an accelerated
routine immunization campaign. The UNAMID team
site in Sortony, North Darfur, also provides assistance
to UNICEF in its efforts to open additional water bore
holes in the eastern parts of Jebel Marra.

UNAMID therefore continues to work jointly
with United Nations agencies to further expand access
to eastern Jebel Marra. Discussions are ongoing to
identify additional locations for a possible permanent
presence by UNAMID and humanitarian actors. The
Mission is also continuing to streamline procedures to
speed up flight clearances.

While UNAMID will continue to patrol into Jebel
Marra, it is important to underscore the need to balance
our efforts with regard to J ebel Marra with the ongoing
protection requirements following the fighting in Khor
Abeche, Shangil Tobaya and Shaeria, as well as the
required preparedness to react to potential hotspots
along the border with Southern Sudan and elsewhere in
Darfur. No doubt, Jebel Marra is an important area in
Darfur that will remain a priority for UNAMID efforts.
But I want to remind members of the Council that there
are challenges throughout Darfur that all require our
presence and full support.

In that regard, the current report (S/2011/22) on
UNAMID details the overall protection-of-civilians
strategy for the Mission. UNAMID's protection strategy
identifies objectives and tasks to engage with and assist
the Government to carry out its responsibilities in
accordance with its international obligations.

Some of the key priorities of that strategy are for
the Mission to not only maintain a robust and integrated
presence in the areas of potential hostilities in order to
deter violence - and deterrence is key - but also
provide direct protection, secure humanitarian space,
and monitor and provide accurate and verified reporting
based on engagement with all sides. Furthermore, in an
effort to continuously improve our operational
preparedness, we have reviewed our initial response to
the fighting in Khor Abeche on 10 and 11 December
2010 and will incorporate lessons learned into our
operational procedures in the future.
As I have stated on previous occasions, including
in remarks to this Council, it is my belief that in order
to achieve lasting stabilization in Darfur, we must seize
all opportunities to build on positive trends in order to
allow displaced populations to regain a sense of
normality in their lives and move beyond aid
dependency. I have always said that we have to refrain
from regarding as normal the abnormal situation of
having more than 1.8 million people in IDP camps. In
that regard, I recognize the improved dialogue and
collaboration between central and state-level
authorities, humanitarian workers and UNAMID
through the reactivation of collaborative mechanisms,
such as the High-level Committee on Darfur and state-
level committees.

If any efforts in that regard are to be fruitful,
however, the fighting in Darfur must stop, and stop
immediately. The renewed clashes over the past two
days have very likely caused new displacements and
suffering of the civilian population, which has suffered
too much already. The full extent of the impact will
become clear in the coming days.

I have engaged the Government and SLA-MM,
calling for restraint and an immediate cessation of
hostilities. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate that call and to urge those members of the
Council who have influence to exercise it so that we
can bring about a cessation of hostilities sooner rather
than later.

I am sorry that I have spoken for a bit longer than
I had planned, but it has been a while since I have
spoken to Council members directly on behalf of
UNAMID.

