Mr. Bull (Liberia): You have climaxed your very
successful tour of duty at the United Nations, Sir, with a
brilliant performance as President of the Security Council
for the month of June. On the eve of your departure I
should like to join your many colleagues in wishing you
every success in your future endeavours. The skilful manner
in which you have presided over the work of the Council
is evidence of your vast experience and outstanding skills
as a diplomat.
Your predecessor, Ambassador Merimee, also
deserves our congratulations for his effective leadership
of the Council during the month of May.

The delegation of Liberia would like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for the
eleventh progress report on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), contained in document
5/1995/473 of 10 June 1995. The Government and the
people of Liberia deeply appreciate his abiding interest in
and contribution to the peaceful resolution of the Liberian
conflict. The report of the Secretary-General provides a
detailed assessment of the peace process, its successes
and shortcomings, and makes relevant observations and
recommendations for the consideration of the Security
Council.

We fully endorse the Secretary-General's
recommendation that UNOMIL's mandate be extended,
and we join in his appeal to Member States to contribute
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia and to assist
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and particularly its peace-keeping
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), in the discharge of its
onerous duties in Liberia.

The Secretary-General' s proposal for an extension of
the mandate is justified in view of several positive
developments in the peace process: the substantial
measure of agreement among the Liberian factions as
acknowledged by the Heads of State and Government of
the ECOWAS Committee of Nine on Liberia during their
summit meeting at Abuja, Federal Republic of Nigeria,
from 17 to 20 May 1995; the visit of the leader of the
National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), Mr. Charles
Taylor, to Nigeria; the recent assumption by the Liberian
National Transitional Government of administrative
control of two additional political subdivisions of the
country and the designation of those subdivisions as safe
havens; and steps being taken to remove land mines on
the Monrovia-Gbarnga highway and in other areas, in
fulfilment of one of the important requirements of the
disarmament process.

These are encouraging developments; however, we
are aware of the rather slow progress in the peace process
and the resulting high cost to the international community,
particularly to the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States which continue to

 

maintain a peace-keeping force in Liberia. The apparent
lack of resolve on the part of leaders of the warring
factions to honour their various undertakings has increased
the scepticism of the international community as well as
that of the Liberian people with regard to their political will
and their intention to end the war.

It is my delegation's firm belief that the persistent
demands of the international community that the factional
leaders end the war and the suffering of the Liberian people
have facilitated the progress achieved in the peace process
thus far. Without the pressure and the active support of the
United Nations, the Liberian conflict would long ago have
degenerated into a state of anarchy. It is for this reason that
my delegation would urge the reconsideration of any action
by the United Nations which would suggest an
abandonment of Liberia. Such an action would only
embolden the warring factions to accelerate the use of arms
and terror to achieve their political ends at the cost of
increased suffering for the Liberian people.

There are several important measures which have not
been implemented by the Liberian factions, including the
installation of the Council of State, a comprehensive cease-
fire, the disengagement of forces and the disarmament of
combatants. Another matter of continuing concern is the
violation by some Member States of the arms embargo on
Liberia imposed by the Security Council in 1992.

The Liberian delegation renews its appeal to the
leaders of the warring factions to implement without further
delay the decisions I have mentioned. Experience has
shown that with the active involvement of the United
Nations these seemingly insurmountable problems can be
resolved. It is therefore our sincere hope that this
Organization will maintain its commitment to Liberia until
genuine peace is achieved.

We convey our profound appreciation to all Member
States, to States members of the Economic Community of
West African States, and to non- governmental organizations
for their support, and we appeal for continued humanitarian
assistance to Liberia. In this connection, we endorse the
draft resolution now before the Council and urge its
unanimous adoption.

The legitimate aspiration of the Liberian people to live
in peace and rebuild their lives following a devastating civil
war is a fundamental human right which must not be
denied them. And we believe that in the foreseeable future
this Organization will be increasingly challenged by such
problems and that it has a moral obligation to remain
resolute in advancing the peace, development and well-
being of all peoples. Our common humanity and
interdependence demand nothing less.

