Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank France and you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate, which
is a demonstration of France's commitment to this
noble cause.

We also wish to express our appreciation to Sweden
for its efforts as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. I want to take this opportunity to
thank the Swedish Minister for her commitment and
that of her country.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General for being
with us today and for his briefing. I also want to express
appreciation to the other briefers, Ms. Virginia Gamba
and Mr. Mubin Shaikh.

We welcome the adoption of the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/21) on children in armed
conflict and we look forward to the compilation of
comprehensive best practices on the mandate on
children and armed conflict, including practical
guidance on the integration of child protection issues
in peace processes.

We note with serious concern the continued
grave Violations against children in armed conflicts,
particularly in relation to recruitment and use, killing
and maming, as well as humanitarian access, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/821) on children and armed conflict. Grave
Violations by terrorist groups, such as Boko Haram and
the Al-Shabaab, in relation to recruitment and use in
asymmetric warfare, particularly the use of children as
suicide bombers, continue to pose a serious protection
challenge, including to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. We also note with serious concern the impact
of armed conflict and grave violations by parties to
armed conflicts on children resulting in their forcible
displacement and serious protection challenges.
Ms. Gamba and Mr. Shaikh highlighted the challenges
faced in that area. It would be difficult after having
heard them to add much that be very meaningful. I wish
to thank them again.

While welcoming the signing of action plans by
parties to armed conflict, we note with concern issues
associated with their implementation, particularly
as a result of armed conflict and limited support in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
children, including those associated with terrorist
groups. While noting the recommendations identified
by the Secretary-General in his report, we would
like to focus on four points that, in our View, could
contribute to strengthening the protection of children
in armed conflict.

First, the implementation of national action plans,
particularly in the area ofsecuring the release ofchildren
associated with armed forces and armed groups, as well
as ensuring their disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration ,will require sustained engagement and
support, which could include, inter alia, ensuring the
availability of child protection advisers in situations of
armed conflict and operationalizing such action plans.

Secondly, international humanitarian law requires
parties to an armed conflict to treat children associated
with armed groups, including those engaged in violent
extremism, as Victims entitled to full protection of their
human rights and to urgently put in place alternatives
to the detention and prosecution of children. Children
should be detained only as a last resort, and for the
shortest period necessary. Ensuring that special
measures are taken to protect children when they are
detained, regardless of the reason for their deprivation
of liberty, is important. That is particularly relevant in
relation to children associated with terrorist or violent
extremist groups.

Thirdly, internally displaced and refugee
children often become unaccompanied and are more
vulnerable to forced recruitment, sexual Violence,
exploitation, deprivation of liberty and ill treatment
during detention. They must be treated with special
care, bearing in mind their needs in terms of access to
shelter, food, clean water, health care, education and
the provision of official documentation, without which
they may be at risk of becoming stateless. Much more
needs to be done in finding durable solutions to those
internally displaced and refugee children. That will
require strengthened support from development actors
to countries emerging from conflicts, as well as to large
refugee-hosting countries.

Fourthly, much more needs to be done to enhance
cooperation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations. The Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children
and Armed Conflict could play a critical role in
exploring mechanisms to further strengthen such
cooperation. For instance, in our region, since 2014,
consultative meetings focused on the protection of
children in armed conflicts were held between the
African Union Peace and Security Council and the
African Committee on the Rights and Welfare of the
Child. With the upcoming appointment of a special
rapporteur in December, such consultative meetings
will play a critical role in responding to the protection
challenges associated with children affected by armed
conflicts in Africa. In that context, we would like to
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to explore mechanisms to further strengthen
the cooperation of her Office with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including in the context of
such consultative meetings aimed at ensuring the full
implementation of plans of action signed with parties
to armed conflicts and the follow-up of the conclusions
of the Security Council Working Group pursuant to
resolution 1612 (2005), as well as the mainstreaming of
child protection.

As a major troop-contributing country, Ethiopia has
taken various measures in order to ensure the protection
of children in areas where our troops are deployed. Our
troops are guided by the rules of engagement, which
are elaborated within the framework of our obligations
under international humanitarian law, particularly the
1949 Geneva Conventions and Protocols Additional I
and II. We have also put in place a mechanism to ensure
accountability and address any violations by our troops
deployed in any mission. Over the years, that framework
has enabled us to address any protection challenges. As
one of the largest refugee-hosting countries, we also
continue to provide international protection to refugee
children, including unaccompanied minors who are
forcibly displaced as a result of grave violations by
parties to armed conflicts.

I would like to conclude my remarks by affirming
the commitment of Ethiopia to continuing its work with
relevant actors to ensure the protection of children in
armed conflict, including here in the Council and at the
level of the African Union.

