Mr. Doss: Thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited me to speak at this meeting. As a graduate of
four peacekeeping operations, I come labelled as a
practitioner - a term which, in the hierarchy of
intellectual achievement, is ranked only marginally
above the sobriquet of diplomat. Nevertheless, I have a
few frank and perhaps unorthodox thoughts to share
with the Council this morning on the issues that have
been outlined in the concept paper (S/2010/67).

First, I shall say a word on the way in which
mandates are drafted and the degree to which there is
clear integration of transition and exit strategies.
Rarely, if ever, do we plan the exit strategy at the
outset of a mission. If we did, I suspect that we might
not want to mount a mission in the first place. The
collective mindset of the international community finds
it hard to accept that some problems are not amenable
to quick, time-bound solutions. Moreover, the United
Nations is often pressed to intervene with haste in
conflict-affected areas and countries, especially when
there is daily media coverage filled with graphic
images of human suffering. Yes, ideally our entry
strategy would define our exit strategy and set out the
benchmarks to guide that process, but reality usually
reveals that, in failed or failing States, the
predictability of progress is highly tenuous.

Perhaps we need to accept this complexity and
uncertainty and recognize that we will often struggle to
find the right approach and that persistence and
perseverance are indispensable tools in the
peacekeeping tool box. Perhaps we need to accept as
well that most conflicts are not resolved through single
solutions and certainly not in conformity with the
timetable ordained by the international community.

We must also acknowledge that peace agreements
do not always make peace. In the four countries where
I have served in peacekeeping missions, numerous
accords were brokered, signed and then discarded. Not
unsurprisingly, therefore, peacekeeping missions
established in support of peace agreements can quickly
become hostages to fortune. In such circumstances,
planning for transition and exit can only be an iterative
process subject to the vagaries of shifting political and
military realities on the ground.

This leads me to say that transition and exit
strategies should not be conceived as a linear exercise
with one step leading inexorably to another. Progress is
neither inevitable nor predestined. Sadly, it is just as
possible to go backwards as it is to go forwards. On the
other hand, it is possible to move ahead with recovery,
State-building and even economic development while
there is still active conflict somewhere in a country.
Transition strategies therefore have to be flexible and
opportunistic.

The next topic is planning with reference to the
end state, key tasks and the phased completion of the
mission. In my View, planning in United Nations
missions today - or at least peacekeeping missions -
is largely geared to the reporting requirements of the
budget and mandate cycle. In my experience, we do not
sit down and think very far ahead. Inevitably, we are
pulled into the immediate - the urgent displaces the
important. The planning process as it is now practiced
is not the best way to think about the future. We tend to
get immersed in the details of mandate implementation
and fail to see the broader strategic picture.

Planning should ideally start with the assessment
of future risk and probability. On that basis, we can
plan for a variety of outcomes, not just one. In
peacekeeping, we will always be faced with
uncertainty, but we should try to look around corners
and get a better fix on possible alternative end states
and not only the end of the State.

I hope that the development of integrated
strategic frameworks will help us move in that
direction, bringing together the analytical and
operational capacities of the peacekeeping operation
and the United Nations country team in a consultative
process with national partners and other actors. This is
what we are currently doing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Now, ifI may, allow me to make a couple of
comments on capacities and resources. Resource
constraints are a perennial problem of all peacekeeping
missions. I doubt that we will ever have adequate
resources. We therefore have to frame mandates that
are manageable, and then ensure that missions make
the best of whatever resources are available to them.
As the concept paper points out, missions vary
enormously in size and complexity. There is no
obvious correlation between surface area, population
size and the magnitude of a mission. While we should
probably avoid a standard formula for determining
mission size, we should try to ensure a reasonable fit
between mandate and means.

That is especially important when a mission is
mandated to protect civilians, as we are in the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). When the Council
gives a mission a protection mandate, it must make
sure that this is a feasible proposition that can be
achieved with the resources and capabilities available
to that mission. Sometimes, I must say, there is a
disconnect between the two, with the result that we
create expectations that cannot be fulfilled.

But there will always be constraints, physical as
well as financial. We must therefore also look for
capacity multipliers. In MONUC, for example, we have
introduced the concept of smart protection, recognizing
that we cannot be everywhere all of the time. We are
trying out a variety of innovations to better direct our
resources to where they can be most effectively used to
protect people most at risk.

To do that, however, our operational policies and
procedures have to be adapted to get better value out of
the resources that are available. Memorandums of
understanding with troop- and police-contributing
countries need to be more flexible to allow for quicker
redeployment as operational situations develop. That
also goes for our operational procedures. The way we
manage our air operations, for example, is a case in
point. Most important, out failure to equip missions
with adequate tactical intelligence capabilities
seriously reduces our operational effectiveness in
conflict situations.
The coordination of international efforts in the
field has also been listed as one of the issues for
discussion. I am tempted to say that coordination is the
holy grail of the international community - much

sought after, but never found. As peacekeeping
missions have assumed a wider range of mandated
tasks, the complexity of coordination has also
increased within missions themselves, among United
Nations partners, with Member States, donor partners
and, of course, the Governments themselves. A great
deal of energy is expended in the name of coordination,
and not always with positive results. Coordination
should be more than just information sharing.

From personal experience, I would recommend
the creation of light but systematic consultation
structures. In Kinshasa, we have the so-called Security
Council-plus format, which meets at least every two
weeks and where we brief and discuss military and
political developments and explore and exchange ideas
on emerging issues of strategic importance, such as
elections, security sector reform and upcoming reports
of the Secretary-General to the Council.

A broader coordination mechanism has been
established for donors, in which the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund participate. There is
also a mechanism for humanitarian coordination. I am
not sure, however, that all those initiatives tie up as
neatly as we might wish. That is especially of concern
in the area of macroeconomic policy, where the impact
of economic measures can have a very direct effect on
security and stability.

Coordination within the international community
needs to be matched by a parallel relationship with
national authorities, especially in the area of national
security. That is especially important when
contemplating drawdown. In Sierra Leone, we met
regularly with the National Security Council to make
district-by-district security assessments as the basis for
decision-making on troop drawdown. Similar
assessments were done in Liberia, and perhaps my
colleague will speak to that. We will also be doing the
same in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as we
move forward on contemplating a drawdown.

You have also asked us, Mr. President, to
comment on political support for the peace process
within the Council and beyond. Creating and sustaining
political support for a peace process is a vital but
sometimes elusive undertaking. Restoring peace and
peacebuilding is an incremental process that rarely
follows a straight and narrow path. That produces
frequent frustration and occasional despondency.

Most of us in the international community will be
associated with a given peace process only for a
limited time before we move on, and so we are
impatient for success. But often we lack a full
appreciation of the historical, cultural and economic
factors that created the conflict in the first place. We do
not always understand the complex personal
relationships that may exacerbate underlying problems.
Our institutional memories can be quite short, while
the cast of characters is very large.

The Council and its faithful servants, the special
representatives of the Secretary-General, therefore
have to find middle ground between empathy and
firmness as we seek to move a peace process forward.
Most important, the messages sent by the Council
through its resolutions and statements, and echoed by
special representatives, must show a high degree of
consistency and political resolve. Frequent changes in
tone or intent encourage intransigence, leading spoilers
to believe that the Council will quickly back off in the
face of adversity or opposition. In mid-2000, when the
Revolutionary United Front attacked the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, the Council's
unanimous and speedy reaction helped to turn the tide.
More recently, the Council's determination to
persevere with our efforts to put an end to armed
violence in the Kivus has made a very significant
difference.

Let me add that the alignment of political forces
behind a peace process must extend to regional actors.
In each of the four countries in which I have been
involved with peace operations, neighbouring States
have either been part of the problem or part of the
solution. They must therefore be engaged, in one form
or another, from the outset.

Finally, allow me to conclude with a couple of
comments on processes, including benchmarks and the
modalities for reporting to the Council on progress
towards the achievement of the end state. Measuring
and evaluating a peace process and the transition to an
end state is not an exact science. Benchmarks,
indicators and outcomes are all useful as tools for
assessing progress, but they must be kept simple and
relatively easy to monitor. They should be accessible
and comprehensible to our national partners. Ideally,
they should incorporate goals and targets already
adopted by the Government concerned and its partners.
They need to be consistent and applicable across a
variety of sectors. They should serve essentially as a
set of traffic lights that are clearly Visible and easily
understood.

They should also draw a distinction between core
and contextual concerns. Core concerns relate to the
security and political mandates of a mission - the
goals that must be achieved before a drawdown can be
initiated or withdrawal completed. Contextual
benchmarks encompass a broader set of goals, such as
poverty reduction, that may not be achieved within the
lifetime of a mission, highly desirable though they may
be.

Albert Einstein once remarked that all knowledge
was experience. So I hope that my limited experience,
which I have shared with the Council this morning,
will serve to expand, if only marginally, our common
knowledge about transition and exit strategies.

