Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): Mr.
President, at the outset let me extend my
congratulations to you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I would
also like to express my appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General Annabi for his report. I extend a
special welcome to the eminent leaders of East Timor,
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, and
thank them for their presentations.

Since its inception one and a half years ago, the
activities of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) have been
quite successful in all areas of post-crisis management,
including security maintenance and nation-building in
East Timor. The case of East Timor is, thus far, one of
the few success stories of the United Nations and the
international community in general. We all remember
the time of tough decisions faced by all the parties
concerned in 1999. Enough has been done to save East
Timor from its chaotic situation, but much remains to
be done to make it stand on its own.

As we all know, this year is especially important
in East Timorese history, with major political events
such as the election of the Constituent Assembly and
the establishment of the independent Government.
Given the importance and symbolism of this mission,
the continuous support of the international community
is crucial. In this regard, the Republic of Korea is more
than willing to do its part.

Allow me to highlight a few issues that my
delegation finds particularly important for the
sustainability of an independent East Timor.

First of all, the upcoming Constituent Assembly
election is of paramount importance not only in itself,
but also because it will lay the groundwork for future
elections. My delegation is pleased that the East
Timorese themselves have launched the preparations
for the upcoming election, with professional and
systematic assistance from the international community
and with the United Nations Development Programme
playing a central role. Despite some concerns about
possible delays in the tight electoral schedule, we
remain hopeful that the entire process will be
implemented smoothly.

It is my delegation's view that, during the period
of elections and subsequent debate on the Constitution,
the most important thing is the maintenance of security
and social order. To ensure peaceful and democratic
elections and unhindered debate on the political
system, the role of the international and local military
and police components will be more important than
ever. It is our hope that both the local and international
security components will maintain particular vigilance
in a concerted effort.

For the start of a new era of reconciliation and
national unity of all East Timorese people, a solution to
the refugee problem will be crucial. In this regard, we
are pleased with the return of over 3,000 refugees last
March and April. We recognize the efforts made by the
Indonesian Government in refugee-related issues, and
we expect Indonesia's plans for refugee registration to
be implemented soon, without fail. We once again call
upon Indonesia and concerned international
organizations to expedite their efforts and strengthen
their coordination to better address this complex
refugee problem.

With regard to capacity- and institution-building,
we highly appreciate the efforts thus far of UNTAET
and other international organizations in all areas. For
these diverse and time-consuming tasks, the emphasis
should be on increasing the Timorese people's
ownership of their nation and institutions, and on
promoting the real participation of as many people as
possible. We hope that the donors conference in
Canberra next month will provide an opportunity to
discuss in greater depth the mid- and long-term
strategy of the international community to assist the
people of East Timor.

Let me make some comments on the United
Nations role in East Timor this year and beyond
independence. My delegation takes note of the
Secretary-General's report that there is a widely shared
fear among the Timorese people about the uncertainty
of the political and security situation this year. Bearing
that in mind, we are concerned that the debate in the
United Nations regarding the early exit of United
Nations personnel might unintentionally send a wrong
signal to security-threatening elements. Therefore, we
believe that it is very important for the Security
Council to convey to the Timorese people its firm
commitment to protect them until, and even after,
independence.

The United Nations mission cannot replace the
new independent Government of East Timor, nor
should it remain there indefinitely. However, the report
of the Secretary-General contains some important
elements that deserve our attention. The Secretary-
General pointed out that a self-reliant East Timorese
police and defence force cannot be completed in one or
two years. Therefore, we believe that the continued
presence of international military and police
components will be necessary after independence,
though reduced in accordance with the developments
on the ground.

It is our view that the reduction of UNTAET,
particularly the military and police components, should
be carried out in a gradual and phased manner. Before
the reduction, however, a clever and clear exit strategy
should be prepared. In this regard, my delegation
appreciates the continuing deliberations of the
UNTAET working group and welcomes the recent
establishment of the integrated mission task force in
the Secretariat. We expect them to continue an in-depth
study on exit strategies that takes into account both the
need for cost-effectiveness and the objective of
fulfilling peacekeeping mandates.

We also expect them to present to the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries a
comprehensive blueprint on the post-independence
engagement of the United Nations in East Timor. My
delegation would like to emphasize the need for close
consultation with troop-contributing countries during
the whole process of preparing and implementing the
troop withdrawal or relocation.

All in all, I would like to emphasize the
importance of the continued involvement and
assistance of the international community for East
Timor so that the progress achieved at great cost will
not be impaired.

Let me conclude by expressing my delegation's
appreciation of the efforts of the Secretary-General and
those responsible for UNTAET's mission. We expect
the next report of the Secretary-General at the end of
July to include practical recommendations on the future
role of the United Nations in East Timor. We look
forward to continuing to participate in this important
debate.

