Ms. Hill (New Zealand): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this wrap-up session and for your
revealing overview of this record-breaking month.
We thank you and your colleagues for managing the
extraordinary workload with considerable flare and
efficiency. I will focus on three points that have struck
our delegation in carrying out its work.

First, New Zealand continues to support wrap-
up sessions as tools with the potential to increase the
Council's transparency to the broader United Nations
membership, on whose behalf we act. We thank the
presidency for scheduling this opportunity for the
Council to live up to its obligation to meet the needs of
the broader membership. Given the frenetic pace of the
Council's work, wrap-up sessions can also provide an
opportunity to reflect on cross-cutting items, but they
are not the only opportunity for transparency provided
by the presidency. The open debate on children and
armed conflict (see S/PV.7414) was a great such
example. It allowed all Members of the United Nations
to contribute views as a basis for future action, and
gave momentum to an important item on the Council's
agenda.

Secondly, the Council's visiting mission to Burundi
and the Central African Republic - its first - and to
Addis Ababa to meet with our partners in the African
Union Peace and Security Council was one of the
highlights of the month. The three legs of the visit were
important opportunities for engaging with people on the
ground and getting a real-life perspective on the issues
on our agenda today. Significantly, the visit fulfilled an
important political function in visibly demonstrating
that the Security Council is maintaining its engagement
in those countries.

The visit to the Central African Republic was
particularly timely, given the Council's scheduled
renewal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic next month, under Jordan's presidency. The
visit to Addis Ababa and the broad subject matter
discussed with our partners on the Peace and Security
Council underscored the importance we attach to
building that partnership. While such engagement is
useful, it is no replacement for continuous engagement
between the two Councils, which is something that
New Zealand is committed to continuing to strengthen
at the practical level. We extend our thanks to Angola,
which, together with the Council presidency, led the
Visiting mission, and to the United States, which co-led
the Burundi section.

Thirdly, allow me to again congratulate you, Sir,
once again on the outstanding way in which you and your
delegation have led the Council's work in March, under
particularly demanding circumstances. We consider
that it is the manner in which the closed consultations
are chaired and your decisive and responsive approach
to the consultations and to members' requests over
the month that can truly make a positive improvement
in the working methods. We also commend the
your commitment to engaging with the media after
consultations so to increase the transparency of the
Council's work. Furthermore, we welcome the growing
number of texts being initiated and developed by
elected members of the Council and the functioning of
the Council as a body made up of the 15.

We wish Jordan every success during its April
presidency and stand ready to support it in every effort,
as we continue our work across the Council's agenda.

