Mr. Davies (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, I had
an opportunity to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency when I addressed this body during
the recent meeting on the situation in Sierra Leone in
respect of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Let me
once again, Mr. President, congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and express the sincere gratitude of my delegation for
inviting us to participate in this debate.

My delegation's appreciation also goes to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
jointly presented to the Security Council and the
General Assembly (S/2009/304). I would also like to
thank the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the representatives of the United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank for their valuable
presentations this morning.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
to marshal the resources of the international
community and to offer advice and propose strategies
for post-conflict recovery, with a special focus on
reconstruction, institution-building and sustainable
development in countries emerging from conflict.

In order to accomplish these goals, the
Committee set itself the following objectives: first, to
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery; second, help to ensure
predictable financing for early recovery activities and
sustained financial investment over the medium to
longer term; third, extend the period of attention by the
international community to post-conflict recovery; and
fourth, to develop best practices on issues that require
extensive collaboration among political, military,
humanitarian and development actors. Therefore, any
consideration of a report presented concurrently to the
Security Council and the General Assembly should be
gauged by the above parameters, with regard to the
attainment of the priorities of the countries on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Four years have gone by, and the proposed
integrated strategies for post-conflict peacebuilding
and recovery and the development of best practices on
issues that require extensive collaboration among
political, military, humanitarian and development
actors have evolved substantially, as spelled out in the
report before us. The countries on the Commission's
agenda continue to receive the international
community's attention. It is very crucial to advance
these objectives to the next level and to help to ensure
predictable financing for early recovery activities and
sustained financial investment over the medium to
longer term.

Peacebuilding is a powerful conflict-prevention
mechanism both in societies that have experienced
violent conflict and in those on the verge of sliding into
conflict. However, studies reveal that the United
Nations and the international community have tended
to invest more resources on conflict resolution and
peacemaking than on the preventive aspect.

The consolidation of peace in societies emerging
from conflict depends entirely on the efforts and
initiatives undertaken to address the immediate
aftermath of conflict - a phase characterized by the
complete withdrawal of the remnants of arms from
communities, the reassimilation of internally displaced
persons, refugees and ex-combatants into civil society
and the provision of relief. These, in our opinion, rank
among the key components required for stabilizing
post-conflict situations in order to pave the way for
various reform initiatives and long-term recovery
programmes.

We must bear in mind that if these factors remain
unaddressed, the potential for societies to slide back
into conflict can be imminent. It is also worth noting
that studies have shown that societies emerging from
violent conflict are more likely to relapse into
hostilities in the first five to ten years following the
end of conflict. Thus a rapid and effective engagement
of the above-mentioned components can be crucial for
the future stability, recovery and the sustainable
development of those societies.

On the home front, Sierra Leone has come a long
way. Since the end of the war, we have had three
general elections, the last of which brought the
opposition party, the All People's Congress of
President Ernest Bai Koroma, to power. We recently
had the quarterly review of the implementation of the

mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. Leadership of
actors on the ground is well coordinated. The numerous
strategic frameworks have been completely streamlined
in President Ernest Bai Koroma's Agenda for Change.
The recently concluded second generation of the
poverty-reduction strategy and the Joint Vision of the
United Nations country team as a coordination
mechanism for partnership collaboration with the
Government have been realized.

The recent hiccup in mid-March that tested our
resolve for peaceful coexistence as a nation was swiftly
addressed by the Government and the Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General by
encouraging the leaderships of two main political
parties to take responsibility for the actions of their
supporters. That effort brought the inter-party dialogue
back on track and, since then, the situation has
normalized.

The high-level event, hosted at the request of the
Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific meeting, the
Permanent Representative of Canada, Ambassador
John McKee, and the Government of Sierra Leone on
10 June this year, sought to move forward the Sierra
Leone peacebuilding agenda by marshalling support
for the Government's Agenda for Change and the
second phase of the poverty-reduction strategy by
announcing the establishment of a $350 million donor
trust fund for the implementation of those strategic
frameworks. The Government appeals for, and looks
forward to, a favourable response now and at the
forthcoming Consultative Group meeting, to be held in
London in November.

On behalf of the Government of Sierra Leone, I
would like to register our sincere appreciation for the
continued engagement of the United Nations, our
bilateral partners and the international community on
Sierra Leone and for the determination to consolidate
peace and democracy and to put Sierra Leone on the
path to sustainable development.

