Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to express our deep condolences to the
people and the Government of the People's Republic of
China for the victims of the bombing of the premises of
the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO). We condemn this barbaric
act, which violates the United Nations Charter,
international law and the rules governing relations
between countries. We call for the immediate cessation of
NATO's military acts.

The targeting of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade
and, before that, the severe damage inflicted on the Iraqi
Embassy in Belgrade, are yet further manifestations of the
aggression of the United States, which started a
systematic war against all the people of Yugoslavia on 24
March this year, in a flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and the mandate of the Security
Council. This aggression coincides with the Anglo-
American aggression against Iraq, which started on 16
December last year and which is continuing. This clearly
demonstrates the pattern of American behaviour, which
flouts international law and the rights of nations and
peoples. Earlier, there was American aggression against
Libya and then against the Sudan. Who knows which
peoples of the third world will be the next victims if the
international community does not stand up against the
tyranny of the American force?

We deeply sympathize with the people of
Yugoslavia, which stands steadfast as it witnesses the
achievements of generations being destroyed by the
American smart bombs that have spared no school,
church, mosque or hospital. We have suffered from the
systematic destruction of every area of life in our country

 

by the same brute American force. However, we remained
steadfast and emerged victorious to rebuild what they
destroyed. The people of Yugoslavia will also remain
steadfast and emerge victorious.

We call upon countries that love peace, freedom and
justice to learn the right lessons from this continued
aggression, which is designed to undermine the territorial
integrity of countries and to systematically destroy their
cultural achievements. We call upon the international
community to unify its efforts to stop the brutal use of
force immediately and to punish the aggressor.

