Mr. Nazario (South Sudan): The Republic of South
Sudan expresses its gratitude to the Security Council
for renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). We appreciate
Council members' continued interest in, and focus on,
our country in this particularly important early stage of
its development.

We furthermore thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hilde Johnson and her team
for their tireless efforts in support of South Sudan.
It is with sincere appreciation that we acknowledge
the contribution of Members of the United Nations
that have provided troops, police forces and civilian
personnel to UNMISS. My Government views that
as a reflection of the level of acceptance of our new
republic within the community of nations, for which we
are very grateful. The Government of the Republic of
South Sudan reiterates that it remains fully committed
to guaranteeing the safety, security and unrestricted
freedom of movement of all United Nations personnel
in South Sudan, as was provided during the years
leading up to independence, and commits itself to
further strengthening its efforts in that regard.

The Republic of South Sudan has made some
progress in terms of establishing national institutions
and extending the authority of the Government, as
expressed by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/486) recently. Given the historical context and
the many crosscutting challenges we are experiencing,
there is of course much more that still needs to be done
to build our State, enhance the Government's capacity
and ensure that it can provide protection to all of its
civilians. The protection of civilians is a national
responsibility that we take extremely seriously, and
it occupies the highest priority on the Government's
agenda. We welcome the Council's acknowledgement of
our efforts in this area over the past year, in particularly
challenging circumstances. In that context, we also
welcome the Council's call on UNMISS to continue its
communication and public outreach efforts to explain
the Mission's mandate to our people.

To ensure that all of our civilians are protected we
must not only redouble our efforts to increase security
at home, but also put relations between the Sudan and
South Sudan on a secure, long-term footing. As others
have correctly noted, our domestic challenges are
indeed linked, in one way or another, to the ongoing
challenges in the bilateral relations with the Sudan.
The establishment of good-neighbourly relations will
be of great benefit for both States. The Republic of
South Sudan strongly believes that the establishment
of two viable States living side by side in peace is both
desirable and achievable.

We welcome the Council's call for a coordinated
approach among the United Nations Mission, country
team and agencies and multilateral and bilateral donors
in support of national State-building and peacebuilding
strategies. We look forward to working in partnership
with the United Nations, international financial
institutions and bilateral donors to build our institutions,
strengthen the rule of law and ensure that the human
rights of all South Sudanese are fully respected in
accordance with South Sudan's own development
priorities as articulated in its development plan.

In situations as complex as that in which South
Sudan finds itself, the challenge is always to identify
priorities, coordinate the required work and apportion
resources accordingly. We look forward to continuing to
partner with the United Nations and other development
and humanitarian partners in those important
prioritization and coordination efforts.

The Government of South Sudan takes note of the
concern of the international community with regard to
its decision to halt the production of oil, and the impact
that may have in the short-term on South Sudan's
development agenda. As we have said before, that was
not a decision taken lightly. In the light of clear evidence
that shipments of South Sudan oil were being seized
illegally and the fact that payments dating to July 2011
had been withheld, the temporary halting of production
was necessary, despite the sacrifices it entailed, in
order to ensure a just outcome for the people of South
Sudan in the longer term. The Republic of South Sudan

maintains its position that it will assist the Republic of
the Sudan by contributing up to one third of the fiscal
gap as calculated last year by the International Monetary
Fund, to the amount of approximately $2.5 billion.

I take this opportunity to reiterate to the Council our
commitment to continue to negotiate the outstanding
issues of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement with
the Republic of the Sudan, as the resolution of all such
issues is an essential prerequisite to our being able to
move forward conclusively with the implementation of
the development plans for our country.

We look forward to continuing to discuss these
issues with the members of the Council and our other
partners in the coming weeks. Once again, we thank the
Security Council for renewing the mandate of UNMISS
and we look forward to continuing our cooperation
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Johnson and her team.

