Mr. Prendergast: During the last briefing on
Bougainville, on 29 August, the Council was informed
of progress achieved in implementing stages I and II of
the weapons disposal plan, the target dates for which
were 31 August and 30 September, respectively. As the
Security Council may recall, the forward movement in
the peace process was welcomed by the Council.

I have to report today that developments since
August have included setbacks. The Bougainville
parties have completed stage I. However, stage II
containment has been completed in only half of the
districts on the island. The number of new weapons
collected since the last briefing grew only by a little
more than 100, reaching a total of 1,684. More
worrying still, seven containers were opened and 212
weapons removed from them. I shall say more about
this later. The momentum for weapons disposal has
definitely slowed down, and, as a result, the entire
peace process has come under some strain.

It may be helpful if I give our assessment of what
lies behind these developments. I would also like to
inform the Council of what steps are being taken to
address the difficulties that have arisen.

The setbacks in weapons containment can be
explained essentially by two factors. The first lies in
well-intended efforts to address the impatience of many
eX-combatants, who are frustrated with the slow pace
of their reintegration and rehabilitation. Two funds
were created to assist the ex-combatants, one by the
national Government and one by a bilateral donor.
Problems related to disbursement from these funds and
the erroneous perception that eX-combatants would
now, in effect, be paid for turning in their weapons has
led some of them to refuse to participate in the
weapons-disposal process. Other broke into containers
and retrieved their weapons.

The second factor has been a deliberate campaign
of falsification and misrepresentation regarding the
nature of the peace process by the followers of Francis
Ona, the main Bougainvillian leader remaining outside
of the peace process. Some people calling themselves
Ona's affiliates or supporters have also broken into
containers and stolen weapons, claiming that they were
acting on his orders.

Discouraging as these developments are, I am
pleased to report that, to the great credit of the ex-
combatant leaders, they have responded with vigour to
these challenges. A Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting was held in Arawa on 30 October.
The meeting, chaired, as usual, by the United Nations
mission - the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) - adopted a number of
decisions designed to make containers more secure, to
foster more positive attitudes to weapons containment,
and to place weapons collection back on track.
Decisions were also taken to address problems related
to usage of the two funds mentioned earlier. We were
encouraged by the decision of former combatants to
complete stage II containment by 24 December,
declaring this to be a Christmas present for
Bougainville.

As a follow-up to the Peace Process Consultative
Committee and the decision on the new deadline for
stage II containment, the two Bougainville faction
leaders convened an extraordinary session in Arawa at
the beginning of November. Participation extended
beyond the usual Peace Process Consultative
Committee membership to include unit, platoon and
company commanders, as well as the provincial
Administration. At this session, the participants
received a briefing on all aspects of the Peace
Agreement, examined issues which were impeding
weapons collection and took corresponding actions.
The session adopted a joint ex-combatants resolution
that, among other things, called for their political
leadership to enter into dialogue with the Me'ekamui
Defence Force of Francis Ona. Following the Peace
Process Consultative Committee meeting and the
subsequent extraordinary session, the ex-combatants
initiated direct contact with the military commander of
Francis Ona.

The ex-combatants also adopted a detailed
calendar of activities to be completed throughout the
island leading up to 24 December, when the close of
stage II containment should be declared. It is
understood that the Alpha Company, the core of the
Me'ekamui Defence Force, which has reaffirmed its
commitment to work along with the other districts in
weapons disposal, could take a bit longer to reach stage
II. UNPOB is expected to witness the signing of the
declarations that individual districts will make
confirming that they have completed stage II.

Meanwhile, beginning in September, UNPOB
held a series of meetings throughout the island with the
chiefs, with churches and with women's groups. The
purpose of those encounters was to mobilize and
engage these important groups in order to promote
maximum community participation in the weapons-
disposal process.

In all of its activities relating to weapons
collection, UNPOB has enjoyed a close and fruitful
working relationship with the Peace Monitoring Group.
The Peace Monitoring Group has provided valuable
logistical support to the collection of weapons and their
storage. It has also served as a reliable link among the
various communities of the island. Thanks to its island-
wide patrols, the Monitoring Group brings to UNPOB's
attention particular issues requiring our joint
intervention. In addition, the Group facilitates the
settling of many cases on its own. We very much look
forward to continued fruitful cooperation with the
Peace Monitoring Group.

I might say a word about the Bougainville
Constitutional Commission. The Commission has been
consulting with the people of the various districts of
the island to ascertain their views on what should be
the content of the Bougainville constitution. The
Commission is expected to produce the first draft
constitution by 1 January 2003. Following that,
consultations will be held with the Bougainville
interim provincial government, the Bougainville
People's Congress and, of course, the national
Government. The target date for the completion of the
final draft constitution and for a report on it is the end
of January 2003.

The draft constitution will then be considered by
the Constituent Assembly, which is expected to be
established by February 2003 and to complete its work
by March 2003. However, the actual start of its work
will, among other things, depend on the verification by
UNPOB of the satisfactory completion of stage II of
weapons containment.

A word about the challenges ahead: I ought to
point out that little more than four weeks remain before
the 24 December deadline set for the completion of
stage II of the Bougainville Peace Agreement. At the
last Peace Process Consultative Committee meeting
and the follow-up session, UNPOB sent a very clear
message to the ex-combatants that the credibility of
weapons disposal and, perhaps, of the entire peace
process would be at stake if the deadline were not met.
We also re-emphasized that progress towards autonomy
depended on the completion of stage II and on its
verification.

Even if the ex-combatants were to declare that the
24 December target date had been met, UNPOB would
still have to verify and certify that the weapons had,
indeed, been committed to containers, as called for by
the plan. This process, on current form, seems most
unlikely to be completed by 31 December, especially in
View of the recent break-ins and the stealing of 212
weapons. UNPOB's continued presence will be needed
on the island to help Bougainvilleans return those
weapons and complete stage II, including certification
by UNPOB. Stage III of the weapons disposal plan, at
which time the parties must decide on the final fate of
the weapons, is still ahead. A decision on the fate of
the weapons is to be made within four and a half
months after the coming into force of the constitutional
amendments. UNPOB is required to be available to
verify and certify whether there has been substantial
compliance by the parties in the handing in of weapons
and whether the level of security of the weapons
creates a situation which is conducive to the holding of
elections. Assuming, therefore, that the December
target date is respected, UNPOB needs to have a
reasonable amount of time to verify and to certify stage
II containment.

Finally, the Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting held at the end of October formally
requested that UNPOB and the Peace Monitoring
Group remain on Bougainville until after the elections
for the autonomous government have been held.
According to the current timetable, these elections
should be held before the end of June 2003. But,
naturally, the actual date will depend on the extent to
which the Bougainville Constitutional Commission and
the Constituent Assembly stick to their present
programmes of work.

In View of the critical tasks to be performed by
UNPOB in the coming year, the Secretary-General has,
as the Council knows, written to the Council
recommending the extension of UNPOB's mandate for
a further year. We fully expect that all of the stages in
the peace process will be completed during that period.
As the Council is also aware, the Government of Papua
New Guinea has requested such an extension. Before
deciding to write to the Council, the Secretary-General
dispatched an assessment mission to Bougainville. The
mission, led by the Director of the Asia and Pacific
Division of my Department, arrived on the island in
time to attend the Peace Process Consultative
Committee meeting. The mission held wide-ranging
consultations with the Papua New Guinea Government,
the Bougainville parties and the countries participating
in the Peace Monitoring Group, all of whom confirmed
that the continued presence of UNPOB was essential
for the successful completion of the peace process.

