Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela. It is our honour to participate under its
guidance in this debate.

The historical reflection on and firm adherence
to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations are essential obligations for all those
committed to international peace and security. The
Charter of the Organization, in its Preamble, calls for
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
practicing tolerance and living together in peace with
one another as good neighbours. The Charter's first goal
is the maintenance of international peace and security,
a precept that over the years has become an inviolable
right of all peoples and nations. However, its fulfilment
requires the elimination of threats that conspire against
its full realization and the eradication of all violations
of the Charter and all threats to the right to peace, such
as interference in the internal affairs of States, acts of
aggression, wars that seek control of natural resources
and non-conventional wars. In recent years, such wars
have become the most serious attacks against the
exercise of people's right to self-determination.

We must also oppose the application of unilateral,
coercive measures and the unjust and exclusive
international order that we have today; we must oppose
the inequality and selfishness that result from neo-
liberal globalization, discrimination and xenophobia,
as well as the growing aggressiveness of the NATO
military doctrine. That also presupposes the unlimited
recognition of the sovereign equality of States, the
peaceful solution of international disputes, respect for
political independence and the political, socioeconomic
and cultural system that nations have freely decided on
for themselves, and the rejection of the threat or use of
threat of force against another State.

The countries of our region clearly understood
those concerns when, at the second Summit of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
held in Havana in January 2014, we formally approved
the Proclamation of Latin America and the Caribbean
as a Zone ofPeace. That is a document oftranscendental
and historic importance that is fully applicable to
the relations of the countries of the region with other
countries of the world.

While it is true that sustainable development
cannot be achieved without peace and stability, it is
also true that there will not be peace or stability without
development; that is true, yet millions ofpeople continue
to be condemned to hunger, poverty and despair. We
therefore affirm that the prevention of conflicts and the
maintenance of peace require solidarity, cooperation
and international assistance, as well as joint action to
eradicate poverty, unemployment, hunger, inequality
and their underlying causes.

We recognize that the Security Council has an
important role to play in the maintenance of international
peace and security by virtue of the responsibility
conferred upon it by the Charter. That is why the
members of the Council must be the first countries to
support peaceful solutions and exercise firm, effective
and clear resistance against the recourse to war and the
violation of the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter. They must be the first countries to exhaust
all possible avenues to preserve life and prevent the
promotion and application of a policy of regime change
and prevent the violation of people's right to self-
determination. They must stop abusing the veto in their
attempts to ensure the impunity of the perpetrators of
the serious violations of international law and human
rights that victimize the people of Palestine. They must
be the first countries to reject any attempts to reinterpret
the mandate of the Council and to usurp from it the role
assigned to other principle organs of the Organization,
particularly the General Assembly.

Seventy years have gone by since the founding of
the Organization. It must be strengthened. In particular,
the Security Council must be made democratic in order
to convert it into a model of transparency, democracy
and genuine participation. The General Assembly
must be revitalized so that it can play its central role
in achieving the rights of peoples and of every human
being in a just, democratic and fair international order.
We also understand that peacekeeping operations are
becoming increasingly complex and involved. They
may be indispensable in certain circumstances, but
they cannot be a substitute for the need to address and
resolve the deep-seated causes of conflicts and they
cannot be a replacement for diplomacy and political
dialogue.

Many are saying today that the rule of law at the
international level should become the cornerstone of
relations between States. For Cuba, that means that the
principles set out in the Charter and in international
law must be applied fully and non-selectively across
the board as essential requirements for peaceful
coexistance between nations, sustainble development
and the promotion and protection of the human rights of
all. The rule of law in international relations is therefore
incompatible with unilateralism and economic,
commercial and financial measures and policies that
run counter to international law; with any effort aimed
at subverting the political, economic or social order
freely chosen by a people or aimed at interfering in a
country's internal affairs; and with measures intended
to foment conflict in sovereign States for the benefit
of actions aimed and domination and hegemonic
influence. That is why we firmly reject all actions aimed
at destabilizing the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
which are in flagrant violation of the requirements for
the rule of law in international relations, as well as the
actions aimed at intervening against Ecuador, Bolivia
and other nations of Latin America and the Caribbean.

Cuba would like to reaffirm here in this forum
the unswerving commitment of the Cuban people to
the Charter of the United Nations, in particular to its
purposes and principles. It reiterates its vocation for
peace and unlimited respect for the sovereignty of
States and its commitment to the realization of the
rights of peoples to development, to a just, democratic
and fair international order, to solidarity between
peoples across the world, to a healthy environment,
including one in which everyone can live free of the
ongoing threat posed by nuclear weapons, a threat to
the very existence of the human species.

