Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, may I warmly thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Salame',
for his statement and forjoining us this morning. I wish
to thank him in particular for his work and his tireless
commitment as well as that of his Mission's personnel,
all of whom are working in a particularly difficult
environment. I also thank Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Schulz for their informative briefings.

The fighting began around two months ago and
has continued despite several calls for a humanitarian
ceasefire. Belgium supports those calls and deplores
the fact that they have been rejected. It is becoming
ever more clear to all of us that the military situation
is at an impasse. This is, unfortunately, exactly what
many of us had feared.

Today's briefing quite rightly reminds us that it is
Libyan civilians as well as the most vulnerable migrants
who are paying the heaviest price for the rejection of a
political solution. Belgium calls on all parties to respect
their commitments under international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians. In particular,
we call on the parties to refrain from any serious
violations with regard to children, including recruiting
them and using them in combat. Belgium commends
the courage of humanitarian and medical personnel,
who are paying a high price for their determination.

At this stage, the major beneficiaries of the current
situation are terrorists. The military option will lead
only to chaos and to the destabilization of the country
by allowing Da'esh to resort to guerrilla strategies; this
is a fundamental threat to the progress made.

Beyond assigning responsibility for the fighting,
Belgium would recall that those who are guilty of grave
Violations of international humanitarian law and, more
broadly, those who threaten the peace in Libya should
be held accountable for their actions. All leaders,
military and civilian, who have control, authority or
effective command over their subordinates could be
held criminally responsible for the crimes committed
by the latter and could be prosecuted in national courts
or the International Criminal Court.

Belgium supports the work of the Special
Representative and of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and calls on the parties to return to
the negotiating table without preconditions. The need
for a ceasefire remains urgent.

Finally, Belgium calls for strict respect by all parties
of the arms embargo imposed by the Council. Violations
of the embargo have, as Mr. Salame' underlined,
prolonged the conflict and the suffering of the Libyan
people. In this regard, we should underscore the vital
work being done by the Libya Panel of Experts, created
by resolution 1973 (2011), with which the Council has
exhorted all States to Cooperate fully. In that regard,
we are encouraged by the recent report from Tunisia of
the freeing of one ofthe experts, who had been detained
for a number of weeks despite his immunity.

In conclusion, I should to underscore, as did my
French colleague, the fact that there is a convergence
of ideas in the Council on the situation in Libya, and I
hope that the Council will be able to pronounce itself
very soon through the adoption of a resolution.

