Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I too would like to
thank Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing on the latest developments in
Timor-Leste. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Timor-Leste for his presentation.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement to be
made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to
make some remarks in addition to that.

The Greek Government deplores the unfortunate
violent incidents, and expresses its deep condolences to
the Government and the people of Timor-Leste on the
loss of so many lives and the enormous destruction of
property. We regret that such a short period of time was
enough to overturn the successes and gains of the past
four years. This clear manifestation of the fragility of
the East Timorese political, security and social
situation is more than worrisome, and it deserves the
full attention of the Security Council.

At the same time we have learned the lesson that
even though we ought to be saving money, the
withdrawal of United Nations forces should take place
in a more cautious way.

We commend the immediate dispatch and
deployment of defence and police forces by Portugal,
Australia, New Zealand and Malaysia in response to
the request of the President and Government of Timor-
Leste. Furthermore, we are very pleased to see all the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations Office in
Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), especially with regard to
easing the humanitarian crisis. On the other hand, we
regret that UNOTIL's mandate is coming to an end
under such dire circumstances.

There is no doubt that Timor-Leste needs a new
reinforced United Nations mission so that the defence,

S/l'V.5457

 
security and justice institutions can regain their
functional capacity and so that the East Timorese
people can be guaranteed a safe and peaceful everyday
life. It is also important that all those who committed
the recent crimes and abuses be brought to justice.

Greece has paid particular attention to the
assessment of the situation presented today by
Mr. Martin. We also give positive consideration to the
views of the Government of Timor-Leste, especially in
the context of the preparations for, and holding of,
presidential and parliamentary elections next year.

In the current circumstances, the main task of the
Security Council is to safeguard the viability of Timor-
Leste's democratic institutions. Greece looks forward
to working with the other members of the Council to
achieve consensus in formulating the most appropriate
draft resolution concerning the United Nations mission
that will succeed UNOTIL. We also look forward to the
specific recommendations of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, we hope that political
reconciliation and the disarmament of all illegal groups
can be achieved in the near future, paving the way for
the resumption of efforts to rebuild this young nation
and put much-needed development projects back on
track.

