I would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing this debate, and Minister Maas for presiding over today's discussion. Ireland aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of the European Union (see annex 25) and the Group of Friends of Women and Peace and Security (see annex 20). We are grateful to all briefers for their powerful interventions. I welcome in particular the interventions of Ms. Ohmar, from NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security, and Ms. Fornel-Poutou, from Association des Femmes Juristes de Centrafrique. Ireland believes that the inclusion of civil society in the Security Council's discussions is critical. Hearing directly from organizations representing those affected by sexual violence in conflict enhances our understanding and our ability to make meaningful change. We must do everything we can to increase our support to local organizations, civil society and women human rights defenders, who are at the forefront of these struggles. The coronavirus disease pandemic has increased the challenge and the importance of their work. Yet as their role has become more critical, we have seen an increased targeting of women human rights defenders. Ireland is committed to building peace that is inclusive of civil society, youth and women - from the beginning and throughout. Preventing gender-based harm is critically linked to preventing armed violence. Put simply, more equal and inclusive societies enable more peaceful societies. Strengthening gender equality and women's rights is both a human rights obligation and key to cultivating peace. Structural gender inequalities and discrimination are at the heart of the differential impact conflict has on women, men, boys and girls and members of sexual and gender minorities. To prevent and eliminate the scourge of sexual and gender- based violence in conflict, our most fundamental task is to achieve gender equality at every level. That includes ensuring women's full and effective participation in political, economic and social life. It also includes ensuring accessible and responsive political, justice and security institutions. Societies where discrimination is tolerated and where economic and social inequalities persist are an enabling environment for conflict-related sexual violence. Promoting gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls is central to Ireland's foreign policy. Our commitment is embedded in our development policy, our women and peace and security national action plan and throughout our activities at the United Nations, including our time as Chair of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women. We are concerned that humanitarian services for survivors remain chronically underfunded. We strongly support and are committed to a holistic and survivor-centred approach to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence. That must include access to comprehensive health services, including sexual and reproductive health services. In 2019, we increased our funding to partners supporting prevention and response interventions for sexual and gender-based violence in conflict-affected and fragile contexts. Our support includes funding for the Special Appeal on the Response to Sexual Violence of the International Committee of the Red Cross and a multi-year partnership with the International Rescue Committee to support the provision of gender-based violence prevention and response services in conflict- affected and fragile contexts in sub-Saharan Africa. Poverty, forced displacement and vulnerability increase the risk of sexual violence, especially for those in flight. As highlighted in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/487), marginalized communities, such as refugees and migrants, indigenous women, members of sexual and gender minorities, members of persecuted political, ethnic or religious minorities and persons living with disabilities, are all at particular risk. We must ensure that those groups are included in all our actions to eliminate conflict-related sexual violence and to provide redress when it does occur. Ireland commends the critical advances made by the Office of the Special Representative towards our collective goal of ending conflict-related sexual violence and impunity for those crimes. Shining a light on those acts is vital but, as the Secretary-General's report implores, we must ensure that, once uncovered, those crimes are stopped and survivors are supported throughout their recovery. Accountability is key to protection and prevention, and the onus is on us all to do more by supporting existing international institutions and strengthening national mechanisms. Last year, Ireland was proud to provide initial support to survivors of sexual and gender-based violence as part of the ongoing truth, reconciliation and reparations process in the Gambia, thus enabling survivors to participate fully in the process and strengthen national systems to respond to victims. Ireland continues to provide support to mechanisms such as Justice Rapid Response, which provide gender expertise to investigations of serious human rights violations in conflict zones, including conflict-related sexual violence. We welcome recent progress linking conflict-related sexual violence with the work of specific sanctions committees. We strongly support efforts to bolster the use of conflict-related sexual violence as a criterion for imposing sanctions and for greater alignment across thematic and country-specific United Nations sanctions regimes. However, for such criteria to be effective in ensuring compliance and accountability, they must be clearly articulated, consistent and credible. It is not enough to simply establish a relevant mandate or introduce new designation criteria; such criteria must result in actual listings. More can be done to ensure greater gender and humanitarian expertise on panels of experts and to encourage such panels to report consistently on instances of conflict-related sexual violence. Regular reporting from field missions would also be welcome, particularly from those missions that already have sanctions-monitoring mandates. There can be no impunity for perpetrators, irrespective of the community or organization they come from. Ireland, as part of the Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse, and as a signatory to the voluntary compact on ending sexual exploitation and abuse, is committed to supporting the Secretary-General's efforts to end the abusive practices of peacekeepers. In conclusion, we must recognize the need to tackle gender inequality as the root cause and a driver of sexual violence in times of war and peace. Ireland views tackling conflict-related sexual violence as an essential element of the wider women and peace and security agenda, which is marking its twentieth anniversary this year. Progress cannot be attained in one area without focusing on the other. During our tenure as an elected member of the Council from 2021 to 2022, we will champion implementation and progress. The survivors of these heinous crimes deserve nothing less.
