Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I express our gratitude to the Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
Ambassador Arias, for the report that he introduced on
the work of the Committee.

Two years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1373 (2001) and the creation of the CTC. By
United Nations standards, that period is sufficient to
assess the Committee's work in implementing its
mandate and to discuss its prospects. We welcome the
intention of the Chairman of the Committee to prepare,
by 15 November, a document on the difficulties States
and the CTC are encountering in implementing the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001).

I wish to make the following points.

In its two years' existence, the CTC has clearly
been playing a key role in the global anti-terrorism
structural system. That is fair and justified. Thanks to
its representativity, legitimacy and transparency, the
Committee is one of the guarantors of a harmonious
and united universal anti-terrorist coalition.

A great achievement of the CTC is the process it
initiated of uniting the efforts of competent
international, regional and subregional organizations in
assisting States to implement the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001). Evidence of that was the
successful holding of two meetings of those
organizations, on 6 March in New York and on 7
October in Washington, DC. It is gratifying that a
growing number of international structures and
organizations are demonstrating interest in
participating in such events. In particular, readiness to
become involved in this process was expressed recently
by the Collective Security Treaty Organization. The
Committee must continue to have an impact on this
process, participating directly in the preparation and
holding of subsequent meetings to ensure that their
work is built on dialogue focused on the most pressing
issues.

One of the most important objectives of the CTC
is the establishment of mechanisms for an exchange of
information between all parties to the global anti-
terrorist coalition. A reliable instrument for achieving
that objective is the Committee Internet site, which has
been substantively improved recently. We hope that the
site will soon eliminate the gap between the Russian
and other language versions and the English version.

The CTC is doing a great deal of work to have
States bring their legislation into line with the demands
of resolution 1373 (2001) and to universalize
participation in the 12 international anti-terrorist
conventions in force. Figures were cited today
confirming the substantive progress made in the past
two years in this area. However, the work is still far
from having been concluded, particularly regarding
developing countries that need assistance in drafting
appropriate legislation.

The Committee is paying a great deal of attention
to establishing a system for rendering assistance to
States to enhance their anti-terrorist potential. There
have been some results, but, in our view, so far the
CTC is unable to make full use of that potential.

With regard to a rather significant group of
States, the Committee has embarked on a new phase of
its work of determining the effectiveness of States'
implementation and use of anti-terrorist legislation and
of their law enforcement mechanisms.

It will be extremely difficult to carry out the
CTC's tasks in this new phase solely by using today's
means and methods. The members of the Committee
should study what new elements must be introduced
into its work so that it can fully implement its mandate
during phases B and C.

In conclusion, we wish the CTC success in its
further work to strengthen the anti-terrorist coalition of
States.

