Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): As usual, my delegation prepared a statement
that was a bit long, and that statement is now before
me. However, I find it extremely difficult and am
extremely embarrassed to speak before the Security
Council on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
when it has become clear to everyone that there is a
huge gap between what the Council says and what it
actually does.
The continuing events in Gaza attest to that fact.
The civilian population of Gaza has suffered long
months of siege and starvation, trapped in a collective
prison unprecedented in human history in terms of its
scope and nature. Mercilessly deprived of food,
medicine, fuel and all of life's necessities, they have, in
legal terms, been subjected to an attempt at genocide
by an occupying force that has, regrettably, flouted all
international law, including international humanitarian
law, and mocked and disregarded all moral and ethical
standards.

The tragedy of Gaza has raised serious doubts as
to the credibility of the Security Council. The Council
has remained unable or unwilling to shoulder its
responsibilities during the siege. The position that the
Council took regarding the siege sent a clear message
to the aggressor that it could escalate its aggression,
because that aggression continues. However, could any
aggression be more serious than aggression that
deprives the people of all of life's necessities? Thus,
Israel has attacked a civilian population that has been
deprived of water, starved and weakened by a blind
war machine that indiscriminately bombs residential
areas, refugee camps, houses of worship, schools and
universities, United Nations facilities, humanitarian
assistance convoys, ambulances and rescue personnel.

Council members have heard that the numbers of
dead and wounded are increasing by the minute; they
have seen the magnitude of the destruction, which is
increasing every minute; they have seen the child
victims of phosphorus bombs; and they have heard that
the aggressor has even prevented the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) from gaining
access to affected areas and reaching victims. The
Council has heard statements by eyewitnesses who
cannot be doubted, including Mr. Jakob Kellenberger,
President of the ICRC, and officials from the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), describing
Israel's brutal practices against the civilian population
in Gaza.

However, the Security Council continues to be
unable or unwilling to do anything. After much
procrastination and hesitation, it adopted resolution
1860 (2009). The resolution had absolutely no effect,
and the reason for that is clear. Thus, the Israelis have
continued to pursue this brutal massacre, unfortunately
with the active financial and technical support of some
who have also provided the aggressor with munitions
to perpetrate its crimes. Those abettors do not hesitate
to offer flimsy excuses for their actions, while at the
same time setting conditions for an end to the fighting.
Those who do so are in no way embarrassed to speak
today of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Developments in Gaza over the past three weeks
have surpassed in brutality anything we have seen
before. As described by Mr. Ging, Director of UNRWA
Operations at the Gaza Field Office, they are a test of
our humanity.

I believe that the failure of the Security Council
to assume its moral and legal responsibilities for the
events in Gaza and its complicity with certain actors in
those events have made it extremely difficult for
people to hear us speak of legitimacy, ethics and
values. This has become an extremely embarrassing
exercise for a person like myself, at least, who was
raised on Islamic teachings that prohibit attacks on
civilians and condemn duplicity and selectivity.

