Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate the
Russian Federation on its presidency of the Security
Council and would like to sincerely thank you,
Mr. President, for your ready response to the request to
convene today's meeting. We would also like to recognize
Poland for its skilled leadership of the Security Council
last month, including the meetings held to address
the Palestinian question and the important debates on
international law and the protection of civilians, which
are so relevant to the grave crisis we are facing right
now. We will never forget the Permanent Representative
of Poland's humane gesture when she asked Security
Council members to stand for a minute of silence in
honour of the Palestinian innocents killed by Israeli
forces (see S/PV.8256). We appreciate that and will
never forget it.

We would like to express our deep appreciation
to our brother country of Kuwait for submitting draft
resolution S/2018/516, which the Security Council
just voted on, and for the Kuwaiti delegation's tireless
efforts to ensure the Council's serious consideration of
our repeated calls for international protection for the
Palestinian people. We commend the Kuwaiti delegation
for the comprehensive and transparent process it and
other Council members undertook to advance the issue.
We regret, however, the extremely evil intent aimed at
undermining that process and the Council's credibility
and authority.

We are grateful to all the countries that voted
in favour of the draft resolution, despite the veto
cast today by the United States, which regrettably
prevented its adoption, and despite the ensuing
tensions and confusion. We would like to convey our
deep appreciation to Kuwait, Bolivia, China, Cote
d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Kazakhstan,
Peru, Sweden and the Russian Federation for standing
firmly on principle, responding to the urgency of the
situation and standing unequivocally on the side of
international law with regard to Palestine, including on
the protection of civilians. Indeed, today's vote sends
important messages that must be recognized, including
the following.

First, there is a severe protection crisis in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in East
Jerusalem and particularly in the Gaza Strip, due to
Israel's illegal policies and practices, such as its use of
force against Palestinian civilians conducting peaceful
protests and its blockade of Gaza, among other
oppressive and punitive measures against our people.

Secondly, Israel's killing and injuring ofPalestinian
civilians will not be tolerated and cannot be excused.
The occupying Power must fully abide by its obligations
under international law.

Thirdly, the Palestinian people are entitled to
protection in accordance with international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, and the
Security Council's obligations and commitments to
protecting civilians in armed conflict.

Fourthly, immediate steps must be taken to end
Israel's closure and restrictions on Gaza, and ensure
the sustained opening of the crossing points for the
normal movement and access of persons and goods.
This entirely illegal, inhumane and suffocating Israeli
blockade must end.

Fifthly, maximum restraint is required on the part
of all parties, as are immediate steps to stabilize the
situation and reverse the negative trends on the ground.

Sixthly, it is time to seriously consider measures to
guarantee the safety, protection and well-being of the
Palestinian people, including through the establishment
of an international protection mechanism. The
Palestinian leadership, including President Mahmoud
Abbas, has long called for such measures, and we are
grateful that despite all of the pressures, this issue has
been given due consideration by the Security Council and
enjoys the majority support of the Council's members.
Their votes today refute the premise that the Palestinian
people are the exception to the rules and principles of
international law, reaffirming instead that they are
entitled to the rights and legal protections to which all
peoples are entitled - reinforcing the universality of
the law and its application to this conflict. They have
rejected the might-over-right strategy, sending a clear
message that no one is exempt from the law - not even
Israel, regardless of the exceptionalism it has for too
long enjoyed.

Of course, the final outcome of today's vote
is extremely disappointing but, unfortunately, not
surprising. While we had sincerely hoped and exerted
all efforts to ensure that the Security Council would
uphold its duties pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and act responsibly to address the protection
crisis being endured by the Palestinian people, we have
never underestimated the obstacles in that regard. We
deeply regret the Council's continued paralysis on our
issue due to the recurrent negative and biased position
of one permanent member of the Security Council.
We deplore the use of the veto to continue shielding
Israel from censure and accountability for its crimes
against our people and to wrongly prevent the Council
from upholding its Charter duties in the maintenance of
international peace and security, including by actions
aimed at saving civilian lives.

Moreover, we strongly reject the cynical attempts
to delay, undermine and thwart action on this initiative
in a manner that denigrates the Council's work and
the serious efforts to address these critical matters
in accordance with international law and relevant
resolutions. We also firmly reject the renewed attempt
today to classify our situation as one of terrorism. It is
not. We reject that classification. It is about the denial
of an entire people's human rights and their oppression
and dehumanization every single day and for decades.
This is a political, territorial rights and justice issue
and we cannot accept the lecturing accusations that the
draft presented by Kuwait was in any way biased.

The draft, which was negotiated for more than
two weeks realistically, addresses all of the factors of
the current crisis, including violence on both sides. If
anything, the draft does not go far enough in addressing
the nightmare the Palestinian people are living under
this criminal Israeli occupation. What we are facing
can be described in just a few words declared this
week by the Israeli Minister Yuval Steinitz, who said:
"I do not exclude the possibility of conquering Gaza
and eliminating it once and for all". This is the reality
of the constant aggression, threats and existential
crisis the Palestinian people are enduring under
Israeli occupation, which the current United States
Administration refuses to see, refuses to understand,
or, in any way properly address.

We will continue our calls and efforts to secure
protection for the Palestinian people to ensure their
safety and well-being. We will continue to seek
accountability and to pursue justice for the victims
through all available legal means, including through
the International Criminal Court. We await the dispatch
of the commission of inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council and the findings following a thorough,
independent and transparent investigation, as requested
by the Secretary-General himself. We will not relent
in pressing for answers, including why Palestinian
children, women and men were killed and injured so
wantonly and wilfully by the Israeli occupying forces
under the direct command of Israel's highest political
and military leaders and who is to be held responsible.

In spite of today's outcome and the paralysis
gripping the Security Council, we will not stop calling
for Council action and the implementation of all of its
relevant resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
because it is its duty and obligation to act and to address
such gross violations and threats to international peace
and security and to ultimately contribute to bringing
an end to this injustice and ensuring a just, lasting and
peaceful solution to this conflict.

Allow me now to end my statement with a message
to our people in Arabic.

(Spoke in Arabic)

We will continue, on behalf of our steadfast people
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the great
people of Palestine, to make every effort to raise their
voice - the voice of reason and justice - and to end
their painful plight. We will spare no effort in calling
for respect for our inalienable rights and to achieve our
legitimate national aspirations. The result of the voting
today will only make us more committed and persistent
in working in the Security Council with the sisterly
State of Kuwait and all friendly countries, and with the
support of our brothers and sisters in the Group of Arab
States; the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries; all of our friends
and free, peace-loving States in Africa, Asia, Europe
and Latin America; the General Assembly and every
other international forum to end the Israeli occupation
of our territory in order to achieve the freedom, dignity
and independence of our people. There is no force
in this world, however great, that is greater than the
determination of our Palestinian people, which has
lasted for more than seven decades. There can be nothing
more deep-rooted than our history and civilization,
which is all about steadfastness and challenge. We will
continue to resolutely defend our just cause so that we
can live in peace and security in our own independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

To all those who accuse the tens of thousands of
Palestinian civilians peacefully protesting against the

occupation of being terrorists 4 and those accusers
got nothing but their own vote in the Security Council
on their failed draft resolution - we say that the

entire Palestinian people, in their millions, are against
occupation and the terrorism practiced by the State of
Israel, whose latest victim, on this very day, was Razan
Ashraf Al-Najjar, a martyr at 21 years of age. She was
a paramedic carrying out her humanitarian duties when
she was shot in the back by the Israeli enemy. The bullet
pierced her heart and ended her life.

