Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We
congratulate Malaysia on convening this debate and on
its leadership of the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We thank the Secretary-General for
his careful briefing, and Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake
both for their briefings and for their important work in
protecting the interests of children.

As others have noted, it has been 20 years since
the Graca Machel report (see A/51/306) was released,
drawing global attention to the devastating impact
of armed conflict on children. Since then, we have
established a strong framework to monitor and address
violations against children in armed conflict. Its
purpose is not simply to criticize or censure, but also
to drive practical improvements on the ground. The
Secretary-General, Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake, as
well as other speakers, have described the places and
ways in which children are suffering in conflict zones.
We are all horrified at the way children are used,
abused, manipulated and killed; their lives blighted,
their futures destroyed. Yet far too often, we see utter
indifference to this suffering of the innocent on the part
of those who could make a difference yet chose not to.

There are real limits to what we as a Council and as
a United Nations can do to change things. But we must
make full use of the tools available to us. The Secretary-
General has been given a clear mandate to report on
and list those parties responsible for grave violations
committed against children in armed conflict.

It is, of course, possible that information used in
such reports is contested, and it is important that there
are discussions to ensure that reports are as accurate
as possible. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General and
his office must be able to discharge their mandate
independently in order to maintain a transparent and
credible listing process. All Member States must respect
the Secretary-General's independence, as required by
the Charter. This is a collective responsibility that we
all must uphold. So too must the United Nations and we
Member States live up to our commitments to protect
children and others from sexual abuse and exploitation
by United Nations peacekeepers and personnel.
Complaints must be investigated and perpetrators must
be brought to justice.

As Ms. Zerrougui has reminded us, action plans
with listed parties are delivering clear, practical results.
Since 2003, nine parties to conflicts in Chad, Cote
d'Ivoire, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Uganda have completed
their action plans and have been delisted from the
annexes of the Secretary-General's annual report.
This progress is welcome. At the same time, we must
acknowledge that the situation of children in many
conflict settings remains grave.

The Secretary-General's latest report (S/2016/360)
paints a harrowing picture. I wish to highlight several
issues that demand urgent attention. Both schools and
hospitals have special protections under international
humanitarian law. Yet attacks on schools and hospitals
were documented in 19 out of 20 situations of conflict
in 2015. Parties to conflict continue to use schools and
universities for military purposes, leaving children
vulnerable to retaliatory attack. Even where no military
attack occurs, the presence of armed forces within
schools exposes children to increased risk of sexual
violence and of recruitment by armed actors. New
Zealand has endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
as have 52 other Member States. We urge others to do
the same.

In May, at the initiative of New Zealand and four
other elected members, the Council adopted a resolution
on health care in armed conflict, which unequivocally
condemned attacks on health-care workers and health-
care facilities. Our message was clear: the wounded
and sick, medical personnel, facilities, transport
and equipment must be respected and protected. The
delivery of medical assistance must not be obstructed.
It is that simple.

And yet attacks on hospitals have continued, with
children frequently among the casualties. The recent
fighting in Aleppo has seen further egregious examples.
These attacks are an affront to our common humanity
and must stop. We urge all States and parties to conflict
to comply with international humanitarian law and to
redouble their efforts to protect civilians and limit the
harm to which they are exposed.

Where fear of violent extremism builds, we see
increasing numbers of children detained without charge
by Governments that consider them security threats.
These children are frequently subject to torture and ill-
treatment. As the Secretary-General has underlined,
depriving children of their liberty is contrary to the best
interests ofboth the child and of society as a whole. The
abuse of children in detention only creates a greater
sense of grievance in communities and further fuels the
spread of violent extremism. The detention of children
without charge must stop. Children associated with
armed groups should be transferred to child protection
authorities for rehabilitation. If charged with a valid

criminal offence, children must be treated in accordance
with international juvenile justice standards. We urge
Member States to treat children associated with armed
groups as victims entitled to full protection of their
human rights.

In that regard, we fully support the Secretary
General's message around reintegration and
rehabilitation. No child's story ends simply with his
or her release by an armed group. Adequately funded
reintegration programmes for children separated from
armed forces and groups are needed to enable children
to rebuild their lives in safety and dignity. Without
support, children may return to violence.

Former child soldiers who have acquired a disability
during conflict have particular rehabilitation and
reintegration needs. Such children are especially likely
to experience isolation and neglect. We would welcome
discussion among the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, UNICEF, the Special Rapporteur
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and other
relevant stakeholders to develop recommendations or
guidance for the reintegration and rehabilitation of
these children.

In closing, let me reiterate New Zealand's full
support for the work of the Special Representative and
her office, the rigour and integrity of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism, and the Secretary General's
comprehensive reporting and recommendations. We
urge all Member States to continue to support their vital
work and to help them translate the global consensus
on the need to protect the rights of children in conflict
settings into a much better reality than we see today.

