Mr. Begec (Turkey): The nature of the current
conflicts requires us to intensify our efforts to achieve
peace and security. The tireless work and perseverance
on the part of responsible members of the international
community have paved the way to the adoption of
important resolutions in the past few months by the
Security Council and the General Assembly on the
questions of Palestine and Syria. Those positive steps
can make a difference only if they are fully implemented
on the ground.
Turkey supports all initiatives that revitalize the
Middle East peace process, address the long-standing
vacuum on the political track and preserve the letter and
spirit of the established parameters. We will not cease
our efforts to reach a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace, which would include the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In that regard, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), which reflects the widespread
agreement on the negative impact on the two-State
solution of Israel's illegal settlement activities. That
resolution, as well as the recent Paris Middle East
Peace Conference, in which Turkey also participated,
represent steps in the right direction in reaffirming the
international community's commitment to the two-
State Vision.

In the meantime, Israel should immediately cease
all settlement activities, as well as the demolition of
housing, land confiscation and other policies that deny
Palestinians their right to development. The continuation
of those practices deepens the sense of injustice,
creates a growing mistrust towards the international
community and breeds desperation. Needless to say,
that is in nobody's interest. Furthermore, attempts to
alter the historical status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
increasing violations of its sanctity, as well as measures
violating the freedom of worship, jeopardize peaceful
coexistence. Palestinians should be able to sit at the
negotiation table as the State of Palestine, equal to
Israel. In that regard, the recognition of the State
of Palestine by more than the current 137 countries
and its full integration to international forums are
vital. Palestinian reconciliation is also an important
component of the lasting peace, and Turkey continues
its efforts to that end.

As part of the agreement on the normalization
of Turkish-Israeli relations, the Ambassadors of both
countries have recently assumed their duties in Ankara
and Tel AViV, respectively. That will enable us to restore
our bilateral relations in many fields and increase our
contributions aimed at addressing the humanitarian
catastrophe in Gaza and the development needs of the
West Bank. Currently, we are focusing on the urgent
needs of the Palestinian people, in particular the
electricity and water shortages, as well as health and
housing issues. We have sent two technical missions to
Gaza to assess the infrastructure. Our humanitarian aid
delivery to Gaza will continue regularly.

Turkey has been undertaking intensive efforts to
end the violence in Syria, ensure the unfettered flow of
humanitarian aid and reach a political solution based on
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex), as outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). To that
end, we have done our utmost to ensure the safe and
secure evacuation of people from eastern Aleppo. We
were pleased to see that those efforts, along with our
call for an emergency special session at the General
Assembly, led to the unanimous adoption of resolution
2328 (2016). That was a modest but promising step after
a long silence regarding Syria in the Council. Following
the decisive role that Turkey played in the evacuation
of 45,000 people from eastern Aleppo, we facilitated
and became the guarantors of an understanding reached
by the warring parties on a countrywide ceasefire.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2336 (2016)
demonstrated the international community's support
for that process and reconfirmed the link between our
efforts and the meticulous work undertaken by the
United Nations.

With the ceasefire in place, we have covered
significant ground. Our aim is to ensure a sustainable
and functional continuation of that understanding. So
far, working with our Russian counterparts, we have
been able to contain the Violations by the regime and the
foreign militia elements. Violators are warned through
appropriate channels. However, the process remains
fragile. The maintenance of the ceasefire is decisive, if
we wish to unblock the political solution. That is exactly
why the period ahead will be critical, particularly the
next two weeks. We invite all actors to exercise their
influence in order to reach the goal desired.

Our efforts are aimed at restarting the political
track from the point where it left off in April 2016. The
preparations for the meeting to be held in Astana with
the presence of the United Nations are ongoing. The
Astana meeting will be complementary and supportive

to the political process led by the United Nations and
represents an important confidence-building step
ahead of the resumption of negotiations in Geneva on
8 February.

While we refocus on our efforts on the ceasefire
and political talks, accountability remains a central
concern. Reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria
will be based on our success in that matter. In that
regard, the adoption of resolution 71/248 by the General
Assembly is a significant development.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong will,
working with our partners, to continue to support
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people in the
coming period.

