Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegation joins
other Council members in thanking Senegal for
having convened today's debate, and we thank you,
Mr. Minister, for presiding over it. We wish also to
express our appreciation to all the briefers for their
respective briefings. We thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2016/780), which provides further
context for the subject at hand.

Malaysia remains committed to further
strengthening and consolidating the comprehensive
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union, particularly on issues of peace and
security in Africa. Such comprehensive partnership
would go a long way towards further strengthening
our collective and ongoing efforts in the maintenance
of international peace and security. In this context,
my delegation pays tribute to the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union, which has been
instrumental in strengthening the partnership within
the two organizations.

Nonetheless, although significant progress has
been made to improve cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in recent years, more
could be achieved to make the partnership more
meaningful, efficient and effective. It is therefore
imperative that such cooperation continue to be
underpinned by, inter alia, a common strategic objective
and a clear division of responsibilities, and premised on
shared assessments, with a view to mutually reinforcing
and complementing the decisions of both the United
Nations and the African Union.

It is patently clear that the lessons learned and
best practices on the cooperation between the two
organizations should be shared on a regular basis
through a structured mechanism with a view to
producing tangible, results-oriented operational
benefits on the ground and avoid task redundancies
and duplication, including through more frequent
secretariat-to-secretariat exchanges.

The opportunity afforded by the three
comprehensive reviews on the United Nations
peacebuilding architectures, United Nations peace
operations and resolution 1325 (2000), concluded
last year, provided a timely opportunity to reflect on
ways and means of reinforcing cooperation in areas of
common interest to the United Nations and the African
Union on promoting and sustaining peace. We remain
committed to the follow-up and implementation phases
of the review, in coordination and cooperation with all
partners and stakeholders.

While conflict management remains a core function
of the United Nations and regional organizations, there
has been a renewed push, of which my delegation is
fully supportive, towards the strengthening of collective
efforts to prevent conflict from escalating into full-
blown threats to international peace and security.

In this regard, Malaysia remains convinced that
conflict prevention must continue to be prioritized
in the cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We should continue to improve
the efficiency of the United Nations-African Union
preventive diplomacy, which should be geared towards
more coordinated actions, including by enabling early
detection and actions to defuse potential crisis situations.

We share the View that regional actors, which assume
greater ownership of development in their respective
regions, have the potential to contribute immensely
to shaping positive outcomes for peace, security and
development. The United Nations should be encouraged
to leverage the comparative advantages of regional
organizations, which possess a better understanding
of the dynamics and root causes of conflicts in their
respective regions. Be that as it may, it is important to
bear in mind recent experiences in the Central African
Republic, Mali and Somalia, among other places, which
have revealed some key areas and stresses that stretch
the limits and capacity of regional organizations in
dealing with such challenging situations. Without
sufficient financial and capacity-building support, the
ability to deliver will not match the aspirations and
determinations of regional organizations, particularly
in harsh and challenging situations. It is also equally
important to guard against burden-sharing becoming
burden-shifting, as unrealistic expectations are
placed on regional organizations that have yet to build
full capacity.

In that context, Malaysia appreciates and commends
the African Union for its leadership in taking ownership
of the region's peace and security agenda. We note,
however, that its ambition is severely constrained by
the lack of necessary resources, particularly in terms
of flexible, sustainable and predictable funding. We
commend and fully support the ongoing efforts and
commitments of the AU to enhance self-reliance in
that regard. It is for those reasons that we welcome
the bold and forward-looking positions adopted by
the AU leaders during the twenty-seventh African
Union Summit, held in Kigali in July, to establish
and operationalize the African Union Peace Fund. As
such, we are pleased to support the draft resolution
(S/2016/977), jointly initiated by Senegal and the United
States, scheduled to be adopted today. We believe that
unanimous adoption of the draft resolution will send
a strong message of support from the Council to the
African Union's member States. We are convinced that
the draft resolution is a necessary step towards further
cementing the close coordination and cooperation
between the two organizations.

In conclusion, we hope that discussions today
generate more ideas and strategies in order to deepen
and strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union with a view to enhancing the
capacity of the international community and regional
organizations to respond effectively to emerging threats
in the African region and beyond.

