The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Albania, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg,
Romania, Slovenia, Spain, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Turkey in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity With the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, Without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kulla (Albania)
took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Molde
(Denmark), Mr. Eitel (Germany), Mr. Zacharakis
(Greece), Mr. Fulci (Italy), Mr. Wolzfeld
(Luxembourg), Mrs. Sandru (Romania), Mr. Turk
(Slovenia), Mr. Laclaustra (Spain), Mr. Calovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and
Mr. Celem (Turkey) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, if I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mrs. Sylvie Junod, head of the delegation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross to the
United Nations.
There being no objection, it is so decided.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council
is meeting in response to the request contained in a letter
dated 5 August 1997 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, document S/1997/614, and in a letter dated 8
August 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Albania to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council, document S/ 1997/628.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 12 August 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/l997/632, transmitting the text of a letter
dated 11 August 1997 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Chile.


