Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation is pleased that the Security
Council finally decided to hold a public briefing on
the dangerous situation that has been developing in
Rakhine state for many months now. It is a situation
that has reached an unprecedented level since the
unacceptable attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation
Army against the Myanmar security forces.

The tragedy is indeed unsustainable. Hundreds
of thousands of people, mostly children, women and
older people, are fleeing violence and abuses of all
types, which have just been described, to seek refuge
and safety where they can, especially in neighbouring
Bangladesh. We take this opportunity to commend the
generosity and courage of the people and authorities of
Bangladesh for welcoming the unfortunate Rohingya.

Senegal has already expressed its deep-seated
concern with regard to the situation of the Rohingya
and has strongly condemned the violence that they
are being subjected to. The President of Senegal, His
Excellency Mr. Macky Sall, referred to the issue in a
joint statement with the President of Turkey, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan. Speaking at the rostrum of the General
Assembly on 20 September, our President said,

"in Burma we are seriously concerned by the
violence against the Rohingya Muslim people.
As outrage is never a selective emotion, Senegal
strongly urges the international community to take
action to put an end to this genuine human tragedy"
(A/72/PV10).

Several speakers launched the same appeal from the
same rostrum last week.

It is therefore fortunate that the Security Council
has heeded such an urgent call to action and has
acceded to the joint request made by Senegal, Egypt,
Sweden, Kazakhstan, the United Kingdom, France and
the United States, calling on the Council to meet in this
format and exchange views, in full transparency and
bearing full responsibility, on the growing threat to
international peace and security, with the participation
of the representatives of the two States that are most
directly affected, namely, Bangladesh and Myanmar.

I would like to congratulate Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, who very early undertook discreet
steps to defuse the crisis, which was breaking out, and
stop it from getting out of control. He visited the region
and met with several leaders and stakeholders. Fully
assuming the responsibility given him by the Charter of
the United Nations to become involved and to prevent
an outbreak or escalation of a conflict, the Secretary-
General, on 2 September, wrote to the members of
the Security Council to draw their attention to their
responsibility with regard to the situation, namely, to
send a strong message highlighting the need to provide
the necessary constructive support and cooperation
aimed at devising a political strategy to put an end to the
vicious circle in Rakhine state. He also insisted on the
importance of restraint and calm in our efforts to avert
a humanitarian catastrophe and ensure full respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law, as
well as the importance of the continued presence and
security of United Nations agencies and personnel and
other partners .

The statement of the Secretary-General this
afternoon sheds further light on the many challenges,
including humanitarian and security issues, in this
very complex situation. Other important figures,
other States and other international bodies have been
deployed and continue to take action aimed at putting
an end to the tragedy of the Rohingyas, stopping the
violence and helping refugees and displaced persons
to return voluntarily and securely to their land and
homes. In addition to the neighbouring countries
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) has also
been very active, including through its Contact Group
on the Rohingya Muslim Minority, and has spared no
effort in seeking a fair and lasting solution to the crisis.

On the ground with the refugees, in Geneva at the
level of the Human Rights Council, and even in New
York with the Secretary-General, the General Assembly
and the Security Council, the OIC, of which the
Senegal is a founding and active member, has brought
parties together and called for diplomatic initiatives,
along with concrete humanitarian assistance. That
was eloquently reflected in the report that sanctioned
the ministerial meeting of the Contact Group held last
week in New York on the margins of the general debate
of the General Assembly on 19 September 2017.

So what has the Security Council done, and
especially what must it do in the light of the statement
we have just heard from the Secretary-General and
the reports, as well as those we will hear from the
representatives of Myanmar and Bangladesh?

After the preliminary discussions we had on this
subject under "Any other business", it appears to
us that the time has come to undertake substantive
discussions - in private consultations - and decide
how we are going follow up on this briefing. Thanks
to the courageous recommendations set forth in the
final report of Kofi Annan's Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State, which was requested by the Government
of Myanmar itself and which the Government has also
boldly committed itself to implementing, we now know
much more about the root causes of the conflict and the
ways and means of resolving it on a lasting basis.

Without prejudice to what we might decide to
do or not to do after today's exchanges of views, the
Senegalese delegation would first like to reiterate
its firm condemnation of the violence that has been
unleashed in the state of Rakhine in Myanmar, from
whatever side it comes, including unacceptable attacks
on the Myanmar defence and security forces by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army armed movement.
Let there be no mistake: the unwavering support and
active solidarity that Senegal has rightly expressed
for and with the Rohingyas, who are considered by
the United Nations to be the most persecuted religious
minority in the world, leaves no room for acceptance of
terrorist acts.
The clarity and unity of the international
community's appeals to the Government of Burma
reflects the urgency and seriousness of this situation,
which is also likely to fuel violent extremism. The OIC,
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the
European Union have all condemned the indiscriminate
and disproportionate repression facing the Rohingyas.
Meeting at the summit in Astana, Kazakhstan, on
10 and ll September, the leaders of the OIC denounced
the Violence and called for an independent investigation
into all cases of human rights violations committed
against the Rohingya minority. Accordingly, three
major objectives should, we believe, guide our thinking.

First, military operations should be stopped so as to
put an end to the campaign against the Rohingyas and
also to make a clear distinction between the rebels and
the civilian population. Appropriate measures should
therefore be taken to ensure that all those found guilty
of abuses are held to account.

Secondly, international humanitarian law must
be scrupulously respected in order to ensure full,
unconditional and unimpeded access for humanitarian
assistance and the dignified and voluntary return
of refugees to their provinces and villages of origin.
In that regard, we take note of the commitment and
willingness of the Government of Myanmar to work
closely with Bangladesh based on the experiences of
the 1993 working group set up by the two countries.

Thirdly, there must be a definitive resolution with
regard to the discriminatory treatment of the Rohingyas;
that resolution should focus on the root causes of the
violence, including the issue of nationality, which is
inextricably linked to ethnicity by a 1982 law that made
that minority the largest Stateless group in the world.

Senegal strongly urges Myanmar to fully
implement the recommendations contained in the
Annan Commission report. We continue to hope that
the report will serve as a framework conducive to the
creation ofa society where the rejection and disapproval
of the other gives way to openness to dialogue. That
is the only way that Myanmar, all ethnic groups and
religions combined, can preserve and enrich the state
of Rakhine's long and proud history and rich cultural
tradition and commit to implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, one of whose essential
objectives is to establish peaceful societies where no
one is left behind. That is the wish of a country like
Senegal, whose belief in dialogue among peoples of
all ethnic groups, races, religions, languages is a long-
standing and principal feature of our foreign policy that
has withstood the test of time.

