Mr. Osvald (Sweden): Your presence here today, Sir,
at the head of the Korean delegation is most welcome.
Later in the debate the representative of the Netherlands
will speak on behalf of the European Union. We fully
support the statement he will make.

In conflicts all over the world we are repeatedly faced
with double tragedies. Men, women and children, driven
from their homes, are also targets of inhuman treatment,
brutal attacks and sometimes even massacres.

Recent internal conflicts pose new challenges to the
international community. Victims of conflict are denied
urgently needed emergency relief, forced to walk hundreds
of miles in search of safety and left to die in remote
wilderness. And those who are there to help are refused
access to the refugees and are even themselves
increasingly made targets of such violence.

Large-scale attacks on human security and gross
violations of human rights within States are the harbinger
of threats to regional and international security. Thus, the
Security Council is frequently called upon to address
important questions of how to protect refugees and
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations.

Sweden welcomes this debate. It should be a step
towards concrete proposals and decisions by the Council
in this field.
Governments bear the primary responsibility for the
security of all individuals under their jurisdiction. This
responsibility also entails that Governments should seek
international support if they lack the ability to provide
such protection and assistance. But individual perpetrators
must always be held accountable for violations of
humanitarian law, also in areas where government
authority has broken down.

The role of the Security Council is first and foremost
to promote political solutions to crises, preferably even
before a conflict has turned violent. Peaceful conflict
resolution and preventive diplomacy are certainly the best
methods of addressing the fundamental problems of
refugees and displaced persons. Action to be considered
by the Security Council in this field is, however, manifold
in nature. The Council has an essential role in ensuring
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights. Actions of the Council, in each individual case,
also contribute to the development of norms for the
behaviour of States, and even non-State entities.

Protection of humanitarian assistance is, and should
be, a task specifically mandated in connection with many
peacekeeping operations. But even in the absence of
United Nations peacekeeping, the Security Council must
ensure that it is fully apprised of the humanitarian and
human-rights situation at hand and of the requirements of
the humanitarian organizations. Therefore, the Council
should consult closely on a regular basis with
humanitarian organizations and seek their advice on how
to improve the security of refugees, displaced persons and
the humanitarian relief workers themselves.

From the outset of a crisis, the Council should use
its moral authority and political leverage to impress on
leaders of parties in conflict their personal accountability

 

for crimes against refugees and displaced persons as well
as humanitarian personnel, in areas under their control. The
need for humanitarian access should be equally underlined.
Impunity should not be accepted. The Council should
consider ways and means to follow up on such crimes.
Preferably, political actors should know from the outset
what kind of consequences they will have to face if they
take part in crimes against international humanitarian law,
or refrain from bringing the perpetrators to justice. An
international criminal court could be a helpful instrument in
this regard. International civilian police could be deployed
in crises to monitor the situation, to help investigate crimes
and to assist in the building of national structures of justice.
Crises are invariably different in nature. The protection
of refugees and displaced persons may require different
kinds of arrangements. For example, a clear distinction
should be made between protection measures in an
enforcement situation, under Chapter VII of the Charter,
and measures in the context of other United Nations
operations. Early consultations between the Security
Council and relief agencies could help define the proper
response.

The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) has a unique international mandate
to protect refugees and others in refugee-like situations. The
complex conditions in refugee-hosting as well as returnee-
receiving areas call for a comprehensive, situation-specific
protection strategy. Sweden welcomes the close cooperation
between the UNHCR and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and hopes that useful
lessons will be drawn by the two agencies from their
experiences in the Great Lakes region.

The High Commissioner for Refugees has called for
a rapid deployment force to assist, inter alia, in separating
military groups from bona fide refugees in mass-
displacement situations. There is good reason to reflect
upon this and other ways of achieving such a separation.

Protection of humanitarian action cannot be isolated
from protection of people in need. Protecting humanitarian
assets and relief workers may be essential for humanitarian
operations to continue. But protection mechanisms must
also, as their primary objective, deal with shielding civilians
from threats to life and livelihood.

Assault on defenceless women and children has been
used as a weapon to demonstrate power and control and to
disintegrate social structures and communities. Protection of
refugees must include special measures to ensure the
safety of women and children.

Humanitarian corridors, safe areas, protected zones
or any other form of humanitarian space can in some
situations provide protection. The United Nations should
assess experiences of such mechanisms so far and the
means to protect them.

The role of United Nations troops, civilian police or
guards in the protection of refugees and displaced persons
should also be further explored.

Humanitarian action must always be based on need
and on the principle of impartiality. Its integrity must be
respected. However, we cannot expect humanitarian
action to be a substitute for political resolve to deal with
the conflicts themselves and their root causes. It is
increasingly recognized that complex man-made crises
require an international response combining political,
military, humanitarian and other civilian action that will
create the conditions for peace while protecting victims of
armed conflict. The Security Council must shoulder its
responsibilities in this regard.

