Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan) (interpretation from French): In congratulating you most sincerely on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, Sir, I would
also like to say that we know you personally and your
ability successfully to guide the work of the Security
Council in such an important and emotional debate as that
under way. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Mahugu of Kenya, the President for the
month of February, who led the work of the Council with
skill.

There is great concern throughout the world over the
fact that Israel, the occupying Power, is initiating a new
phase in its construction of settlements in the occupied
territories. These steps are unlawful both in the south-
eastern suburbs of the Holy City, adjacent to Arab
Jerusalem - a territory occupied following a war m as
well as in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan. Furthermore,
these practices, as has been thoroughly explained here
since yesterday, are doing great harm to the peace
process. These are violations of article 49 of the Fourth
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption 1)
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

 

Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 and to the many
resolutions adopted by the Security Council that have been
referred to by delegations that have spoken before me.

Yesterday afternoon, the representative of Israel
concluded his statement by quoting the Bible. He gave us
a rather brief summary of five paragraphs at the beginning
of Chapter 8 of the Book of Zechariah.

The Lord does indeed talk about old men and women
and small boys and girls living in Jerusalem. But at the end
of that same chapter 8, verse 23 talks about people
speaking different languages and belonging to different
nations coming to Jerusalem to worship God. We must
above all cite the words of the Lord in verse 17 of the
same chapter of the book of Zechariah, which is the
confirmation of a commandment:

"And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts
against his neighbour". (The Holy Bible, Zechariah 8.17)

The Koran, Holy Book and divine word for more than
a billion Muslims, respects Jerusalem. In sura XVII, entitled
"Children of Israel", verse 1, Al-Quds is the Holy City of
three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
According to verses 77 and 78 of sura XXII of the Koran,
Abraham was not the spiritual ancestor of a nation, but of
all believers, as God tells all the believers of all centuries
and of all nations, "Abraham is your ancestor". The use of
the word ancestor is therefore quite spiritual and goes far
beyond the physical sense.

The question of Al-Quds Al-Sharif obviously concerns
Palestinians, the great majority of whom are Muslims,
though some are also Christians. The question concerns
Arabs because Palestinians are Arabs. The Security Council
has before it document S/l997/157, which contains a
communique issued by the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States.

However, the question is also Islamic. The Council has
before it document S/ 1 997/ 182, which contains a letter from
the Permanent Representative of Indonesia to the United
Nations, who 1s the Chairman of the Islamic Group of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference

More than a quarter of a century ago, in 1969,
following an act of arsOn that took place in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, the first summit of Islamic
countries was held in Rabat, Morocco. I was present there
as a member of the Afghan delegation, and I saw the

intense devotion of the representatives of Islamic
countries throughout the world to the question of Al-
Quds. It is therefore the Islamic people of the world who,
considering Al-Quds an Islamic city, are concerned today,
and they number oVer a billion.

Christians throughout the world are also deeply
concerned. The Muslims of the world also respect the
holy places of Jews and Christians.

These facts are Well known throughout the world.
The problem under discussion is not at all local, but is
important for a broad sector of humanity. Spiritual and
religious rights are the most fundamental of human rights,
even if they have been passed over in silence in the
statements, conventions and other legal instruments
internationally issued or adopted in the past half century.

About two years ago the Security Council debated"
this same subject. We have already recalled that
resolution 465 (1980) of 1 March 1980 stated, over 17
years ago, that such measures taken by Israel led to a
change in the physical character, demographic nature and
institutional structures in the territories occupied by Israel
in 1967, including East Jerusalem. These measures
therefore have no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstacle to the establishment of a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.

It is certain, as the experience of peoples has shown,
that anyone who creates mistrust by building in the
occupied territories is not building confidence, and that
anyone who exploits its power as an occupier and tries to
draw advantage frOm it jeopardizes the precarious
stability of the peace process. At the same time, it moves
towards the point of no return on the path of conflict and
condemns its army to being for ever an army of
intervention.

Anyone who confiscates the territories of the citizens
of an occupied territory only stokes the victims' resolve
to resist. Anyone who builds settlements in' occupied
territories is destroying at the same time any chance 'of
reaching a period of lasting settlement, peace and
tranquillity. Anyone who thinks of extending settlements
in the occupied territories is further aggravating the
situation for years to come. Anyone who insists on
committing a series of actions that cause widespread
upheaval and poison the atmosphere of the peace process
is only choosing a policy of long-term confrontation.
Security Council 3745th meeting (Resumption l)
Fifty»second year 6 March 1997

The vital duty of the Security Council is to strengthen
the foundations of the peace process. This duty is becoming
very urgent at a time when the derailment of the peace
process can be seen coming from miles away. The
Council's action would not be valid if it were to end this
debate in silence. There is immense and almost total
agreement around this table. Delegations agree on almost
all points. This enables the Council to take a stand while at
the same time reconfirming its previous resolutions. Such
an action would be useful for future efforts to renew the
atmosphere of hope for peace, which is so important for the
peoples of the Middle East.

In conclusion, the world impatiently awaits, at the end
of this meeting, a firm and unequivocal resolution from the
Council denouncing any action taken by the occupying
Power that creates mistrust and confrontation, and clearly
denouncing anything that creates an obstacle to the peace
process or that might destroy the chances of viable
coexistence between neighbouring peoples in the Holy
Land. This would be the denunciation of an action that has
already been condemned on many occasions, and the
affirmation of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of land
by force.

