Ms. Rice (United States of America): I am
pleased to join the members of the Council for this
important discussion tonight. It is obviously a very
serious situation in Gaza. And while our goal must be
the stabilization and normalization of Gaza through the
implementation of a durable and fully respected
ceasefire and an end to all terrorist activities, I think
that resolution 1860 (2009) shows that the Council and
the United Nations are indeed seized of the matter.

The resolution is a step towards our goals. It
reflects the international community's concern about
the circumstances in Gaza and its desire for a
sustainable peace in Gaza.

I want especially to note that, while much work
remains to be done, there is important work under way.
In that regard, the work of Egyptian President Mubarak
in the mediation efforts of Egypt are to be not just
applauded, but supported. I believe that it is those
efforts that will ultimately help to lead to a durable
ceasefire, and that will lead not only to a durable
ceasefire but to a sustainable peace in Gaza, and we
must all support the Egyptian efforts.

Obviously, there are many tasks to be done to
root out the causes of the hostilities, including dealing
with the provision of rockets and the smuggling of
weapons, securing the borders so that we can lay the
basis for the reopening of crossings based on the
principles of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access, and providing security for the Israeli people
and a better life for the people of Gaza.

We must establish an international consensus that
Gaza must never again be used as a launching pad for
rockets against Israeli citizens, because it is important
to remember how this crisis began. Violence in Gaza
was instigated by Hamas, a terrorist group that has
called for the destruction of Israel. Eighteen months
ago, Hamas took over the Gaza Strip in a coup, and
since then thousands of guns, rockets and mortars have
been smuggled into Gaza. Hamas refused to extend the
tahdiya, and continued armament is a root cause of the
current situation and has gravely endangered the
residents of both Gaza and southern Israel. Hamas's
commitment to violence is an attack not only on Israel,
but also on the two-State solution.

We require principled resolution of the situation
in Gaza, and the resolution that we have adopted
tonight in fact gives us a basis on which to do this.

Of course, it is not just a matter of resolving the
situation on the ground. There will need to be a
principled resolution also of the political challenges in
Gaza that re-establishes the Palestinian Authority's
control, including over borders, and facilitates the
normal operation of the Rafah and Kerem Shalom
crossings, as the resolution recognizes, and in time, the
opening of other crossings.

And we support President Abbas as he carries out
his responsibilities both with respect to governance and
in negotiations to establish a State of Palestine.
Regional States have previously recognized the
importance of this, notably in the 26 November Arab
League resolution.

As we strive for a sustainable ceasefire, the
United States remains deeply concerned about the
innocent Palestinians who are suffering in Gaza, and
the United States will undertake, maintain and continue
the humanitarian efforts that we are making to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
non-governmental organizations that are working there.

Let me say, too, that the United States recognizes
the right of Israel, like other States, to exercise its right
of self-defence, and we have said to Israel that it is
obligated to take feasible steps to minimize the impact
of any actions on civilians. I want to remind the
Council also that Hamas continues to hold Israel
Defense Forces soldier Gilad Shalit, and he must be
released.

Finally, let me just note that, while we are dealing
with the current situation in Gaza, we must keep our
eye on the goal of resolution 1850 (2008), which we
adopted in this Chamber a short time ago. That is the
goal of establishing an enduring commitment to mutual
recognition; freedom from violence, incitement and
terror; and a two-State solution, building upon previous
agreements and obligations. All United Nations
Member States bear a responsibility to promote these
principles and to help the parties towards the
establishment of a State of Palestine to live in peace,
side by side with the State of Israel.

The United States thought it important to see the
outcomes of the Egyptian mediation efforts in order to
see what resolution 1860 (2009) might have been
supporting, and that is why we chose to abstain tonight.
But after a great deal of consideration, we decided that
the resolution - the text of which we support, the
goals of which we support and the objectives of which
we fully support - should indeed be allowed to go
forward. I believe that, in doing so, the Council has
provided a road map for a sustainable, durable peace in
Gaza.

