Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We note the effective efforts of Special Envoy
of African Union, Mr. Edem Kodjo, in assisting the
successful conclusion of the intra-Congolese political
dialogue and the signing of the political agreement of
18 October. We are convinced that that agreement will
play a role in ensuring political stability in the very
difficult time leading up to the election. We commend
the 17 November appointment of Mr. Samy Badibanga
to the post of Prime Minister as the first step in
implementing the agreement. We call on the political
forces in the country that have not signed the agreement
to continue to participate in the political process.

We are convinced that the interpretation of the
agreement with respect to defining the update of the
voter register and the concrete time frame for holding
the presidential election should be determined by the
Congolese people themselves. The intervention of
external players on the pretext of imposing their psuedo-
recommendations for organizing the electoral process
and broadening the political space is unacceptable.
Such actions are liable to violate the equilibrium that
has been achieved with such difficulty. We should
refrain from interpreting Congolese fundamental law,
because the country has its own Constitutional Court,
which on 11 May ruled concerning the procedure
for the termination of the powers of the President
and parliamentarians.

We regret the victims of 20 and 21 September
demonstrations. However, we suggest that it would be
logical to talk about human rights violations only after
the investigations have been completed and the role
played by opposition leaders in provoking the unrest
and violence against Government representatives has
been assessed.

The main reason for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo's place on the Security Council's agenda
is the fact that the conflict has not been resolved and
illegal armed groups remain active in the eastern
regions of the country. We are pleased to note the full
cooperation that has been established between the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Government of the country, and we pay tribute
to the personal efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Maman Sidikou.

We hope that the re-establishment of full-scale
joint operations of the MONUSCO Force Intervention
Brigade and the Congolese army to neutralize illegal
armed groups, will ultimately help to eliminate the
security vacuum in the eastern part of the country.
We also commend Kinshasa's efforts to improve its
cooperation on security issues with the Governments
of neighbouring Uganda and Rwanda. We believe it
important for States members of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to
step up their efforts to ensure the implementation
by all signature countries of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. In that regard, we note
the efforts being made by ICGLR under the presidency
of Angola. We call for the provisions of the Framework
to be invoked in addressing the problem concerning the
arrival of supporters of the former First Vice-President
of South Sudan, Mr. Machar, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in August.

The problems of the region cannot be resolved
through force. We need to implement plans for the
disarmament, demobilization and repatriation of former
fighters of the Mouvement du 23 mars. So far, steps have
been made in that area only by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo itself. It is important that MONUSCO
remain impartial and limit itself strictly to its Security
Council mandate on the eve of the elections. We are
convinced that a close partnership with Kinshasa will
allow the Mission to fulfil its role of stabilization.

