Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia): At the outset, let
me congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month and convey our
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his report, contained in document
S/l995/444.

Recent events in Bosnia and Herzegovina have led
us to a situation which calls for a timely review of the
future role of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR). The Bosnian Serbs continue to humiliate
the United Nations by taking its peace-keepers hostage
and defying relevant Security Council resolutions, giving
a worldwide impression that the United Nations, and in
particular the Security Council, is ineffective in
addressing a threat to international peace and security.

 

Malaysia strongly condemns such cowardly acts and
demands the immediate and unconditional release of all
remaining detained UNPROFOR personnel. We call upon
all parties fully to respect the safety of UNPROFOR
personnel and the civilian population.

The Working Group of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) on Bosnia and Herzegovina, composed
of OIC Contact Group members and UNPROFOR troop
contributors, has carefully examined the report of the
Secretary-General and has already presented its position,
which my delegation fully supports.

Let me at this stage make the following comments
and observations on the report of the Secretary-General.
The report contains several contradictions and, in some
cases, inaccurate information. For example, in paragraph
67, it is incorrect to indicate that neither party to the
conflict seems to have reached the firm conclusion that it
has a better chance of achieving its objectives at the
negotiating table than on the battlefield. Indeed, it is only
the Bosnian Serbs who have rejected the Contact Group
peace plan and opted for a military solution. We wish to
reiterate our demand that the Bosnian Serbs accept the
peace plan so as to resolve the conflict with a political
solution.

The mandate for UNPROFOR has been clearly spelled
out in the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
in the context of Chapter VII of the Charter and its
enforcement. We do not agree with the attempt to
characterize UNPROFOR as merely a peace-keeping
operation and to downplay UNPROFOR's mandate relating
to its enforcement responsibilities.

The existing mandate suffers from a lack of
implementation. UNPROFOR should be provided with the
required means for the full implementation of the mandate.
In this regard, our position on the options presented by the
Secretary-General is as follows.

On Option A, we do not agree that UNPROFOR
should withdraw from Bosnia. On the contrary, the United
Nations Force should be increased and strengthened to
enable it fully to implement its mandate.

On Option B, the existing mandate of UNPROFOR
should be retained, but the means of implementation need
to be adapted. We do not agree with maintaining the status
quo, as this policy has proved to be a failure.

On Option C, we favour assertive action and are of
the View that this could be undertaken without changing
the existing mandate.

As for option D, we do not agree that this option is
the way to move forward, especially when the Bosnian
Serbs have once again blatantly challenged the will of the
international community by taking United Nations peace-
keepers hostage. This option will weaken UNPROFOR's
mandate rather than strengthen it.

We too believe that a combination of some of the
elements pertaining to the options contained in the
Secretary-General's report will strengthen UNPROFOR
and thereby enable it effectively to discharge as well as
fully meet its mandate. In this regard, we recall that the
OIC paper has elaborated the steps which UNPROFOR
can take in order fully to fulfil its mandate.

We welcome the establishment of the rapid reaction
capacity (RRC) under the command and control of the
United Nations to assist UNPROFOR in the
implementation of its mandate. UNPROFOR's mandate
must be implemented robustly in order to maintain the
credibility and dignity of the United Nations mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We believe that the RRC should
also be used for the protection of the civilian population,
particularly in the safe areas, with air support from the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), in addition
to the protection of UNPROFOR personnel. The RRC
should also establish land corridors for humanitarian aid.
We feel that it is also timely for the Council now to act
on the Secretary-General's earlier report on the safe areas
by adopting the heavy option as compared to the present
light option. We object to any move that would abandon
the safe areas, and wish to insist that UNPROFOR should
continue to protect the safe areas.

Resolution 836 (1993) permits UNPROFOR to use
force to protect the safe areas and the civilians in them.
The mandate is available for UNPROFOR and by
extension NATO to neutralize weapons violating the safe
areas. In this regard, it will be necessary to neutralize the
surface-to-air missile systems deployed by the Pale Serbs.
The recent downing of the NATO F-l6 makes it
necessary to take such action.

As for the exclusion zones, it should be recalled that
the zone and weapons collection points were set up as an
alternative to air strikes. However, if the weapons
collection points in the context of reprisals against United
Nations personnel become an obstacle to implementing

 

the exclusion zones, then these points should be abandoned
and the weapons within them neutralized by air power. We
also believe that it is necessary now to withdraw United
Nations military observers, who have become pawns in the
Serb strategy to embarrass the United Nations. The United
Nations should not succumb to Serb blackmail, but has to
review the role of the United Nations military observers.

My delegation also wishes to state in clear terms the
need for security guarantees for the Bosnian Government in
terms of its right to self-defence, as provided for in the
United Nations Charter, including by lifting the arms
embargo.

We are inclined to go along with the adoption of the
draft resolution before the Council. This adoption, we hope,
will contribute towards fully enforcing all relevant Security
Council resolutions and act as an effective deterrent to any
coercive measures or violence perpetrated against United
Nations personnel and civilian populations in the safe areas.

Finally, it is equally important that all offers to
strengthen the UNPROFOR presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina should not be sidelined as we proceed with the
deployment of the RRC.

