Mr. Cardi (Italy): We are pleased with today's
unanimous adoption of resolution 2351 (2017), which
ensures that the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara will continue to fulfil
its critical mandate in an increasingly complex and
challenging operational environment. I would also like
to thank the United States for its excellent presidency
of the Security Council this month and its efforts to
facilitate the complex negotiations on the resolution,
and all Security Council members for the constructive
and forward-looking approach that has led to today's
consensus decision.

The news that the remaining elements of the Frente
Polisario withdrew today from the buffer strip in
Guergerat is important because it fulfils the Secretary-
General's request. The latest developments on the
ground are also proof ofthe results that can be achieved
with persistent diplomacy on the part of the Council.
We encourage the parties to continue upholding their
commitment to the ceasefire agreement.

Italy is hopeful that the improvements in the situation
on the ground and today's resolution will help to build
the required momentum towards a rapid resumption of
the political process. We believe this is a critical moment

for Western Sahara that presents an opportunity to
fulfil the Secretary-General's objective - indeed, our
objective - of revitalizing the political track with a
new dynamic and a new spirit in order to reach a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
can provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara.

With today's resolution the Security Council
affirms that it shares that vision and fully supports this
urgent task. We therefore invite the parties to engage as
soon as possible, without preconditions and in a spirit of
compromise, in a new round of talks under the auspices
of the Secretary-General and facilitated by the new
Personal Envoy. At the same time, I would like to salute
the outgoing Personal Envoy, Mr. Christopher Ross,
and to thank him for his tireless efforts and personal
commitment to the issue.

