Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to say that we are very pleased to see you, Sir,
assume your role as President of the Security Council.
On behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I would like
to extend our thanks to you for having convened this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I would like also
to express our appreciation to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his
informative briefing.

Viet Nam associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is widely acknowledged that the Middle East
has faced growing and unprecedented complex
developments over the last couple of years. The
upheaval and transformations that have been taking
place have seen all parties concerned, Governments as
well as people, find themselves in novel but challenging
situations. In the light of their wider ramifications, it
is in our common interest to promote dialogue and
cooperation to minimize the adverse effects and refrain
from the use or threat of use of violence and force.

Change, however, has yet to come to the question
of Palestine, which has always been at the core of the
situation in the Middle East. Years have passed since we
last saw substantive progress in the negotiations between
the two sides, or among associated parties. Millions of
Palestinians remain displaced from their homeland and
continue to suffer what the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
considers "the deadlocked political process and the
deteriorating socioeconomic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory". Israel, as the occupying Power,
persistently refuses to freeze settlement activities or to
adhere to the long-standing terms of reference for the
peace process. The lack of direct talks and negotiations
and, therefore the current impasse, have been coupled
with recent threats to exercise unilateralism with regard
to past agreements.

In that context, Viet Nam reiterates our principled
support for the courageous struggle and rights of the
Palestinian people over more than 60 years, in particular
the right to self-determination. We strongly urge an
immediate end to the current blockade of Palestinian
territory and for continued efforts to facilitate
negotiations among all the parties concerned, including
those by the Quartet, the League ofArab States, regional
and international partners and the United Nations, in
order to resume Israeli-Palestinian negotiations as
soon as possible. It is high time that the international
community, including the Security Council, intensify
efforts to address this crisis, for which a just, lasting
and comprehensive peaceful solution is long overdue.
That solution must take into account the legitimate
security concerns of the parties concerned, be based on
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map, of which the principle of land-for-peace and
the right of all States in the region to live in peace and
security are the critical element.

The solution to the pressing issues in the Middle
East also lies in greater efforts aimed at creating an
environment in the region of mutual trust, peace
and coexistence. An important step to that end is the
upcoming conference on the establishment of a Middle
East zone free of nuclear weapons and other types
of weapons of mass destruction. We are convinced,
however, that visible progress towards a lasting andjust
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict would also
be a strong reassurance to all Governments and peoples
about the genuine feasibility of peace and prosperity
for all in the region and, thus, peace for the world as a
whole.

