Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
is grateful to you, Sir, for convening, although later than we
expected, this meeting. I would like to express satisfaction
that the appeal initiated and signed by the group of United
Nations Member States not members of the Security
Council has coincided with a similar appeal launched by
members of the Security Council itself.

Needless to say, it is with grave concern that the
leadership and the people of Ukraine have responded to the
recent developments in the region of South Asia, which
forced my country, together with other like-minded Member
States, to seek the urgent convening of a special meeting of
a Security Council.

There is no doubt that the issue under discussion today
- and the name of the agenda item speaks for itself - is
crucial to the maintenance of international peace and
security. That is why it is a primary responsibility of this
authoritative United Nations body.

My Government has already expressed its concern at
the nuclear testing conducted by India and by Pakistan.
Ukraine condemned these actions as constituting a serious
threat to existing international agreements in the field of the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. Our reaction to these
events has been clear and, I believe, fully justified. This
position is based on the key principles of my country's
disarmament policy. Ukraine voluntarily renounced the
world's third-largest nuclear arsenal, which it inherited.
Thus it assumed the status of a non-nuclear-weapon State,
and it continuously demonstrates full compliance with non-
nuclear principles, advocating and strongly promoting
universal nuclear disarmament.

Therefore, Ukraine, like anyone else, has a moral right
to criticize actions that threaten the non-proliferation
regime. Ukraine acceded to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in 1994 and
signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT) in 1997 as a State whose participation in that
treaty was actually essential for its entry into force.

Our position, as well as the positions of the vast
majority of States that have signed and ratified both
treaties, were based on the belief that such moves would
help all of us to ensure an effective non-proliferation
regime, to halt the development of nuclear weapons and
to create grounds for a step-by-step elimination of
weapons of mass destruction.

I have to say that our hopes, beliefs and aspirations
have been dashed by nuclear explosions at the Pokaran
and Chagai test sites.

It is very important, in our view, that the
international community demonstrate all its firmness,
cohesiveness and determination to save the principles and
the objectives of non-proliferation, to avert the spiral of
a nuclear arms race in South Asia and to preserve peace
and stability both in this region and globally.

We strongly believe that the one and only way here
for India and Pakistan is to become full-fledged parties to
the NPT and CTBT without any conditions and without
any delay.

Ukraine urges all other States that have not yet done
so to become parties to the NPT and to ratify the CTBT
in order to expedite its entry into force. We also call upon
other Member States to exert every effort to influence
India and Pakistan to assume commitments under the
NPT and the CTBT.

Ukraine also considers inadmissible any action that
could aggravate tensions in the region and - God
forbid - cause a major conflict between the two States.
In this connection, Ukraine welcomes the declared
readiness of India's and Pakistan's leaders to negotiate
disputable issues. We are ready to support this process
wholeheartedly because we in Ukraine have deep
sympathy and great respect for both peoples.

We hope that the Secretary-General will encourage
India and Pakistan to enter into an immediate and
constructive dialogue, and we welcome his efforts in this
respect.

Any other development, even an attempt to preserve
the status quo, should be deemed unacceptable. Should
this undesirable scenario take place, my Government will

 

seek consultations with the nuclear Powers which provided
the relevant security assurances to Ukraine in connection
with its accession to the NPT, in order to look for a new
reading of those assurances in view of the latest
developments in its close geopolitical environment.

However, we still firmly believe that India and
Pakistan will put aside their nuclear ambitions and will not
allow any further aggravation of the situation in the region.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to support the
main thrust of the resolution just adopted by the Security
Council.
At the same time, however, I should like to associate
myself with my colleagues from Canada and New Zealand
in drawing the attention of the members of the Council to
the fact that again, as in other recent instances, United
Nations Member States that are not members of the
Security Council were not given the option of expressing
their positions in the open debate before this important
resolution was adopted.

We hope that the voice and the arguments of Ukraine
and of other non-members of the Security Council will be
duly taken into consideration.

