Mr. Chua (Singapore): Foreign terrorist fighters
are a clear threat to international peace and security.
An estimated 12,000 foreigners from over 70 countries
have participated in the conflicts in Iraq and Syria. That
is the largest mobilization of foreign militants since the
Soviet-Afghan War in the 1980s.

It is not just the number of foreign fighters that has
been commanding attention, but the horrific tactics
used by terrorist organizations like the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front.
Their violent campaigns against minority groups in
northern Iraq and Syria, the brutal murders of Muslims
and non-Muslims, the abduction of innocent civilians
and the widespread abuse of human rights constitute
crimes against humanity. Singapore condemns in the
strongest possible terms the actions of ISIL and other
terrorist groups. We extend our deepest condolences to
all who have suffered or who have lost loved ones.

Singapore is not immune to the threat of terrorism
and radical ideologies. There are foreign fighters
in Syria who have traveled from South-East Asia.
The Singapore Government knows of a handful of
Singaporeans who have gone to Syria to take part in the
conflict. Other Singaporeans expressed interest to join
the fighting in Syria but were stopped before they were
able to travel.

Like many countries, Singapore is gravely
concerned about the potential threat posed by returning
terrorist fighters. The Soviet-Afghan war drew in
thousands of foreign fighters, led to the creation of
Al-Qaida and inspired the creation of other terrorist
groups. Al-Qaida's key regional affiliate in South-East
Asia, Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), has been responsible for
several large-scale terrorist attacks, such as the Bali
bombings in 2002. In December 2001, the Singapore
Government foiled a plot by JI members to attack
targets in Singapore, including a number of diplomatic
missions. Fortunately, they were stopped before they
could do harm.

Terrorist groups such as ISIL and the Al-Nusra
Front are a threat to the entire world. The international
community must counter that growing global threat
with a comprehensive strategy that addresses not just
the military but also the ideological aspects of the
conflict. We must counter the radical ideology used
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters, which fuels their
violent extremist agenda. The Singapore Government
has supported and worked with our Muslim religious
leaders, community groups and individuals to
rehabilitate terrorist detainees and to delegitimize
radical ideologies.

Singapore welcomes the strong leadership of the
United States on this issue, in particular the formation
of an international coalition to combat the ISIL threat.
Singapore also welcomes the Jeddah Communique
issues by Arab countries of the region to stand united
against ISIL. Both will be critical in cutting off
financial and material support for ISIL and preventing
the movement of foreign terrorist fighters, as well as in
the ideological battle.

Singapore firmly supports all international and
regional cooperation to combat terrorism, including the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and all Security Council resolutions
related to counter-terrorism. We welcomed the
adoption of resolution 2170 (2014) on 15 August, which
condemned the terrorist acts and violent extremist
ideology of ISIL and the Al-Nusra Front and urged all
United Nations Members to take appropriate measures
to combat terrorism. Resolution 2178 (2014) on foreign
terrorist fighters, adopted by the Council today, is an
important step in the global effort to combat terrorism,
and Singapore was pleased to co-sponsor it. We stand
ready to play our part in combatting the threat of global
terrorism.

