Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
I, too, wish to thank Mr. Mwakawago for his briefing
and for his efforts at the head of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).

We recall that five years of war in Sierra Leone
cost the lives of some 50,000 people and led to the
enlistment of 10,000 child soldiers. Today, six year's
after UNAMSIL's deployment, that country has
regained stability and peace. The involvement of the
United Nations and the international community has
been a success and set an example. I believe that needs
to be highlighted because we need such success stories.
Just as we recognize our success in Burundi, we should
recognize this success in Sierra Leone.

As the last UNAMSIL contingents prepare to
leave Sierra Leone, I feel that we should try to assess
the success of international and United Nations actions
in resolving the crisis. That is what I should briefly like
to do now in considering the factors for success, the
exit strategy and our efforts to combat impunity.

What were the main factors for the success of the
Mission and of the international community's
involvement in resolving the crisis in Sierra Leone? I
believe that those factors are linked above all to the
characteristics of the Mission itself. It has a robust
mandate and adequate staffing, with some 17,500
troops by the year 2001, covering one third of the
territory of Liberia and a quarter of the territory of
Cote d'Ivoire. I pay tribute to all the troop-contributing
countries for the quality of their contingents. I note in
particular that the deployment of a Pakistani
mechanized brigade was also key in confronting the
Revolutionary United Front.

To the President of the Security Council, I affirm
quite openly my belief that the second key factor to
success was the United Kingdom's involvement on two
fronts - with UNAMSIL in restoring peace and
stability, by force when necessary, and with the Sierra
Leonean authorities in re-establishing the country's
security and police forces.

I now turn to UNAMSIL's exit strategy, which I
believe should also be hailed as an example. As others
have done, I should like to stress that the definition and
implementation of an exit strategy have been and
remain essential at a time when the number of Blue
Helmets deployed has reached record levels. I believe
that the formula for progressive withdrawal, with very
clear-cut criteria, that was adopted by the Security
Council with respect to UNAMSIL is undoubtedly a
model on which we should draw when we consider the
withdrawal of other peacekeeping operations.

The third element to which I wish to refer
involves our efforts to combat impunity. The
establishment of the Special Court in Freetown and the
work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission have
played an essential role in promoting and ensuring the
restoration of peace and stability. The fight against
impunity is indeed integral to crisis settlement
strategies. That is true in Sierra Leone and elsewhere,
such as the Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire, to cite just two
examples.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm France's
support for the Court, to which my country recently
made a financial contribution. I also welcome the role
being played by Nigeria and soon to be played by
Mongolia in ensuring the Court's security and safety.

Like others, I assert that the international
community must continue to support Sierra Leone in
its efforts to consolidate peace and ensure
development. Indeed, the United Nations will pursue
its work in that area with the establishment in the next
few days of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone. Nor must we ignore the regional
dimension of the problem or the role played by the
United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire.

In conclusion, I thank the United Kingdom for
the draft presidential statement before us, which we
wholeheartedly support.

