Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the other speakers for their briefings. The
problems of children today will become the problems of
adults in 10 years. Not only do armed conflicts deprive
children of an opportunity to grow in a balanced
manner, with access to education, but they also create a
new generation of adults who will have known nothing
but war and who will not know how to live in a world
without conflict. It is therefore our duty to seriously
engage with the issue of children and armed conflict to
prevent future wars.

The issue has become even more pressing with the
staggering rise of armed groups such as Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In
that respect, I would like to congratulate France for
having organized this timely and relevant debate on the
child victims of non-State armed groups.

We believe that the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, adopted in 2007, should be considered an
important tool for Member States and international
organizations.

Japan welcomes the fact that the "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign, which was launched on 6 March
2014 by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, and UNICEF, has achieved clear results in
one year. Chad has been removed the list of problem
countries, leaving only seven countries on that list. In
Myanmar, approximately 400 child soldiers have been
released, and Yemen has signed an action plan.

However, that progress is far from sufficient.
It should be noted that, under the strategy to end
the recruitment and use of children by national
security forces, which was drawn up by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
a total of $32.8 million over two years will be required
for the implementation of the action plan to bring the
number of child soldiers in the armed forces of the
countries concerned to zero by the end of 2016.

In that regard, Japan supports several projects in the
Middle East and Africa, in partnership with UNICEF,
to promote the rehabilitation and reintegration of child
soldiers. That helps to prevent those children from once
again becoming combatants as a result of economic
difficulties, inter alia. Japan has thus funded $80 million
worth of various projects for the rehabilitation of child
soldiers over the past six years.

Today, we are paying special attention to an
important question: how can we apply the knowledge
acquired through that campaign to non-State armed
groups? Indeed, ofthe 59 groups listed in the annexes to
the 2014 report of the Secretary-General (S/2014/339),
51 are non-State actors. It would, of course, be difficult
to immediately conclude plans of action between the
United Nations and non-State armed groups. However,
I believe it is possible to advance step by step in that
direction. For example, the United Nations could try
to convince non-State actors with which it is already
in contact to negotiate peace agreements, among other
things, that would provide that they renounce the
practice of recruiting children into their ranks. It could
also mediate between the non-State opposing forces
to arrange for a simultaneous release of their child
soldiers.

As mentioned in the concept note (S/2015/168, annex) prepared for this debate, non-State armed
extremist groups increasingly employ child abduction
as a strategy. We are deeply concerned by the massive
abductions of children by groups such as Boko Haram
and ISIL. The abduction of children is the first act of
violence against them. It can open the door to forced
recruitment and other barbaric acts, such as sexual
violence and murder. Japan therefore believes that there
will be a real gap in our commitments to deal with the
problem of children associated with armed groups,
if abduction is excluded from the list of triggers.
Abductions are part of the criteria that should be listed
in the annex to the relevant reports of the Secretary-
General, and we believe that we must take steps to fill
that gap.

