Mr. Bryant (Liberia): I was here in February to
present to the international community the Results-
Focused Transitional Framework - a composite of the
efforts that the Transitional Government of Liberia had
exerted in an attempt to resurrect a totally collapsed
State. We were encouraged by the overwhelming
response of the United Nations, the United States, the
European Union, the World Bank and a number of
bilateral partners, as measured by the pledges for $522
million. Those pledges are being transformed into
action on the ground to produce tangible results for the
people of Liberia.

I am here today for one primary reason: to plead
with the Council to lift the sanctions on my country.

As we disarm and demobilize our conflict's
combatants, there are two critical needs associated with
the process.

First, there is the need to rehabilitate
ex-combatants, many of whom are lacking in economic
survival skills. Following various processes of medical
care and counselling, they will be helped to acquire
new skills through training.

Secondly, there is a need to reintegrate them into

local communities. An entry point in this regard is the
creation of jobs to provide work for them. Here,
Liberia remembers the lessons of history:
ex-combatants who are not meaningfully rehabilitated
and reintegrated into society run the risk of being
re-recruited into violent crime and conflict. Our
evolving fragile democracy simply cannot afford that.
Accordingly, there is an urgent need to revive our
economy and create jobs in support of the reintegration
of ex-combatants and the internally displaced.

This brings me to the issue of the lifting of
sanctions. Liberia makes a passionate appeal to the
Council today to lift the sanctions on timber and
diamonds. We make this appeal while appreciating the
motivation for the imposition of the sanctions and in a
spirit of full cooperation with the international
community in order to address the concerns of the
Security Council.

We also make this appeal because the sanctions
contribute to the perception that Liberia is very unsafe
and dangerous. There is a surcharge on everything
imported into Liberia, thus raising the cost of living for
my people. That has adverse implications for an
orderly transition from conflict to peace.

The forestry sector holds the greatest short-term
promise for job creation and the fostering of economic
recovery. That sector used to provide over 7,000 jobs,
contribute 20 per cent of Government revenues and
account for approximately 50 per cent of our foreign
exchange earnings. The sanctions on timber continue to
hurt us. Sanctions were imposed on Liberian timber for
five direct and indirect reasons. The primary reason
was that timber resources were being used by the
erstwhile Government to purchase arms for the
purposes of fuelling conflict within the subregion and
of suppressing its own people.

On this issue, we are pleased to report that the
war is over and Liberia is now at peace with its
neighbours. Rather than purchasing arms, the
Transitional Government is currently disarming
combatants. Our mission in this respect is to make our
society gun-free and to live in harmony with our sister
countries of the subregion.

United Nations forces are being deployed
throughout the country - they have a visible presence
at all sea ports and airports and they are patrolling our
borders to ensure that weapons do not re-enter our
country.

The Transitional Government is committed to the
rule of law, human rights and social justice. This
Government is not in the business of suppressing its
own people. Despite provocation from detractors, we
have remained focused on the major issues of
disarmament and reconstruction. We have no political
prisoners and no prisoners of conscience. The media is
enjoying unprecedented freedom. Ours is indeed a
Government of peace, reconstruction and national
renewal.

The second concern of the Security Council was
the lack of transparency in the awarding of concession
agreements. It was the opinion of some members of the
international community that concession rights may, in
fact, have been granted to fly-by-night investors doing
business not in the interests of Liberia but in the
interests of the ruling elite and international criminal
elements.

On this critical issue, 30 concession agreements
have been examined. The first review was undertaken
by the Forestry Development Authority, mainly to
catalogue the legal and operating status of the 30
companies involved in the sector in 2003.
The second review involved more stakeholders,
including environmentalists and conservationists as
well as journalists and other international
organizations. Five recommendations from that review
have been made to the Board and have been endorsed.
They are the following. All concessions whose acreage
was increased within the period 1997 to 2003 should be
reduced to their original size, as contracted with the
Forestry Development Authority prior to 1997.
Concession areas illegally taken away from others
between 1997 and 2003 should be given back to their
rightful owners. New concession areas illegally
occupied between 1997 and 2003 without satisfaction
of then-existing requirements should be withdrawn. All
concessionaires indebted to the Government and the
Authority should be made to settle their obligations.
All concessions should be given a definite time frame
in which they can come into conformity with new
guidelines and regulations; those who fail to do so will
have their concessions revoked through legal process.

Specifically, 24 of the 30 concessionaires have
been cleared and will be recertified to recommence
operations following their settlement of financial
obligations to the Authority and the Government.
Additionally, six of the concessionaires have not been
cleared due to past gross irregularities and are slated
for further investigation and/or legal revocation.

The third concern of the international community
was that timber revenues were not being used for the
benefit of the Liberian people. That relates to the issue
of accountability. Since our incumbency, we have taken
measures to ensure that our resources are utilized for
the benefit of all our people. We currently have in place
Executive Order No. 2. It centralizes the collection of
all Government revenues under the authority of the
Ministry of Finance and the deposit of all such
revenues into the Government's account at the Central
Bank of Liberia. Executive Order No. 2 has
substantially increased Government revenues and
control over those revenues.

Further, we have opened a Government timber
revenue account at the Central Bank for stumpage fees
and land rental. We have opened another forestry
account, also at the Central Bank, for reforestation,
conservation and research fees collected within the
sector. Accounts at other financial institutions have
been closed. The Central Bank accounts will assist us
in tracking and monitoring revenues from the sector.

Additionally, the terms of reference of a
European-Union-funded audit of the Authority has
been commissioned by the Government to recommend
new systems that will enhance financial transparency
and accountability. It is expected that a more
transparent budgetary process will also evolve from
that undertaking. The Board of Directors has resolved
to hire the services of a certified public accounting firm
to develop, install and train Authority staff in the new
systems to be recommended by the audit.

Because Liberians are so dependent upon and
interact so closely with their local forest resources, my
Government is fostering a forest sector reform
programme that restores the connection between forest
and community. In that direction, we are considering
the following: establishing county-level advisory
committees intended to provide a channel of
communication for communities; developing village
wood lots to secure fuel wood supplies for urban
communities; and establishing a unit in the Forestry
Development Authority responsible for developing and
enhancing the flow of forest resources and benefits to
the community.

These efforts are an integral part of a community-
friendly logging policy that we are currently
developing. That policy will ensure that a percentage
of the timber revenues generated goes back to meet the
development needs of the local communities where the
logs were felled. Those funds will serve as matching
resources for the corporate social responsibility funds
provided by logging concessions to assist local
communities. The primary development needs targeted
for those funds are education and training, health and
sanitation, and infrastructure. An oversight committee,
drawn from relevant sectoral ministries and agencies,
will be established to monitor utilization of those
funds.

The law requires concessionaires to build
community infrastructures such as health facilities and
schools. The Government is now considering, at the
policy level, the degree of responsibility for
community development on the part of concession
holders, the national Government and local
governments.

The fourth area of concern of the international
community has been the low capacity of the Forestry
Development Authority to regulate the sector. On that
issue, we have put in place a programme to enhance the
capacity of the Authority as follows. The Board of
Directors has been reconstituted, as recommended by
the Timber Sanctions Review Committee. The Board
now includes the Minister of Finance, thus linking the
Authority with the macroeconomic management of the
Government. The Board has approved the creation of
two Deputy Managing Director positions, one for
protective forestry - conservation - and another for
commercial forestry. They will focus, highlight and
balance conservation and commercial issues.

The Government has made available to the
Authority an initial amount of $350,000 to commence
the rehabilitation of its infrastructure. With additional
assistance from the United States Office of Transition
Initiatives, all five regional offices are being renovated,
refurbished and equipped with short wave
communication and mobile equipment. Refresher
training courses have commenced. One has been
undertaken for managers and sectional heads. A second
phase now under way includes refresher training for
more than 200 forest rangers, sealers, protection forest
guides and park wardens. Train-the-trainer courses are
also being organized.

We have encouraged the establishment of
oversight committees and institutions for monitoring
effective sustainable forest management practices,
community involvement and environmental impact
assessments. In this connection, we are pleased to
inform the Council that the Environmental Protection
Agency has been established and set up as one of the
oversight and monitoring institutions.

While the aforementioned measures are critical
for improved governance of the sector, we are also
committed to enhancing the regulatory capacity by
progressively working towards achieving the
following, in partnership with the international
initiatives: the evolution of a stronger management
team by engaging external experts either through
request for secondment or through direct hire as
technical assistance experts; the review and revision of
forestry commercial levies, as well as strengthening the
revenue collection system; the establishment of a web
site and creation of a CD-ROM; and beginning the
building of a geographic information system/remote-
sensing capacity. The fifth area of concern of the
international community has been the lack of
appreciation for the environment, conservation and
biodiversity in forestry operations.

To address these fundamental concerns, our
reform programmes now accentuate the environment in
the operations of FDA. Primarily, we have adopted a
"triple-C" policy - conservation, community and
commercial - to henceforth guide us in the
exploitation of our forests. This policy seeks to strike a
balance between the competing interests of community
development, conservation and commercialization. In
this context, FDA has endorsed the initiatives of
Conservation International, along with 13 non-
governmental organizations, and has given these
organizations unequivocal access to FDA and its
operations.

The Government and Conservation International
are now working together to restore Liberia's forest
conservation programme. A sequenced landscaping
strategy to secure and expand the network of protective
areas and national parks has begun. Two national
parks - Sapo and Nimba - have been proclaimed and
six new target areas have since been identified and
protected. A conservation trust fund will be established
for these and related purposes. A primary objective of
this fund shall be to facilitate biodiversity research.

Finally, we recognize that there are appropriate
laws on the books for good governance of the forestry
sector. However, these laws have not been rigidly
applied in recent times, thereby creating chaos and
leading to the abuse and misuse of our forest resources.
Our Government shall henceforth vigorously enforce
forestry laws and regulations. Additionally, in concert
with our international partners, Liberia will continue to
review and implement a strategy of long-term
sustainable forest management.

I have laid out for the Council's consideration a
series of actions which we have taken and propose to
take in order to meet its requirements for lifting
sanctions on the export of our timber products. We
would like the Council to have its experts visit Liberia
within the next 90 days to validate this performance.

Diamond sales are a foreign exchange earner for
Liberia. Diamond production, alongside the
exploitation of gold, is an economic mainstay for a
substantial number of our people. Additionally, on
account of Liberia's dual currency regime, in which the
United States dollar serves as legal tender alongside the
Liberian dollar, diamond dealers and traders from
neighbouring countries prefer to do business in our
markets. As such, Liberia receives collateral benefits
from these transactions.

We have made tremendous progress in satisfying
the demands of the Security Council. We have
submitted ourselves wholeheartedly to the
internationally recognized Kimberly Certification
Process. The Process requires participating countries to
enact legislation that clearly defines procedures aimed
at promoting transparency in the production, sale,
importation, transit and exportation of rough diamonds.
Our cooperation in this area is known to the Council's
own Panel of Experts, which, in paragraph 93 (b) of its
most recent report, states that this collaboration
between the Diamond High Council and the Ministry
of Lands, Mines and Energy was closely monitored by
the Panel.

In compliance with this requirement, an act
entitled "An Act Amending the New Minerals and
Mining Law, Part I, Title 23, LCLR, By Adding
Thereto a New Chapter 40, Providing for Controls on
the export, import and transit of Rough Diamonds" has
been submitted to the National Transitional Legislative
Assembly for enactment into law.

As further assurance to the Council of our total
compliance with the Kimberly Process, we have agreed
with the Sanctions Review Committee that
immediately, upon the lifting of sanctions on diamonds,
Liberia will temporarily impose a voluntary embargo
on the sale, importation and exportation of rough
diamonds until it is Kimberly-certified. Further, in an
effort to establish a viable monitoring mechanism for
rough diamonds produced in Liberia, the Ministry of
Lands, Mines and Energy is setting up a cooperative
mining system within the alluvial mining subsector.

The cooperatives will provide small-scale miners
with financial and material support. The cooperatives
will, in turn, purchase rough diamonds produced by the
miners. As with timber, a percentage of revenue intake
from diamond extraction will revert to these
communities for development. Under this system, all
production will be monitored and regulated. This will
enable the Government to trace diamonds produced
from the fields to the Diamond Certification Centre at
the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy and through
to their destination on the international market. A
database will be established at the Diamond
Certification Centre for effective monitoring, research
and planning purposes, as well as to disabuse the
international community of the notion that Liberia does
not have diamonds. The Government has embarked on
extensive training of its mineral inspectors and mining
agents, who are expected to play a vital role in
monitoring the cooperative scheme.

While we await the decision of the Council with
regard to lifting sanctions on diamonds, we take
cognizance of the decision of the United States
Government to unilaterally lift sanctions on the
importation of diamonds from Liberia, and to express
our appreciation for that decision. And for the record, I
want to make clear that, even though the United States
has been generous in doing that, to date there have
been no exports of diamonds to the United States in
violation of the Council's sanctions.

As I conclude this appeal for the lifting of
sanctions, permit me to say a few words of gratitude to
this body. The United Nations has been kind to Liberia
in many and varying ways. It supported the Accra
peace talks and developed the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement. That accord is currently guiding us in our
transition from continuous conflict to sustainable peace
and human development. The United Nations continues
to provide humanitarian assistance to war-weary
Liberians through its specialized agencies. Those
agencies are working in collaboration with the
Government and with non-governmental organizations.
The United Nations has authorized and now has in
place one of the largest peacekeeping forces in its
history to disarm combatants as well as to keep and
enforce the peace in Liberia. The United Nations co-
sponsored the highly successful International
Reconstruction Conference for Liberia, held on 5 and 6
February 2004. For all of that, Liberians thank the
United Nations from the deepest recesses of their
hearts.

May I also take this opportunity to pay a special
tribute to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
personal involvement in resolving the Liberian
conflict. Despite other global crises such as those in
Iraq, Afghanistan and the Middle East, he has raised
the Liberian crisis to the highest level of international
concern and has provided diplomatic leadership in
rescuing the situation. We are immensely grateful to
the Secretary-General for his support and assistance.
Leadership is about inspiration, and he continues to
inspire us to reject conflict and to build a better society
for our people.

Finally, let me assure all members of the Council
that, through their support and assistance, Liberia is
breaking through. A failed State is being transformed
into an emerging democracy. A lawless State is being
transformed into a nation that respects human values
and is committed to the rule of law. A pariah State is
being accepted into the comity of decent nations. And a
conflict-prone State is being transformed into a nation
of peace - at peace with itself, at peace with its
neighbours, at peace with the international community.
Liberia is counting on the Council for its continuous
understanding and support.

