Mr. Klein (spoke in French): It is a pleasure for
me to be here to introduce the report on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH). Considering the principal responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security, I should like, before
turning to the specific activities of UNMIBH, to offer
my comments on the important changes that have
recently occurred in the Balkan region.

Last month, the commemoration of the fifth
anniversary of the signing of the Dayton Accords
coincided with the clear resurgence of nationalist
parties in the sixth series of elections organized since
the end of the war. Those who had defended the
holding of perpetual cycles of elections as a panacea to
confronting the challenges of democratization are now
reconsidering the relevance of turning to democratic
procedures before democratic values are established.

(spoke in English)

Having spent five years implementing peace in
the Balkans, I do not share the pessimism of some
commentators, for three reasons. I believe that we have
an historic opportunity to put a close to a tragic decade.
We need to seize that opportunity and not be deterred
by short-term developments.

First, the democratic changes in Croatia and
Yugoslavia are of fundamental significance. For a
decade, nationalist regimes in Belgrade and Zagreb
have torn Bosnia and Herzegovina apart. Despite their
signatures on the Dayton Accords, the regimes in
Zagreb and Belgrade did everything they could to
frustrate its intentions.

As recently as April 1999, in a tape recorded
conversation, President Tudjman instructed President
Jelavic to pretend to cooperate with the international
community and to never let on that the goal remained
partition. President Milosevic encouraged Serbs to
View the Republika Srpska as a separate State and used

S/PV.4245

 

it to evade sanctions. Both States treated indicted war
criminals as heroes and gave them refuge. Both gave
military and financial support to separatist, partitionist
forces.

In my recent meetings with each of them,
President Mesic, Prime Minister Racan and President
Kostunica have all confirmed their intention to take a
new path based on respect for the sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. For Croatia, this means
ending direct financial assistance to covert parallel
Croat structures and channelling support in a way that
enhances state institutions. For Yugoslavia, it means
quickly normalizing bilateral relations and exchanging
ambassadors as a first step towards addressing
outstanding bilateral issues.

There will be challenging times ahead and
difficult decisions to be made as we seek to drive the
process forward without overloading nascent
democratic forces that have not yet been able to
consolidate their hold over the institutions of
Government. Nonetheless, I believe that after the
forthcoming elections in Serbia, the time will be right
to seek to put trilateral relations on a new footing by
inviting the Presidents of Yugoslavia and Croatia to
meet with their counterparts in Sarajevo. I would hope
that members of this Council would support such an
initiative.

My second cause for optimism is that we now
have a clear commitment by the members of the
European Union (EU) to south-eastern European
integration. The EU roadmap, as highlighted at the
recent Zagreb summit, and the Stability Pact, despite
its slow start, for the first time give the people of the
region a credible destination in a European home. It
should be recognized that the Dayton Accords
addressed the internal and constitutional dimensions of
statehood, but were not a regional context. European
integration was the missing political construct, without
which regional stability could not be achieved. In many
senses, Europe has now taken up where Dayton could
not go.

The challenge here is to make the promise of

Europe credible to the common people. They are
sceptical, thinking that the international community
may leave the work unfinished and that they will
remain in a Balkan no man's land, marginalized from
mainstream Western development and fought over and
preyed upon by nationalist, extremist and criminal
interests. This is why I have been advocating at least
one concrete step, such as membership in the Council
of Europe, as tangible proof that we are committed to
their future.

My third point is that even though progress has
been frustratingly slow, much has been achieved to
build the infrastructure of a State that can function in a
European context. We should not underestimate the
magnitude of the task we undertook and the
commitment we promised five years ago.

In the fall of 1995, Bosnia and Herzegovina was a
wasteland of human tragedy and destruction. Half the
pre-war population - some 2.2 million people - were
refugees or internally displaced persons. During three
and a half years of violent ethnic cleansing, more than
200,000 people died. The economic infrastructure, the
housing stock and the religious and cultural objects of
an ethnically and culturally diverse land had been
purposefully destroyed. Not a family was left
unscathed.

Rebuilding the physical and social infrastructure
was never going to be cheap or easy. We committed
ourselves to the task not only for humanitarian reasons
but also because, politically, Bosnia and Herzegovina
cannot be relegated to a mere footnote in the Balkans
or in Europe. Three times in the past century it has
necessitated massive international intervention. It
remains the historical, religious and ethnic fault line
that can again rupture regional stability. And it is the
only State from the former Yugoslavia that is in any
way multi-ethnic.

Against this background, I was neither surprised
nor am I unduly concerned that the nationalist parties
preserved their positions in the recent elections. Their
relatively weak showing in the April municipal
elections shocked them into mobilizing their old
system of patronage and local media control to boost
voter turnout in their favour. They spent enormous
sums of money, very little of which was accounted for.

The election results were not entirely negative.
Major non-nationalist parties consolidated their
positions and, in theory at least, could form a grand
coalition that does not include the three main ethnic
parties. The real disappointment is that after five years
of intensive international engagement, a sizeable
proportion of the population continues to support those
who led them into war but who cannot lead them into
Europe.

S/PVAZAS

 

There are some lessons to be learned from these
elections. We have made our task more difficult by not
having acted robustly against the criminality and
corruption that have sustained the nationalist elites. For
the past five years, the only engine of economic growth
in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been international
assistance, while nationalist parties have been able to
plunder State assets. Resistance to the creation of a
State Border Service and to economic reforms, such as
privatization of public companies, is most accurately
explained on criminal, not political grounds.

I welcome the High Representative's focus now
on economic reform and institution-building, but I am
convinced that we would have made greater progress
had we robustly tackled crime and corruption earlier,
including through a more intrusive police and judicial
mandate. This is why I have voiced concern about
achieving a seamless transition from UNMIBH's
judicial system assessment programme to its successor
body in the Office ofthe High Representative.

It could also be argued that the international
community has been overly conservative in how we
have implemented the Dayton Accords. We have paid a
very high price for our timidity in not arresting
indicted war criminals in the early days of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization intervention. Their
continued presence undermines the establishment of
the rule of law, inhibits inter-ethnic reconciliation,
prevents the victims and their families from reaching
psychological closure and holds back the political
future ofthe region.

I am pleased to be able to say that over the next
18 months, the Law Enforcement Personnel Registry
that UNMIBH has established will ensure that there are
no war criminals in the local police forces. But until
Karadzic' and Mladic' are brought to justice, there will
remain a dark shadow over everything we are trying to
do. Ultimately, we cannot absolve the innocent until we
punish the guilty.

Finally, the efforts of the international community
have often languished through conflicting political
messages, uncoordinated projects and failure to follow
through, which have been used by obstructionists to
their advantage. This is the price of having different
bodies mandating different organizations under a loose
coordinating authority.

As we take stock of what remains to be done at a
time of shrinking resources and competing regional

priorities, some rationalization and consolidation of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina
should not be ruled out. Diminishing resources must be
used to greater effect. This means displaying far
greater resolve and unity of effort. The dramatic
changes in South-Eastern Europe have given us the
opportunity and the necessity to re-evaluate our
strategies and synchronize our operations on a national
and regional basis. In this regard, the European States
must play a key role.

Turning now to the specific role and work of
UNMIBH, the Secretary-General's report summarizes
the achievements of a Mission that is fully engaged,
dynamic and results-oriented. We have broken new
ground not only in what we do, but also in how we do
it. The Mission stands at a point where we can see the
end in sight, but we do not have the financial resources
to get there.

Let me summarize quickly what we have done.

We have achieved the transformation and
reduction of police forces from 40,000 wartime
personnel in 1996 to under 20,000 today.

Over 95 per cent of these police personnel have
undergone transitional and human-dignity training
courses to ensure understanding of human rights.
Specialized training has been conducted in drug
control, organized crime and crowd control.

The Law Enforcement Personnel Registry has
been established to register and conduct background
checks on all police personnel. Phase 1 of this project
will be completed this month. It identifies every police
officer, where they came from, their ethnic group and
their experience and qualifications. In phase 2, we will
be able to weed out personnel who are suspected of
war or other crimes. The Registry is also the basis for
determining the ethnic composition of the police
forces.

Full freedom of movement is now taken for
granted. The numbers of refugees and displaced
persons have increased dramatically. In the first 10
months of this year, over 46,000 minority returns have
been registered - twice the number of last year. The
number of return-related incidents, although still
unacceptably high, has decreased in most areas, as a
result of UNMIBH training and guidance for the local
police.

S/PV.4245

 

Major steps have been taken towards changing
the ethnic composition of the local police forces to
give confidence to returnees. Over 550 cadets, most of
them members of minorities, have entered or
completed training at the two multi-ethnic police
academies, in Sarajevo and Banja Luka.

The agreement reached this year with both
entities on voluntary redeployment of minority police
officers to return to their pre-war places of
employment has started to bear fruit. In another
innovation, the first refresher courses for pre-war
police have begun. The unified multi-ethnic Brcko
police service has been inaugurated and functioned
responsibly during pre-election riots.

Following two years of obstructionism and delay,
on 6 June UNMIBH inaugurated the State Border
Service at Sarajevo airport. I will return to this point
later.

In response to the alarming statistics on the
number of illegal migrants transiting Bosnia and
Herzegovina on their way to other parts of Europe, we
have initiated a joint task force on illegal immigration
and organized crime through the Cooperative Law
Enforcement Arrangement between entity Ministries of
Interior.

Substantial progress has been made in the
integration of the Federation Ministry of Interior and
the Ministries of Interior in mixed Croat/Bosniac
cantons. Our target now is to establish unified budgets
and complete physical co-location of ministries.

The police commissioner project is making good
progress. Its aim is to reduce political interference in
police work and to institute a single chain of command
in police forces.

The formerly separate Bosniac and Croat
specialized police forces in the Federation have been
integrated and trained for crowd control and major-
incident management.

The excellent judicial system assessment
programme, which was terminated on 1 December
2000, completed 14 major reports on the systemic
deficiencies ofthe legal and judicial system.

The first Bosnia and Herzegovina multi-ethnic
United Nations Civilian Police contingent of 12 is
performing well in East Timor. A second contingent of
23 officers, including one woman, is now being
deployed. And the first nine military officers will be
ready next month for deployment as United Nations
military observers to Eritrea and Ethiopia.

The progress made by the Mission has enabled us
to think about an end point. With this in mind, we have
prepared, as an internal and evolving document, a plan
for the completion of our core mandate. The Mandate
Implementation Plan is a realistic attempt to identify
specific objectives for the tasks given to us by this
Council and to translate them into realistic programmes
and projects that are achievable, provided that we have
the necessary resources and a political environment
conducive to that work.

In fact, one of the driving forces behind the
creation of the Plan was to give donors a
comprehensive overview of the requirements of the
Mission and, upon completion of the programmes, a
clear measure of the results of their contributions. This
is critical, given the expansion of peace operations and
the necessity of prioritizing programmes that require
donor support.

Our vision for the state of local police forces in
December 2002 takes into account the legacy of war,
current political conditions, rational expectations ofthe
population, local policing traditions and the aspirations
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the European family
of nations. The intention is to address the three levels
of law enforcement in democratic societies, namely,
the individual police officer, the institution of law
enforcement and the relationship between law
enforcement agencies and civil authority and society.

Mandate implementation does not attempt to
prejudge the decisions of the Council on the duration
or the substance of the mandate of the UNMIBH. At
six-month intervals, and particularly towards the end of
2002, the Mission will evaluate the completion of its
goals. Every effort will have been made to maximally
achieve all areas of the core mandate and to have
established self-sustaining mechanisms and institutions
to achieve long-term and ongoing goals such as a full
minority representation. All of this is dependent on
UNMIBH having the resources to do the job. Allow me
to briefly highlight the key areas where mandate
implementation risks becoming stalled because of
major resource shortfalls.

Rapid establishment of control over State borders
is the key to the consolidation of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and international personality in Bosnia and

S/PVAZAS

 

Herzegovina, including with respect to its neighbours.
The multi-ethnic State Border Service, which
UNMIBH had been tasked to establish, is the first
State-level rather than entity-level executive agency
and an integral part of the international objectives of
institution-building. More concretely, full deployment
of the State Border Service is absolutely essential to
combat organized crime, illegal migration, customs
evasion and trafficking in human beings and illicit
drugs.

At Sarajevo airport alone, we have documented
over 21,300 people this year who are suspected of
having entered the country in order to illegally migrate
to European States. The number of illegal migrants
apprehended in Croatia has nearly doubled to 18,000
this year, and the number of victims of trafficking has
also increased. In November alone, 50 women and girls
were freed from brothels and assisted in repatriation to
their home countries.

With the resources available to us until now, we
have established a 400-person State Border Service
deployed at three land crossings, one airport and a
national headquarters, but we need the help of the
Council and we need funding. However, as of today,
we are unable to hire candidates for 900 positions
which will result in a coverage of 60 per cent of the
border. Under the best possible circumstances, which
include the release and utilization of all previous donor
pledges, the projected budget for 2001 will not even
cover the salaries for these additional staff, let alone
equipment and operating costs. I sincerely urge all
potential donors, particularly the European States and
institutions, for which an effective State Border
Service is a cost-efficient preventive investment, to
support the rapid deployment of this essential State
institution.

A second deep concern is the lack of funding for
housing reconstruction for minority police. Here we
are victims of our own success. This year we have
broken through all the political obstacles to the
deployment of minority police. Their presence in the
areas of return is a vital confidence- and security-
building measure to encourage others to return. If we
agree that the ability of people to return to their homes
is the litmus test of the Dayton Accords, then support
for minority police housing must be at the top of our
priorities. At present we have over 200 minority police
ready to go home, but no funding to assist them. I am
deeply concerned that this entire project may falter
over this single issue.

Finally, there is the legacy of Srebrenica. Five
years on, after the infamous massacre of over 7,000
men and boys, the area of Srebrenica remains a tragic
and desolate place. The decision on a permanent burial
site for the victims has removed a major psychological
impediment, but substantial assistance is required to
create the semblance of normal life. Serb displaced
persons currently living there need political and
financial assistance to be able to go home, thus
releasing housing for Bosniacs to return. The
infrastructures in Srebrenica municipality have not
been repaired since the war, and investment is required
for job creation to support those who are returning and
those who wish to stay.

I believe we all have a solemn moral
responsibility to assist the people of Srebrenica, and
after five years the opportunity to make a difference is
now before us. In cooperation with the international
organizations on the ground in Srebrenica, we are
preparing a comprehensive plan to address the many
urgent needs. It is our hope that the relevant donors
will allow us to use the United Nations Trust Fund
resources for these purposes.

(spoke in French)

May I close this presentation by paying tribute to
the men and women who are working in the service of
UNMIBH. It is their work that makes our Mission
successful. Day by day the 93 nationalities of which
UNMIBH is composed represent a model of what can
be accomplished when men and women of goodwill are
prepared to work together for a common cause.

I am particularly happy that China is planning to
make available to UNMIBH police officers and a
diplomat. This bears witness to the constant support
that the members of the Council give to UNMIBH.
Please rest assured that we will continue to work hard
to deserve your confidence.

