My thanks go to today's briefers, Special Representative Swan, Ambassador Madeira and Ms. Hassan, for their extremely useful and detailed updates. Regrettably, I must open on a sombre note, because despite the Secretary- General's calls for a ceasefire, Al-Shabaab continues to launch its attacks. We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks, including the murders of two humanitarian workers just last month. The United Kingdom expresses its condolences to the victims' families and reaffirms its solidarity with Somalia in fighting terrorism. Let me reiterate - it is vital that all parties ensure unimpeded access to, and the safety of, aid workers, in line with international humanitarian law. As we near the end of the current political cycle, I would like to reflect on Somalia's progress - and there has been progress. In March, Somalia achieved Heavily Indebted Poor Country Debt Initiative relief. It achieved that decision point following impressive economic performance, and can now access new international financing. The Federal Government has increased its revenue base with international support. Somalia is making progress in building resilience to humanitarian shocks and, with support from the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the Somali National Army has taken back and held territory from Al-Shabaab. This is a marathon, not a sprint. But at the moment, we are making progress. As the electoral processes commence in Somalia, we acknowledge the agreement between the Federal Government and the federal member states on an electoral model for 2020-2021 and stress the importance of preserving that spirit of consensus. We now urge all stakeholders to work together to deliver an inclusive, timely and credible electoral process, which includes a 30 per cent quota for women. And I want to reiterate to Ms. Hassan how useful it was to hear from her about how civil society is working to achieve that target, but also about the challenges that it still faces. I want to express our deep concern about the increasing number of attacks on the freedom of expression, including the killing, assault and intimidation of journalists. As Somalia prepares to hold an electoral process, Somali leaders must ensure that the political space remains open, allowing the expression of a diversity of voices. Beyond that electoral process, commitment to effective federalism is critical for Somalia's long-term stability, including by building State institutions and ensuring that resources and power can be distributed in a way that best serves the Somali people. We urge Somalia's leaders to set out their vision for the steps towards an inclusive political settlement, finalizing the constitution and ensuring direct elections in 2024-2025. We encourage them to maximize the benefits of debt relief through better federal economic cooperation, and we urge Somalia's leaders to continue to articulate a clear vision for the security transition after 2021. As we enter the next political cycle, Somalia and the international community should re-commit to the principles of mutual accountability. The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for and commitment to Somalia's long-term stability and growth. I turn again now to the security situation in Somalia, which remains a significant challenge. First, I would like to re-state our tribute to the continuing commitment and sacrifices of AMISOM troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and to Somalia's security forces. We welcome the renewal of the Somalia sanctions regime and the international resolve to counter Al-Shabaab by tackling their access to arms and illicit finance. We express deep concern at the worrisome statistics on children and armed conflict and sexual and gender-based violence in Somalia. We welcome the tasking in the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the sanctions mandates to report on human rights. All tools must be used to ensure that people do not suffer. We also welcome the efforts of the Federal Government to renew the Somalia transition plan. The deadline at the end of 2021 for the Somali authorities to have taken greater leadership from AMISOM is a momentous one. Our partners in the African Union and from among AMISOM TCCs have made enormous sacrifices in supporting Somalia as it works to retake control of its own security. It is clear that that support will be needed after 2021. But it is also clear that we have an opportunity to support AMISOM as it evolves towards a role in which it can enable the Somalis to manage their own security. International conversations, including at the European Union's upcoming conference on security, and critically through the independent assessment mandated by the Security Council, are necessary in order for partners to reflect on how we can collectively implement Somalia's security vision. I encourage constructive engagement with those processes as we approach a new mandate next year. Lastly, Somalia faces a protracted climate and conflict-induced humanitarian crisis, compounded by what Special Representative Swan called the triple shock of the coronavirus disease pandemic, locusts and floods. The United Kingdom gave £64 million in humanitarian aid to Somalia in the last fiscal year. We call on the international community to provide more funding for the humanitarian response and efforts to build long-term resilience. In conclusion, I want to emphasize three points. First, I underscore that a united international response is crucial to supporting Somalia and its fight against the protracted humanitarian crises. Secondly, I reiterate our call for the Federal Government to ensure that the agreed electoral process is inclusive, credible and timely. And, lastly, I wish to stress that Somalia's long-term peace and stability depends on a clear plan for ensuring its security, a political vision for better federal cooperation and continuing international support and commitment to mutual accountability.
