Mrs. Miculescu (Romania): Let me join my Thai
colleague in commending Argentina on its distinguished
presidency, and on convening this important and timely
meeting.

Improving the Council's working methods,
increasing its transparency and broadening partnerships
that can support the Council in fulfilling its essential
task of maintaining international peace and security
represent a work in progress that we are all committed
to. We therefore very much welcome this annual
exercise. In particular, we appreciate today's debate, as
it allows us to put forward some modest considerations
on two topics that Romania pays great attention to,
both in its national capacity and as a member of the
European Union (EU).

As regards sanctions, we have acquired, at the EU
level, substantial experience in balancing security and
fundamental rights that could bring added value to the
broader debate at the international level. The obligation
to include safeguards when adopting restrictive
measures, whether autonomously or pursuant to Security
Council resolutions, is established by the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union. When examining
the legality of such measures, the Court of Justice of
the European Union explained that the right to effective
judicial review requires that any decision that affects
a person individually must be taken on a sufficiently
solid factual basis. Judicial review cannot be carried
out in the abstract, but must assess whether the reasons
are substantiated.

Considering those requirements, we warmly
welcome the role and the activity of the Office of the
Ombudsperson, a valuable rule-of-law component in
the sanctions regimes, and we express our full support
for Ms. Kimberly Prost's endeavours.

To conclude on this point, we would like to mention
the ongoing EU legislative process meant to amend the
rules of procedure of the General Court. The aim is to
establish an adequate system of procedural safeguards
that addresses the need for confidentiality without
affecting the right to a fair trial.

Let me now turn to the second subject, the
International Criminal Court (ICC). I am very happy to
see the ICC Prosecutor here today. We take the View that
it would be a positive step to establish a mechanism on
the follow-up of referrals made by the Security Council
in accordance with the Rome Statute. We have in mind,
in this respect, the following considerations.

The broad membership of the Rome Statute,
which currently includes 122 signatory States, and the
Council's competence to refer situations to the ICC
even from non-States parties create the possibility
of an overlap between the activities of the Security
Council and those of the ICC with respect to the same
situation or situations at certain moments in time.
With that possibility, strong coordination between
the two institutions is undoubtedly required. One
could mention the examples already given, such as
aligning sanctions lists with issued warrants. Improved
cooperation between the Council and the Court would
certainly consolidate international justice and ensure
coherence in the exercise of the mandate that each of
the two institutions has in the maintenance ofpeace and
stability in the world.

Another perspective is the activity of the Court
compared to that of the ad-hoc Tribunals, which benefit,
at present, from the attention of an informal working
group. A fortiori, a dedicated working group for the
ICC would be justified, notwithstanding the formal
argument of their different origin: in one case, Security
Council resolutions, in the other, an international
treaty. In our view, that formal argument should not
prevail over the substantial one - that of the scope of
judicial activity 4 as the consequences of interaction
between the two institutions are essential to achieving
the Court's mandate.

The Security Council has already made a
substantial contribution to combating impunity by
creating the ad hoc Tribunals. The relationship with
the ICC, for which the founding act of the Court
provides a solid basis, is an opportunity to build upon
and to expand that contribution. There is a need for
a constant and meaningful exchange of views among
Council members in order to address situations that
are referred and the consequences for non-compliance
with cooperation obligations under the referrals. On
the basis of the periodic reporting by the Office of
the Prosecutor, adequate follow-up measures, as well
as instances where a deferral of the investigation or
prosecution could be decided upon, could be examined.

Taking into account all those arguments, let me
conclude by saying that such a mechanism would be a
step in the right direction in developing a mature and
balanced relationship, enabling both institutions to
exercise their mandates in an even more efficient and
complementary manner. Romania appreciates your
synergies, Madam President.

