Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the delegations of Senegal and
Angola, for having taken the initiative to hold today's
debate. I also thank Mr. Zerihoun for his briefing.

Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be made
by the observer of the European Union. I wish now to
make the following remarks in my national capacity.

Today, as the risk of piracy seems to be decreasing
in the Horn of Africa, maritime insecurity is growing
in the Gulf of Guinea. This development is worrying
because it carries instability at a time when the West
Africa is facing other challenges posed by illicit
trafficking and the proximity of the terrorist threat in
the Sahel. Given that the Gulf of Guinea is a place of
intense economic activity and trade, the fight against
maritime insecurity there is a challenge that goes beyond
the sphere of purely security matters. Ownership of this
issue by the coastal States is therefore crucial. Just as
important is the establishment of regional cooperation
structures that will allow for greater effectiveness in
the fight against the various forms of maritime crime.

We welcome in this respect the establishment, in
Yaounde, pursuant to the decision taken at the Summit
of the West African and Central African Heads of
State in June 2013, of the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is our hope that this important tool for
regional cooperation becomes fully operational as soon
as possible. As for Belgium, we stand alongside the
West African States and are committed to supporting
them in their fight against maritime crime. My country
is a member of the Group of Seven Plus Friends of the
Gulf of Guinea, whose action is aimed at coordinating
maritime capacity-building initiatives undertaken by
various international partners.

Belgium has also actively participated in the
development of the European Union Maritime Security
Strategy and its related Gulf of Guinea 2015-2020
Action Plan. Furthermore, Belgian bilateral initiatives
are in line with the Action Plan. Accordingly, Belgium is
active in strengthening the national maritime, military
and civilian capabilities of several coastal States in the
Gulf of Guinea through training activities it sponsors.
A particularly fruitful partnership example is the one
developed with Benin in which Belgium is currently
cooperating in the training of personnel for three new
patrol boats and in the training of marines.

Belgium also regularly provides ships from its
navy as part of the international initiative "Africa
Partnership Station" which aims to develop military,
coast-guard and marine expertise of African coastal
nations. That was the case, for example, in 2014, with
a logistics support ship and, in 2015, a frigate. During
the latter deployment, the Belgian frigate trained on
board sailors from Togo, Gabon, Congo and Benin. It
also participated in the exercise Obangame Express,
conducted in the Gulf of Guinea to help local forces
develop their capacity to fight illegal maritime activities.
Belgium is studying the possibility of deploying again
this year a logistics support ship as part of the Africa
Partnership Station.

In conclusion, I should like to emphasize the need
for consistency in the fight against maritime crime
with the improvement of the living conditions of local
populations. Any lasting solution will indeed include a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of the problem, taking into account the factors that fuel
them, such as governance gaps and poverty. Treating
the causes of the problem is to act in order to prevent
their exacerbation or re-emergence. Belgium therefore
welcomes the Council's adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2016/4, which contains a set of
concrete recommendations on the means to that end.

