Mr. Stareevie (Serbia): At the outset, I should
like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spiric',
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As a neighbouring country that desires sincere,
good-neighbourly and friendly relations with Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia is following the development
of the overall situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina with
due attention. As a signatory and a guarantor of the
Peace Agreement for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1031
(1995) on its implementation, Serbia is firmly
committed to respecting the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a matter of
principle. Also, Serbia supported the candidacy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council, and I wish once again to
congratulate it on its election.

The position of my country incorporates concrete
support of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the process of
European integration and we regard membership in the
European Union for all the countries of the South-East
European region as a common goal. Serbia is of the
view that regional economic cooperation - both
bilateral and intraregional, through the Central
European Free Trade Agreement - gives a particular
impulse towards the permanent stabilization of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as of the
region as a whole.

My country supports the processes of internal
political reforms aimed at advancing the institutional
capacities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and welcomes

all political initiatives to intensify these reforms. We
take note of the fact that the representatives of all
political parties from both entities and all three
constitutive peoples expressed certain reservations with
regard to the solutions recently proposed by the
representatives of the European Union and the United
States within the so-called Butmir process.

The Republic of Serbia will honour every
agreement that is accepted by the representatives of
both entities and supported by a consensus among all
three constitutive peoples containing sustainable
solutions in the spirit of contemporary democratic
values. We encourage all participants in this process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to do all that is necessary for
such an agreement to be reached. Also, Serbia views
the ongoing process of the transition of authority from
the Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be in accordance with the 2+3 principle
of consensus.

In conclusion, I should like to say that the
Republic of Serbia agrees with the assessments
presented in the report of the High Representative and
the conclusions of the European Union Council of
17 November concerning the role and contribution of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force in
maintaining security in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
therefore support the proposal of Office of the High
Representative to extend the mandate of that mission.

