Ms. Rice (United States of America): I wish to
thank President Abbas for his presence here, and also
the Ministers from the Arab League States who have
joined us.

The United States is, of course, deeply concerned
about the situation in Gaza, which is clearly worsening.
We have been working around the clock to try to end
the violence there. The ongoing attacks against Israel
and the decision by Hamas not to respect the previous
period of calm show us that when this ends there must
be new arrangements in place, not a return to the status
quo ante. It is imperative that any ceasefire be durable
and sustainable and that it ensure the safety and
security of Israelis and Palestinians alike.

The situation before the current events in Gaza
was clearly not sustainable. Hundreds of thousands of
Israelis lived under the daily threat of rocket attacks.
Frankly, no country - none of our countries - would
have been willing to tolerate such a circumstance.
Moreover, the people of Gaza watched as insecurity
and lawlessness increased and as their living conditions
grew more dire because of the actions of Hamas, which
began with the illegal coup against the Palestinian
Authority in Gaza. A ceasefire that returns to those
circumstances is unacceptable, and it will not last.

We need urgently to conclude a ceasefire that can
endure and bring real security. That will begin a period
of true calm that includes an end to rocket, mortar and
other attacks on Israelis and allows for the cessation of
Israel's military offensive. It must also include an end
to the smuggling into Gaza and a reopening of
crossings so that Palestinians can benefit from
humanitarian goods and basic supplies. The November
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access provides a
basis for reopening those crossings. We must find a
way, with the consent and full cooperation of like-
minded Governments, to prevent any arms or
explosives from entering Gaza, and the reopening of
the tunnel systems that have allowed rearmament of
Hamas must be prevented.

Our goal must be the stabilization and
normalization of life in Gaza. That will require a
principled resolution of the political challenges in Gaza
that ultimately re-establishes the Palestinian
Authority's legitimate control and facilitates the
normal operation of all crossings. The November 26
Arab League statement will serve as an important
guide in these efforts, efforts that are led by Egypt.

The international community should adopt an
intensive reconstruction initiative, perhaps through a
donors conference, that would complement the efforts
of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza, because the
Palestinian Authority actually devotes 58 per cent of its
budget to Gaza. There should be an effort to
reconstruct Gaza.

As we strive for a ceasefire, the United States
remains deeply concerned about innocent Palestinians
and Israelis who are suffering. Let me assure the
Council that we understand the urgency of an end to
the fighting and that we are working around the clock
to bring it into being. In that regard, we are pleased by
and wish to commend the statement of the President of
Egypt, and we wish to follow up on that initiative.

But we also are very concerned about the
humanitarian situation in Gaza. From American
partners on the ground I have had detailed reports
about the difficult circumstances in Gaza. I have
discussed them in detail with Prime Minister Olmert
and Foreign Minister Livni. The Prime Minister has
informed me that as of tomorrow Israel will open a
humanitarian corridor so that there can be some relief
for the people of Gaza. That is something we will
follow up on, but we will also help you, Mr. Secretary-
General, to follow up on that through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), because
the problem, as I understand it, is that even if goods get
into Gaza it is not possible to distribute them there.
The United States will work actively to relieve that
circumstance. Moreover, the United States - which
has already provided $85 million for humanitarian
work in Gaza in the last year - will contribute more
emergency aid, if that is needed.

We very much need to find a solution to this
problem in the short term. But this time it really must
be a solution that does not allow Hamas to use Gaza as
a launching pad against Israeli cities. It has to be a
solution that does not allow the rearmament of Hamas,
and it must find the way to open crossings so that
Palestinians in Gaza can have a normal life.

Just three weeks ago we sat in this Chamber to
vote on resolution 1850 (2008). It described the
principles to chart a better future for Israelis and
Palestinians alike. Resolution 1850 (2008) noted that
lasting peace can only be based on an enduring
commitment to mutual recognition, freedom from
Violence, incitement and terror, and the two-State
solution, building on previous agreements and
obligations.

I think the members of this Council know that
President Bush and I personally have been very
dedicated to that goal. We remain dedicated to that
goal, and the United States of America will remain
dedicated to that goal, because we know that the time
has long since come when Palestinians, who deserve to
live in their own State, should get that State, and when
Israelis, who will live in peace and security when they
have a peaceful neighbour, should have that peace and
security.

I do not mean in any way to diminish the dangers,
the urgency, the challenges of this moment in Gaza.
This is a crisis that we must resolve, and resolve
urgently. But we must also stay focused on creating the
conditions that will ultimately lead to a real peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

