Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having organized this debate.
Mary Robinson has expressed brilliantly what we are
all thinking. I fully subscribe to what has been said by
previous speakers.

The Ambassador of Sweden, speaking on behalf
of the European Union, will make the general
comments called for by the two Security Council
resolutions that we have already adopted and the two
reports of the Secretary-General on this important
topic.

Rather than repeat what earlier speakers have said
around this table today, I would like to try to think with
my Council colleagues about how the principles that
brought us together today can be applied to a specific
issue. I am thinking of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Why is this? Because we are in
the process of deploying contingents there right now,
and the Security Council is going to carry out an
important mission there at a crucial moment. Also,
because that is, without a doubt, one of the deadliest
conflicts for civilians. According to estimates of
observers, there have been between 1 million and
2 million civilian victims. How, specifically, when
confronted with this tragic situation, can our Council
better ensure the protection of some 50 million
Congolese citizens, particularly those living in the
areas of conflict? This is a very concrete problem that
faces us, and we must bear in mind the limitations of
the mandate that our Council has given to the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The limits are
particularly narrow, but I am convinced that we can do
better and more than we have done so far.

How can this be brought about? Our goal is to
restore peace, territorial integrity and sovereignty for
the inhabitants of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. From this point of View, it is clearly important
not to stop with disengagement but to move towards
the withdrawal of foreign troops and the
demobilization of negative forces, and to put an end to
the pillaging of the natural resources of that country.

Specifically, in order to provide protection for the
civilian population, over and above putting an end to
the fighting, there are things we can and must do. I
think that the first thing is to strengthen the
international presence charged with observing and
investigating the facts on the ground, including,
unfortunately, the massacres, particularly in the eastern
part of the country.

From this perspective, there is one man who is
already doing a great deal, Mr. Garreton, whom Mrs.
Mary Robinson mentioned. We should hear him a third
time before going to the field because his testimony
before our departure would be extremely valuable, and
he must be given the means to visit the area more
often. It is not right that the Geneva office not be in a
position to fund more visits by Mr. Garreton to the
field.

Beyond the work done by Mr. Garreton, a second
thing we can and should do is to encourage non-
governmental organizations and all other actors that
can, through their presence in the field, contribute to an
awareness of events. In that regard, I would like to pay
tribute to Human Rights Watch, which has done a
tremendous job. There is no substitute for exposing
concealed crimes.

Thirdly, we must no doubt strengthen the
presence of human rights specialists within MONUC.
Mary Robinson has said the same, and she is quite
right. There are not enough MONUC personnel to carry
out every aspect of the mandate we have entrusted to
them, especially as the mandate does not allow the
soldiers and observers we are sending to the field to
take the time to look into the human rights situation in
depth. We must therefore endow MONUC with a
rapidly growing number of observers whose sole
mandate is to monitor the human rights situation.

Finally, I believe that we should not rule out the
possibility of bringing to justice those responsible for
the most significant crimes and massacres that have
taken place in that unfortunate country. Will it be
necessary to set up a special tribunal, as in the case of
Sierra Leone? Should we follow the Cambodian
example? I would tend to be inclined to follow the
Cambodian model, but this is a matter that we will
have to be consider once we are in the field: how to
provide justice to the Congolese people and how to
bring to justice the perpetrators of the most significant
crimes against the civilian population.

Beyond these actions sharply focused on
protecting civilians and providing them with justice,
there are two other actions we must take. The first is to
develop economic projects with the involvement of the
MONUC contingents, and the second is the
development of humanitarian activities. In that regard,
before departing we will have to listen to the
recommendations of Mr. Oshima, who is present here.

Finally, a difficult topic we will have to address is
the question of how to administer areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that have been
evacuated by foreign troops. This is a question we will
have to ask ourselves, and one that we will have to
raise in particular with the political actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also a question
those actors will have to deal with on a priority basis in
the context of their national dialogue.

These are a few specific points illustrating that it
is only one step from principle to action, a step that we
will be taking in our upcoming visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

