Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Chinese presidency for initiating and convening this
open debate on the critical subject of terrorism, which
is today destabilizing both regional and global security.

International terrorism has grown increasingly
sinister. It has moved from isolated acts in individual
countries to a large-scale terrorist aggression across
Europe, Asia and Africa. The activities of terrorist
groups undermine the foundations of the existing world
order far beyond the conflict zones of North Africa
and the Middle East, even reaching the Central Asian
region. That is quite evident in the fact that citizens
of various Member States have been recruited or are
volunteering to fight in Syria and Iraq. The ever-
increasing violence there has led to an escalation in the
number of civilian victims, mainly women and children,
as has resulted in the forced migration of people to
Europe at an unprecedented rate. That uncontrollable
exodus, together with the destruction of cities, sites and
historic monuments is of great concern to all of us in
the United Nations community.

Moreover, it may be just a matter of time before
nuclear weapons and the technology that produces them
fall into the hands of terrorists. Our world is once again
in danger and the risks cannot be underestimated. It is
with this in view that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
of Kazakhstan presented a new security paradigm
document entitled "Manifesto: The World. The 21st
Century" at the fourth Nuclear Security Summit held
recently in Washington, DC. The document features
a critical take on the issues of war and peace. The
President has proposed to establish, under the auspices
of the United Nations, a global coalition of States for
peace, stability, trust and security. Its common task for
the next decade is

"to end wars and conflicts in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Yemen, Libya, and Syria, in eastern Ukraine, and
the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation".

In September, my President also suggested
establishing, under the auspices of the United Nations,
a unified global network comprised of various entities
to counter terrorism in order to defeat this scourge and
bring perpetrators - and their supporters - to justice
(see A/70/PV.13).

My delegation is deeply convinced that the fight
against international terrorism demands a long-term
comprehensive approach and cooperation at all levels
with the active participation of all Member States, global
and regional structures and civil society. Kazakhstan
is party to all the major international conventions and
instruments against terrorism and is also guided by
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My country proposes that current United Nations
mechanisms, including the Global Strategy, be made
legally binding through relevant Security Council
resolutions. We call on all delegations to support this
bold and forward-looking approach and to speedily
adopt a comprehensive document on international
terrorism, which has challenged our efforts for the last
20 years. We also call on all Member States to work
together on the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. We congratulate the
organizers who are present for the very successful
meeting held recently in Geneva.

Kazakhstan has also acceded to anumber of regional
and global instruments on countering violent extremism,
and the illicit trafficking of arms, ammunition and
explosives. Currently, we are engaged in the Joint Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia.
That document was elaborated by five states of the
region, in close cooperation with the United Nations,
global and regional powers and organizations. We have
hosted two meetings in Almaty on this regional plan,
as well as two training workshops of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and
the South and Central Asia Regional Conference on
Countering Violent Extremism in Astana. We believe
that all of these symbolize our sincere contribution to
the united fight against the scourge of terrorism.

To order to ensure peace and security in the entire
Asian region, here at United Nations Headquarters in
1992 Kazakhstan initiated the Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia, a forum for
collaboration on how to counter new terrorist threats
and challenges. It has become a unique pan-continental
security forum. Kazakhstan, as the 2010 Chair of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), hosted the organization's first conference on
the prevention of terrorism. The Astana Commemorative
Declaration was adopted at that conference, confirming
the commitment of participating OSCE States and
partner countries to combatting terrorism. Those
activities continue even today within the framework
of Kazakhstan-European Union cooperation. We
listened very carefully to the statement of the Observer
for the European Union. In addition, my country
also cooperates on counterterrorism matters with
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization within the
framework of the individual partnership action plan,
thus expanding collaboration with the Euro-Atlantic
Partnership Council.

Spiritual and religious leaders play a significant role
in fostering inter-ethnic and interreligious harmony,
and so Kazakhstan regularly convenes the Congress of
Leaders of World and Traditional Religions, bringing
together religious and political leaders to promote
peace. At the national level, we adopted a Programme to
Counter Religious Extremism and Terrorism to ensure
public and societal safety through the direct engagement
of our citizens in prevention and rehabilitation outreach
activities. In a few weeks, on 6 May, Mr. Mogens
Lykketoft, President of the General Assembly, will
organize a high-level conversation on Religions for
Peace, initiated by Kazakhstan and supported by our
partners, with a view to demonstrating the power
of religious unity against the destructive nature of
terrorism and violent extremism.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan is committed to working
closely with the international community as a part of its
deep commitment to combat the ever-growing scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism.

