Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Minister
Lajcak for his briefing and welcome him back to the
United Nations. The United Kingdom fully supports
his chairmanship and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its work to address
the serious security challenges we face.

The people of Ukraine feel these challenges
acutely. The United Kingdom fully supports Ukraine's
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
including in Crimea as should every member here
today. Yet year after year, we see persistent disregard
for international law on the part of a permanent
member of the Council. Last month marked five years
since Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea. Russia
has continued this pattern of behaviour, blatantly
disregarding the principles set out in the Charter of the
United Nations and the Helsinki Final Act, and Russia
continues to destabilize eastern Ukraine, interfere with
Ukrainian elections and fuel the ongoing conflict, at a
devastating humanitarian cost.

Since the conflict in Ukraine began, over 10,000
people have lost their lives, almost 25,000 have been
injured and 3.5 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance. The efforts of international organizations to
deliver assistance to vulnerable people in the Donbas
are being restricted. Russia bears responsibility for
this ongoing situation. This conflict will be brought to
an end only through the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, requiring a truly sustainable ceasefire and
genuine political will.

We welcome the personal commitment that Minister
Lajcak has shown to mitigating the humanitarian
consequences of this conflict. The OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine plays a crucial and
impartial role in monitoring the situation on the ground.
It deserves our full commitment and to be able to carry
out its mandate free from intimidation, restrictions
on access and interference with its equipment. The
United Kingdom will remain a resolute supporter of
the Mission.

The OSCE and the United Nations continue to
cooperate on shared goals. I would like to thank the
OSCE and UN-Women for co-chairing the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons. We
welcome Minister Lajcak's plans to focus on trafficking
supply chains in the OSCE area.

Countering terrorism and violent extremism
is another area of important cooperation. Here, we
welcome the OSCE's inclusive focus, embedding a
whole-of-society approach that fully incorporates
the rule of law, human rights, gender and prevention.
We also welcome the OSCE's strong partnership
with the Security Council's counter-terrorism bodies
and collaboration to implement multilateral counter-
terrorism frameworks.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), women and peace
and security must also remain high on the agendas
of both organizations. I agree with Minister Lajcak's
comments that we must do more, as the United Nations
and the OSCE, to reinforce each other's work in this
important area.

The United Nations and the OSCE continue to
support the Western Balkans through coordination and
collaboration between our respective presences in the
region. We should jointly continue to ensure that OSCE
activities complement United Nations activities.

We welcome the recent progress in the OSCE'S
human dimension, with the adoption of a landmark
ministerial decision on the safety of journalists and
plans for the implementation of that decision. We look
forward to engaging with the OSCE Representative
on Freedom of the Media ahead of the international
conference on media freedom to be hosted by the
United Kingdom in July.

The OSCE is a valuable forum for dialogue, and if
all States show political will to engage constructively
it can reduce risk and ultimately help rebuild trust.
The full implementation and modernization of existing
commitments are essential for achieving greater military
transparency and predictability. We hope that Minister
Lajcak's approach as OSCE Chair will uphold these
imperatives. We share his priority of working towards a
resolution of the protracted conflicts in the OSCE area
and we welcome the commitment his has demonstrated
by visiting the region early in his chairmanship.

Finally, let me say that we completely share the
call Minister Lajcak made this morning for effective
multilateralism. We can only tackle our shared
challenges, such as climate change, terrorism and arms
control, by working together multilaterally under the
rules-based international system.

