Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the briefings by Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General, Ambassador Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota, Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Ms. Helen Clark, Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme. They
have given us an assessment of the work, progress and
challenges facing the Peacebuilding Commission.

In our statement, we will focus on the three priority
areas set out by the Secretary-General in his report
(S/2012/746), namely, inclusivity, institution-building
and sustained international support and mutual
accountability. In our view, those aspects are central
to peacebuilding and to establishing the necessary
conditions for progress and to prevent a relapse into
new situations of instability and tension.

From an early stage, inclusivity, seeks to ensure the
participation of all actors and parties involved in the
conflict and of those who, suffering the consequences,
are often not considered participants in the national
reconstruction and peacebuilding processes.

Inclusivity can provide legitimacy to reconstruction
processes and can involve and engage the population
in such processes, thereby promoting social cohesion
and national ownership and laying the foundations
for lasting agreements. In that way, they also prevent
frustration, tension and possible relapse into conflict at
the same time as they allow for work on the underlying
roots of a conflict with a view to reconciliation among
the affected population.

In that context, we draw attention to the
fundamental role that women should have in post-
conflict and peacebuilding processes. We express our
concern that women remain marginalized from political
power and planning in peacebuilding processes and
in many national processes in general, in spite of the
Council's call in resolution 1325 (2000) that women
should be ensured greater representation at all levels of
decision-making. We must continue working towards
the effective implementation of that resolution and
the seven-point action plan on gender-responsive
peacebuilding set out in the Secretary-General's 2010
report on women's participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).

With regard to building national institutions in
the post-conflict phase of peacebuilding, the process
of institutionalization must be adaptable and able to
respond to the needs ofthe population, while possessing
transparent working mechanisms that make their work
subject to accountability. In that work, particular
attention should be paid to the political and social
dynamics of the country and its practices, ensuring
the central importance of national ownership of such
processes. Institutions that are perceived as legitimate
and independent will allow for progress towards a
successful transition. Such progress will strengthen
respect for the rule of law and its underlying principles,
which is essential for the stability and development of
the country.

With regard to sustained international support
and mutual accountability, we must recognize the
importance of political and financial support and
commitments for making progress in national strategies
aimed at peacebuilding. Such efforts require certainty
and predictability when it comes to resources. We
therefore acknowledge the importance of partnerships,
as noted in the report of the Secretary-General, with the
World Bank, other institutions and the private sector.
Donations must respect and contribute to national
peacebuilding plans. It is the country emerging from
conflict itself, with the support of the Commission and
of the international community, that should designate
the plans it deems most relevant. We underscore the
role that regional and subregional organizations can
play in providing the necessary political support to the
peacebuilding process and, as far as possible, financial
support.

Against a complex international backdrop, we
issue a call for the work to continue on mechanisms
that could provide greater certainty in the flow of
resources. In that regard, I am pleased to report that my
country expects to continue its annual contribution to
the Peacebuilding Fund.

In our capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2009 and during our membership in
2012, we had the opportunity to learn first-hand about,
and become involved in, the Commission's work to
promote peace and rebuild the countries that are part
of the various configurations. We acknowledge the
progress achieved. However, much remains to be done
to ensure the full implementation of the objectives for
which the Commission was established. In that regard,
we believe that the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations could expand its scope to consider
peacebuilding and establish linkages with the relevant
actors in this field.

We conclude by reiterating the call to continue
perfecting the relationship between the Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission and improving and
expanding the channels of communication between the
two bodies, in particular when it comes to considering
the renewal of mandates.

