Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate.

We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The year 2014 has been a critical year for the
Middle East peace process. It is important that the
international community remain committed to finding
a just and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. We must not give up hope at this crucial
juncture. We believe it is the responsibility of the
parties concerned to create an environment conducive
to peace. Improved conditions for Palestinians can only
help to improving the situation in the region as a whole.
The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, must end as soon as possible if
a sustainable solution in the region is to be found. The
international community has repeatedly called for a
freeze on settlement activity. We encourage the parties
to exercise restraint for the sake of the greater goal of
peace.

The blockade of the Gaza Strip is another obstacle to
the peace process. Restrictions on imports and exports
due to the blockade are stifling economic growth, and
should be lifted in accordance with resolution 1860
(2009), an act that would contribute significantly to the
economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being of
its people. We note with concern that the United Nations
has been hard pressed to keep the vast majority of the
people of Gaza supplied with minimum necessities. We
would like to emphasize our strong support for the work
of United Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.

The security needs of the people of Israel must
also be respected. A climate conducive to peace will be
encouraged by a approach of mutual sensitivity to each
other's concerns. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians
will only worsen feelings of suspicion and insecurity
and widen the gap between the parties. Sri Lanka
supports the implementation of the General Assembly
resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders. Sri
Lanka also supports the Palestinians' application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations.
We also recognize that the viability of the two-State
solution will depend on the political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people.

We hope that every effort will be made to achieve
success in the peace process so that both the Israeli and
the Palestinian people will be able to enjoy peace and
prosperity in their own lands. We should not let go of
the chance, once again, to achieve a sustainable peace
when there is much international goodwill supporting
the process.

