Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Aboulatta and his entire team for their remarkable and
effective work in managing the issues of the Security
Council during this month, which has had a very heavy
workload. I also thank him for issuing the concept
note, which allows us to focus on the issues of this
wrap-up meeting.

These formal wrap-up sessions are very useful. We
support them and believe that it is a good idea to hold
them as part of our ongoing support for transparency in
this Council. We also support the holding of informal
and interactive meetings of the Security Council with
non-member States because that also allows us to enrich
ourselves with their comments on our own work.
I will concentrate on one of the areas of the
Council's work in the month of May that the presidency
has specifically highlighted, that of resolution 2286
(2016) on medical assistance in armed conflicts. I
will also make a brief reference to the briefing on the
challenges to security in the Sahel (see S/PV.7699),
which my delegation organized together with the
Egyptian presidency just a few days ago.

With regard to 2286 (2016) resolution, which was
adopted by consensus and sponsored by 86 States
Members of the Organization, indeed deserves to be
highlighted. It is the first Security Council resolution
to deal exclusively with medical assistance in armed
conflicts, and its adoption shows that the Security
Council is responding to a very painful reality. In the
year and a half since Spainjoined the Council, there has
not been a single month during which there has not been
one attack against doctors or hospitals and a country
in conflict. Resolution 2286 (2016) not only condemns
attacks against doctors and hospitals in armed conflict
and calls for compliance with international law in the
area, it also urges States to investigate such violations of
international humanitarian law and to bring the guilty
to justice. It also deals with issues such as preventing
attacks, the importance of training and the need to
gather objective and reliable information on the attacks
against doctors and hospitals in countries in conflict.
The resolution also calls upon the Secretary-General
to request and make recommendations to prevent these
events and to inform the Security Council at least once
a year on the implementation of this resolution. The
adoption of the resolution sends a message of support
from the Security Council to doctors and health-care
workers who work in situations of armed conflict
and day after day are fulfilling their missions under
extremely difficult conditions.

With regard to the new methods of work of the
Security Council, this resolution has established a new
precedent in the way that initiatives are proposed and
texts are negotiated. For the first time, the initiative of
the leadership and the coordination of the process was
assumed by five members. They are all elected members
belonging to the five regional groups. Therefore, it was
not only an innovative process, but also a model process
in terms of consensus, transparency and the inclusive
nature of it. It was an example of the success of the
Security Council's initiatives and efforts when it works
in a constructive way and as a team.

Climate change is not an abstract problem or one for
the future; it is scourge that is determining the living
conditions of millions of people throughout the world
today. It is pushing specific countries and people, for
example, Somalia, into a situation of environmental,
economic and social stress, and it has a direct impact
on international peace and security. It is a horizontal
and structural challenge that we must confront with all
of our resources.

In light of the aforementioned, I turn to the briefing
on the security challenges in the Sahel that took place
last Thursday (S/PV.7699). That meeting was a clear
example of the way in which the Council should address
threats to peace and security concerning situations on
its agenda through an integrated, holistic approach,
including, for example, in cases such as the Sahel,
desertification as a key element in understanding
the reality of the situation in the Sahel. The Security
Council must therefore be appropriately informed of all
challenges to peace and security in all corners of the
world. That is the only way in which, together, we can
improve our most fundamental function - prevention.

I conclude by reiterating, Mr. President, my
appreciation for your focused and effective presidency
of the Council and to wish every success to the French
presidency in the upcoming month.

