Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting, and we
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her valuable briefing
this morning.

Peru has been following the situation in Syria
with great concern. The extreme vulnerability of the
humanitarian situation has been exacerbated by the
escalation of violence in recent weeks. We are alarmed
that some 11.7 million people still require humanitarian
assistance in order to survive, most of them women and
children. There are several focuses of concern right
now, Syria's north-west being one of the most serious,
given its population density and high volatility. We are
deeply concerned about the fact that the impact on the
civilian population is being aggravated by the growing
control that terrorist organizations have in the area,
with new fatalities, arbitrary detentions, kidnappings
and destruction of infrastructure. Peru reiterates
its firm condemnation of terrorism. While believe
it is essential that the terrorist groups that remain in
Idlib and other parts of Syria be brought to justice,
we emphasize that combating this scourge should not
be seen as a justification for endangering the lives of
millions ofpeople.

In the circumstances, maintaining the agreement
reached by Turkey and the Russian Federation in
September is crucial. We also want to focus attention
on the tragic situation of the nearly 40,000 displaced
people in Rukban, who face daily shortages of food,
drinking water, medical care and supplies, as well as
extreme weather conditions. We acknowledge and
support the humanitarian work carried out by the United
Nations and agencies such as the Red Crescent, and we
welcome the recent provision of assistance in this area.
We emphasize how important it is to ensure that this aid
is provided in a sustained manner, and that at the same
time urgent efforts are made to reach comprehensive
solutions that can put an end to these people's suffering,
especially considering that 95 per cent of them have
expressed the desire to leave the camp and return to
their places of origin. In that regard, we welcome the
humanitarian corridors that Russia has set up in the area
aimed at ensuring people's voluntary, safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters. We
also urge the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies to continue to increase their assistance to the
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons in
north-eastern Syria who are fleeing the violence of the
remaining groups affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.

We encourage efforts to improve the conditions in
the Al-Hol camp, and hope to see more initiatives such
as the transit centre in Al-Suwar, which is providing
urgent medical care to displaced persons en route to
safer places. We also want to point out that any military
operation, such as that under way in Baghouz, must
respect the principles of precaution and distinction
enshrined in international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, I want to stress that only a political
solution that lays the foundations for sustainable peace
in Syria can make it possible to overcome the continuing
humanitarian disaster there.

