Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too wish to speak in this open meeting,
and not just to share our opinion on the current situation
in Syria with the members of the Security Council.

We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his briefing.
We wish Mr. Lowcock every success on the Syrian
humanitarian track. We trust that he will address the
situation impartially and earn the trust of the parties.

On 14 and 15 September, the sixth international
meeting on Syria was held in Astana. It was yet another
genuine step taken by Russia, Iran and Turkey to
strengthen the cessation-of-hostilities regime and to
stabilize the overall situation in Syria. Parameters for
all four de-escalation zones have been outlined. The
calm in south-western Syria is maintained through
constructive cooperation with the United States and
Jordan. The level of violence continues to drop. We
continue to underscore the temporary nature of the
de-escalation zones. It is unacceptable to speculate that
such zones are a veiled attempt to divide Syria into
spheres of influence. We View those allegations as an
effort to discredit the Astana process.

The territory under the control of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is dwindling. The
Russian air force continues to provide support to the
Syrian Government to combat that threat. Following
its besiegement by rebels for many years, the siege of
Deir ez-Zor has been lifted. However, we see attempts
to hamper action to prosecute fighters and drive them
out of the city. That is at odds with the stated goal to
fully vanquish the scourge of ISIL on Syrian soil. Once
again, we caution that terrorists should not be given the
opportunity to gain the upper hand. Only through frank
cooperation, without hidden agendas, will it be possible
to eradicate terrorist hotbeds.

That, by the way, also pertains to countering Jabhat
Al-Nusra and its clones. Recently, the members of
Al-Nusra took action to undermine the establishment
of the de-escalation zones in Idlib and to prevent
Government troops from conducting an offensive in
Deir ez-Zor. In such conditions, it will therefore be
impossible to set up observation points and checkpoints
in the Idlib zone before driving out the main Al-Nusra
forces. That challenge is currently being addressed
effectively. We note media reports that one hospital
after another in Idlib is being bombed. Such false
information from militants and their sponsors is a well-
known tactic used in the Syrian conflict.

The Astana process - a platform that was
graciously provided by Kazakhstan - has breathed
new life into intra-Syrian talks, under the auspices
of the United Nations. We see that it has provided the
momentum for the Geneva process, under Staffan de
Mistura's stewardship. We look forward to the onset
of direct talks between the parties. Much will depend
on the opposition's ability to unite, eschew radical
positions and finally begin constructive dialogue. Our
partners in Saudi Arabia and Egypt have undertaken to
facilitate that far from easy task, and we sincerely wish
them success. We hope the next round of Geneva peace
talks, to be held at the end of October, will succeed.

During the dialogues in Astana, the guarantor
countries have not lost sight of the issues of safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access, mine clearance and
so forth. The agenda also includes topics such as the
release of people who have been detained or abducted,
proposing reciprocal steps for all the parties involved
in the conflict.
We reiterate once again that it will be impossible
to achieve effective solutions without involving the
Government of Syria in the discussion. Unfortunately,
no Syrian representatives were invited to the Syria event
organized by the European Union during the General
Assembly high-level week. An important step has been
taken by establishing a tripartite mechanism involving
Russia, Syria and the United Nations, and we hope that
it will enable us to find solutions to the many complex
issues related to humanitarian activities. For example,
we are expecting the process for granting convoys
permits to be shortened to two to three days. However,
we repeat that transborder supplies will have to be
gradually rolled back as humanitarian access expands.
We should emphasize once again that we cannot ascribe
all the problems related to humanitarian access to the
lack of harmonization procedures. Decisions about
timing and routes have to be made, and the security
situation taken into account, in each specific case. We
are aware of instances in which humanitarian convoys
have been threatened precisely because of errors in
their arrangements.

We cannot countenance risking the lives of
humanitarian workers, and we firmly believe that the
United Nations should rule out the possibility of sending
convoys to regions that are occupied by terrorists,
such as Jobar, in the capital, and Idlib. In that regard,
it is difficult to understand the recent border crossing
by humanitarian convoys through the Bab Al-Hawa
checkpoint, which is under Al-Nusra control.

Another long-standing problem is the fair
distribution of humanitarian aid. We know for certain
that it often ends up in the hands of local warlords,
is resold on the black market and used as a currency
for purchasing the loyalty of local residents. We know
that representatives of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
have received threats and warnings about interfering
in distribution issues. Unfortunately, United Nations
representatives often have no idea of whose hands
their humanitarian aid is ending up in, and that
is unacceptable.

We also know for certain that the need for
humanitarian assistance is often calculated
incorrectly and is sometimes overestimated when
territories controlled by the opposition or terrorists
are at issue. That is why we should ensure that local
national reconciliation committees play a major
role in determining the population's real needs.
They are present in every de-escalation zone and
include representatives of the Government and armed
opposition's local authorities and respected civilians
such as clerics, engineers and teachers. Russian officers
also participate in the committees as observers. We are
ready to organize the engagement of United Nations
representatives with the committees to ensure that
humanitarian operations can be better planned. Any
establishment of parallel authorities in areas under
terrorist control would be unacceptable.

The potential of these committees could also be
used to enable exchanges of detainees and prisoners.
Around 100 people from both the Government and
the opposition have already been freed in the southern
de-escalation zone. The local national reconciliation
committees are currently improving their coordination,
and plans are in the works to convene a Syrian peoples'
congress, which could play an important role in the
Geneva negotiation process alongside the united
opposition platform.

In a situation that is being stabilized in many parts
of Syria, accompanied by individuals returning on a
massive scale, the scope of external humanitarian efforts
must be stepped up. What is wanted now is speedy
organization to bring in the materials, technology and
equipment needed to rebuild the country and restore
civilian life. Syrians must be given a sense that peace
is coming. We urge the United Nations to increase
humanitarian assistance throughout Syria without any
slowdown induced by listening to the arguments of
those who are trying to exploit the issue of humanitarian
aid in order to achieve a political settlement on their
own terms. It is a fact that some capitals continue to
tie humanitarian assistance, including mine clearance,
to progress with the political transition, and we know
perfectly well that there is pressure on the United
Nations and its entities not to move too hastily to begin
reconstruction efforts. On top of that, Syrians are still
being targeted with unilateral sanctions, and such
collective punishment measures must stop.

We agree with the View that it is essential to provide
assistance to Syria's neighbours, which have taken in
millions of refugees. However, we also believe that this
is, after all, a temporary situation and that expending
significant funds to establish refugees in their host
countries is ill-advised. Of course, schools for Syrian
children in Turkey and Jordan can be built, but surely
it would be better to help restore the education system
in Syria itself.

We are deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Raqqa. Tens of thousands of people have
been under siege for months, civilian targets are being
regularly bombed and hit by heavy artillery and there
are no humanitarian corridors. And yet for unknown
reasons, the United Nations has still not included this
emergency zone on its list ofbesieged areas. In our View,
it should be a matter of no less concern to the United
Nations than the issues that the Emergency Coordinator
brought up today. In general, we would like to advise
the Under-Secretary-General to base his assessments
on verified information, as we have already said several
times. We trust that his future visit to Syria will enable
him to better understand the humanitarian situation in
the country.

