Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Once again we find ourselves, in the crisis
affecting the Balkans, demanding the immediate halting
of armed action on the part of a State - action which is
clearly a violation of resolutions adopted by this Council.
We are doing so - as so often in such instances - for,
among other reasons, the purpose of avoiding silence by
the Council being construed as a kind of tacit acceptance
of a policy of fair accompli achieved by force.

Working in such a context is even more difficult
when the developments in question occur while there is
a redoubling of negotiating efforts to secure a political
settlement to the conflict.

In drafting the resolution that the Council adopted a
few moments ago, it proved particularly difficult to find
words adequately to express the real indignation over the
lamentable fact that troops of the peace-keeping forces
with which the international community is trying
generously to help the parties to resolve their conflicts -
a generosity not adequately reciprocated - lost their lives
as a result of deliberate action by members of one of
these parties. We ask the Governments of the Czech
Republic and the Kingdom of Denmark to accept our
condolences at the irrational death of their soldiers during

 

the recent massive Croat invasion of Sector South and
Sector North.

As we did in the informal consultations before the
adoption of the resolution on which the Council has just
voted, we take the view that the Government of Croatia
must now tell the Council, in detail, of all the measures that
we hope and expect will be taken quickly to bring to justice
and punish with appropriate severity all those responsible
for the attacks and unspeakable abuses against United
Nations personnel.

We are obliged to the Secretary-General for his report
on the situation in Croatia. In the circumstances of its
submission, it is more than understandable that he had to
await further developments before being in a position to
suggest a course of action with regard to the mandate of the
United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia
(UNCRO). We hope that the Secretary-General will be in
a position to communicate his ideas on this subject to us as
soon as possible. We take the view that the mandate, and
perhaps the very presence, of UNCRO must now be
reconsidered in depth realistically, without losing sight of
the need to prevent civilians from suffering indiscriminately
more than they have already, particularly when refugees
and displaced persons are involved. The figures indicating
the magnitude of their tragedy are in this case enormous.

Moreover, we expect the Government of Croatia, in
accordance with what its Permanent Representative recently
told the President of the Security Council, to have
regard - and show that regard by deeds and by refraining
from specific acts - to the extremely delicate nature of the
current situation in the region of Eastern Slavonia.

We must also point out something which, though
obvious, must be reiterated: any political solution must be
based on negotiation between the parties. But negotiations
lose their character as such if the parties do not carry them
out with basic good faith, fully respecting that principle
with daily, tangible implementation.

