Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): The twentieth century
lingers when it comes to the number of civilians killed
in armed conflicts. Well into the first decade of this
present century, a grim trend continues unabated in its
path of destruction: civilian casualties still far
outnumber combatants killed in action. In parts of the
world, blatant disregard for international humanitarian
law has led to atrocities, including genocide and crimes
against humanity, which we had hoped would belong to
the history books. Therefore, my delegation can only
welcome the Council's growing attention to this issue
and today's debate called for by France.

Among several aspects related to the protection
of civilian casualties, I will touch upon the two that I
believe lie at the core of the problem.

The first aspect is the failure of parties to
conflicts to abide by their international obligations.
Here, there can be no confusion or complacency. All -
State and non-State actors - are bound by
international humanitarian law and must fully respect
it. Just as importantly, if and when observance is faulty
or non-existent, it is up to the international community
to ensure accountability. The tragic evidence of the
importance of protecting civilians in conflicts and a
test to our resolve in doing so is the current situation in
Gaza. I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his briefing and to express our deep
appreciation to him for the outstanding work that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) is doing under the most trying of
circumstances.

The disproportionate response by Israel has taken
a dramatic toll on civilians in Gaza. The numbers of
people killed and injured grow by the hour. As we have
just heard, the number of dead is now over 900 people
and the number of injured is fast approaching 5,000,
and an unacceptably high proportion of the victims are
civilians, in many cases women and children. Hospitals
are near breaking point. Several thousand people have
left their homes. Around 35,000 people have sought
refuge at United Nations facilities. Food, water, sewage
treatment, fuel, electricity and other basic items are
lacking or are gravely insufficient for the
overwhelming majority of the population. According to
information from the United Nations, civilians are
terrorized, traumatized and feeling trapped and helpless
in a deadly rage of violence and destruction.

The firing on humanitarian convoys last week
and the shelling in the vicinity of United Nations
schools being used as safe havens for displaced people
are intolerable and cannot be justified under any
circumstances whatsoever. We join the United Nations
in asking for an independent investigation of the
incidents, which must not be repeated. Full
accountability is indispensable. We are encouraged by
the fact that United Nations humanitarian aid, which
was briefly interrupted, could be resumed after
reassurances given by Israel were considered credible.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
Mr. Celso Amorim, has just concluded a visit to the
region, during which he spoke to the leaders and his
counterparts in Syria, Israel, Jordan, Egypt and the
Palestinian National Authority. He left the region even
more convinced that a ceasefire is imperative.

The call made by resolution 1860 (2009) must be
heeded immediately. That is so because innocent
civilians are being killed in large numbers, and that
must stop. It is also so because the lack of
implementation of the resolution will erode the
credibility of the Security Council, with consequences
that go far beyond the present crisis. We therefore call
for a mobilization of the international community to
ensure full and immediate compliance with resolution
1860 (2009).

The second aspect I wish to comment upon is
related to the first: the role of the United Nations when
parties fail to abide by their obligations and
peacekeeping forces are confronted or expect to be
confronted with violence directed against civilians.
This aspect is a growing concern of the international
community, and of the Security Council in particular.

The need for United Nations forces to protect
civilians in their areas of operation is a key moral and
political component of peacekeeping missions. Our
collective conscience could not and would not accept a
situation where the United Nations would stand idly by
as civilians are injured or killed on its watch. Public
support for the Organization would suffer if it were
seen as unable or unwilling to protect civilians in the
midst of armed conflicts witnessed by its peacekeeping
personnel.

For that situation to be avoided, it is essential that
the Council continue to take steps to craft mandates
and secure military resources consistent with such
moral and political imperatives. The recent
strengthening of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its authorized reinforcement testify to
the importance that the Council and the United Nations
give to this crucial task.

The adequate protection of civilians with refugee
status must also be ensured. It is indispensable that the
principle of non-refoulement is respected, as well as
the right to seek asylum.

We concur with the Secretary-General's
conclusion in his report to the Council dated
28 October 2007 (S/2007/643) that special attention
must be paid to the issue of sexual violence in armed
conflict. In the case of such violations of international
humanitarian law, as well other practices tantamount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide, the
Council must seriously consider referring appropriate
situations to the International Criminal Court.

The increasing incidence of deliberate attacks
against humanitarian workers is also an area in which
the Council must continue to focus its efforts. Such
attacks are wholly unacceptable and must not be
tolerated. It is absolutely essential that the
humanitarian space be fully preserved and that safe and
unhindered access to populations in need be assured.

We hope that the adoption by the Council today
of the updated aide-memoire prepared by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which
addresses these and other important issues, will
contribute to the concrete implementation of the
Council's resolutions on protection of civilians in
armed conflict, especially resolutions 1674 (2006) and
1820 (2008). More importantly, we hope that the
Council will remain engaged in efforts to effectively
address the need to protect civilians in armed conflicts
when the parties fail to fulfil their obligations.

