The President (interpretation from French): As this
is the first meeting of the Security Council for the month
of May, I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
on behalf of the Council to His Excellency Mr. Karel
Kovanda, Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic
to the United Nations, for his service as President of the
Security Council for the month of April 1995. I am sure
that I speak for all members of the Security Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Kovanda for
the great diplomatic skill and unfailing courtesy with which
he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Croatia

The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nobilo
(Croatia) took a place at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is deeply concerned by the
resumption of hostilities in the Republic of Croatia
over the last few days.

"The Security Council demands that the
Government of the Republic of Croatia put an end
immediately to the military offensive launched by its
forces in the area of Western Slavonia known as
Sector West which started on the morning of 1 May
1995 in violation of the cease-fire agreement of
29 March 1994.

"The Security Council also demands that the
parties respect the economic agreement signed
between them on 2 December 1994 and, in
particular, take all necessary steps to ensure the
safety and security of the Zagreb-Belgrade Highway
and its immediate environs.

"The Security Council urges the parties to
cease hostilities and comply with the existing cease-
fire agreement.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
fully respect the safety and freedom of movement of
all United Nations and European Community
Monitoring Mission personnel in the area concerned,
in the area known as Sector South and elsewhere,
and therefore to remove all restrictions placed on
United Nations personnel.

"The Security Council urges the parties, in
order to achieve these objectives, to accept without
delay the proposals put to them by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative in their efforts. The Council further
requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed of
developments on the ground as well as in the
ongoing talks."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/23.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 11.59 pm.

