Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me first
warmly welcome High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Valentin Inzko, and thank him for the
report (see S/2010/575, annex) and his work. We fully
share his assessment of recent developments and the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like to
reaffirm our full and continued support for him and his
office, as well as for his efforts to implement the
Dayton Peace Agreement and to engage Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its reforms towards joining the
European Union.

At the same time, let me warmly welcome
Mr. Nebojsa Radmanovie, the new Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank him
for his statement and for the special emphasis he has
placed on the European aspirations of his country -
aspirations that are shared by all the inhabitants of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me add on a more personal note that it is has
been and is good to sit next to Bosnia and Herzegovina
at this table as a neighbour, just as we are neighbours
in Europe. Every Austrian knows that if one takes a
ruler and places it on the map, the distance between
Vienna and Sarajevo is shorter than the distance
between Vienna and the western border of Austria.

Against this background, we also congratulate the
institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the recent
fulfilment of the requirements for visa liberalization,
which was confirmed by the Council of the European
Union on Monday. Austria very much welcomes this
opportunity for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
as an important step forward that will bring the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union
closer together. More frequent and flexible visits will
also lead to the intensification of business contacts.
This decision by the Council of the European Union
clearly demonstrates that where there is political will,
necessary reforms can be implemented effectively. We
hope that this spirit of reform will also be taken on by
the new Governments of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the same time, in line with the assessment of
the High Representative and the recent progress report
by the European Commission, we regret that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made limited progress in many
areas of reform. The Constitution needs to be brought
in line with international and European standards,
including with rulings of the European Court of Human
Rights.

Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to increase the
functionality and effectiveness of its State institutions
and to continue to cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, although
we have taken note of the overall positive evaluation
by Mr. Brammertz in this regard. Failure to implement
the conditions on immovable military property has also
delayed the implementation of the NATO Membership
Action Plan.

As an example of the capability of the institutions
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we are encouraged by the
professional handling of general elections by the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
assessment that the elections were generally held in
line with international standards. At the same time, we
hope that the Constitution will be adjusted and that
future elections will be open to all citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, in line with the European
Convention for Human Rights and its Protocol No. 12.

We call on all political parties to end the use of
divisive and nationalistic rhetoric. Here, I have to say,
we specifically share the concerns expressed by the
High Representative. Instead, a functional and
effective State-level Government needs to be formed
urgently to tackle the many outstanding reform issues.
The politicians of Bosnia and Herzegovina will, we
hope, work together to make further progress on the
country's path towards the European Union and to
fulfil the 5+2 criteria set forth by the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.

In October, the European Union Foreign Affairs
Council again confirmed the readiness of the European
Union to continue the European Union Force Althea
with an executive military role beyond 2010 under a
renewed United Nations mandate, and we look forward
to next week's adoption of the resolution extending the
authorization. The operation has started to provide
non-executive capacity-building and training support,
thus contributing to strengthened local ownership and
capacity. Austria will continue its commitment as a
troop contributor to the operation.

With a mandate extended until the end of 2011,
the European Union Police Mission has focused
specifically on fighting organized crime and corruption
as part of an overall effort to entrench the rule of law
in the country. The recent high-level visits by the
President of the European Council, Mr. Van Rompuy,
and Commissioner Fiile underline the unequivocal
commitment of the European Union to the European
perspective for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
European Union's preparedness to assume the leading
role in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the future. Members
of the Council know how strongly my own country is
committed to these aspirations and goals.

The Treaty of Lisbon has given the European
Union more effective policy tools from which Bosnia
and Herzegovina will also benefit, for example in the
form of a strengthened European Union presence in the
country.

Fifteen years after the signature of the Dayton
and Paris Peace Agreements, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward for their
country on the path towards European integration. We
encourage the political leaders of the country to put
Bosnia and Herzegovina firmly on the way towards the
European Union and, in doing so, they can count on
our support.

