Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): First, I would like
to convey to you, Sir, and to the bereaved families the
condolences of my Government.

I thank you for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. I wish you every success during your
presidency. It is a great honour for us to welcome
Ambassador Sharma, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for East Timor, to this meeting. His
assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste is highly
valued by my Government.

I would also like to extend our appreciation to
Deputy Special Representative Sukehiro Hasegawa and
to all members of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) for all the
achievements we have made together in recent months.
With the presence of the peacekeeping forces, the
police and civilian experts, and the consolidation of the
democratic process and institutions, we have together
maintained a stable and vibrant democratic country.

In January this year, the Government initiated a
process of bringing governance to the people in remote
areas. The communities in those areas have seized the
opportunity to raise their concerns and priorities. These
meetings have given the Government an opportunity to
explain the national development plan, the Government
programme, the available resources and the challenges
ahead.

In the area of telecommunications, we have an
ambitious project under way. By the end of this year,
all the capital districts will have fixed and mobile
communications fully operational, paving the way for
better technical conditions for radio and television.

The agriculture sector is a priority area of the
national development plan. Efforts have been made to
increase our productivity in the sector, which is the
lowest in Asia. More than 60 per cent of the irrigation
system has been repaired and new ones have been
constructed.

The Government, with the help of donors, has re-
established electricity in 55 sub-districts and is
currently conducting feasibility studies in the area of
hydropower.

A national health-care policy has been adopted.
Much of the infrastructure has been rehabilitated, but
malaria and tuberculosis continue to be widespread.
There is a need for more doctors, nurses, midwives and
ambulances. Recently, during a visit of the Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women to a remote village, the community of
Mauschiga requested medical assistance and expressed
its gratitude for her offer to facilitate medical care for
the people, many of whom have lived with war wounds
that require urgent medical attention.

Despite the efforts to reconstruct 700 of the 900
schools destroyed in 1999, 25 per cent of our children
do not have access to formal education.

We hope that an investment law now under
consideration in the national Parliament will prepare
the foundations for more investment in other sectors of
the economy, not only in gas and oil. Timor-Leste will
remain committed to maintaining an attractive fiscal
and regulatory framework for investment.

We will soon start maritime boundaries
negotiations with Australia. The Maritime Zones Act
adopted by Parliament in 2002 set out Timor-Leste's
200-mile maritime boundary claim. We hope that
negotiations will be a success and consistent with
international law. The oil and gas revenues in those
areas are of strategic value to our country and people.
The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and
the Government of Timor-Leste are preparing a plan to
create a fund that will manage the petroleum revenues
in a way that is transparent and responsible.

We continue to consolidate our relations in the
region and in the world. The Joint Ministerial
Commission of Indonesia and Timor-Leste met in Dili
from 4 to 6 September. The Commission agreed to
continue to seek solutions to the residual problems of
the past and, most importantly, established cooperation
in the areas of commerce, investment, development,
education, health and security. In general, despite
forecasts of a contraction of the economy, the
Government believes that it will reverse the trend very
soon.

East Timor President Xanana Gusmao has
continued to promote reconciliation and national unity.
He has participated in various meetings in the border
area in order to encourage reconciliation and the return
of refugees from West Timor to their homeland. In
spite of these efforts, approximately 26,000 remain in
the refugee camps. During the second meeting of the
Indonesia-Timor-Leste Joint Ministerial Commission,
both parties agreed to encourage their settlement away
from the border to places allocated by the Government
of Indonesia and to facilitate the return of refugees who
choose to return to Timor-Leste.

The United Nations and the Security Council
intervened in my country in a timely manner. The
international community, in particular the donor
countries, have invested huge financial and human
resources and know-how in this Mission, although
some resources have not arrived on time. My Prime
Minister has stated that the judicial system, law and
order, finance and planning and defence and security
will require substantial assistance and support for some
time.

We share the view expressed by the Secretary-
General in paragraph 14 of his report (S/2003/944),
that

"it is clear that it will not be possible for Timor-
Leste to achieve self-sufficiency in certain key
areas of the mandate by 20 May 2004."

The mandate that the Council set forth in
resolution 1480 (2003) in 2004 is nearing its end -
20 May 2004. We welcome the debate and discussions
about the future mission of the United Nations. We
recommend a credible, strong United Nations presence
in key areas in order to help consolidate stability and
security, sine qua non conditions for sustainable
development and for the success of the United Nations
mission.

Finally, in July this year we received a visit from
the President of the General Assembly at its fifty-
seventh session, Mr. Jan Kavan. His visit was very
successful. My Prime Minister, Mari Alkatiri, has
instructed me to invite the Security Council to send a
delegation to East Timor. Such a visit would be an
honour, given the fundamental contribution made by
the Council to the success of the United Nations
mission, and its crucial role in the liberation of our
country and our people.

