Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
details the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from
19 October to 15 January 2010. Today, I wish to draw
the Council's attention to the major events of the
reporting period and subsequent developments, as well
as to the principal challenges to security and stability
in Kosovo and how we believe they can best be
addressed.

Political instability and uncertainty have
characterized the past three months in Kosovo. In
December, the Kosovo authorities organized the first
2

Assembly elections not held within the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999) and in which UNMIK played
no role. The day of the election passed without serious
security incident. Kosovo Serb participation, except in
the North, where it was negligible, was the largest
since the general elections organized by UNMIK in
2001. However, local and international observers
reported widespread irregularities and manipulation of
votes. The Kosovo Supreme Court, the Election
Complaints and Appeals Panel and the Central
Elections Commission tried to address these problems,
and voting was repeated in several municipalities.
External observers, however, stated that irregularities
persisted at some locations.

With the certification of the final results now
behind them, Kosovo leaders are in the process of
forming a new Government, which I hope will be
sufficiently strong and stable to engage authoritatively
in a substantive dialogue with Belgrade. I would also
note the calls by various members of the international
community - which I, personally, fully endorse - for
Kosovo to have a Government with clean hands.

This period also saw the publication of a report
by the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly
Special Rapporteur, Dick Marty, concerning allegations
of organized criminal activities, including trafficking
in human organs, by members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) in northern Albania in 1999.
On 25 January, the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe adopted a resolution calling for an
investigation of allegations of inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo.

In my view, this Council of Europe report needs
to be taken seriously and an investigation should be
launched as a matter of priority in the interest of all. In
this regard I cannot but urge all those with pertinent
knowledge, including Mr. Marty, to make any and all
evidence available to the competent investigating
authority without delay. Of course, it is crucial that
adequate protection be provided to all witnesses. l have
discussed the matter with the Head of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX),
Mr. Xavier Bout de Marnhac, who has assured me that
EULEX has the expertise and jurisdiction to handle the
investigation under resolution 1244 (1999). My
understanding is that EULEX would be ready to
assume any responsibilities assigned to it in this matter.
11-23603
For my part, I can only reiterate that UNMIK will give
its full support to the investigating authority.

Beyond these issues, while the security situation
in Kosovo has remained largely unchanged since the
last reporting period and unresolved political issues
continue to challenge Kosovo's long-term stability, I
would like to draw the Council's attention to another
problem that has become increasingly pressing.
Mounting fiscal difficulties and the possible economic
hardship they may cause could soon overshadow
political differences as the greatest threat to Kosovo's
stability.

The International Monetary Fund has warned that
Kosovo can ill afford the implementation of recent
campaign promises of substantial pay raises for
teachers and other civil servants, which the
Government has stated it intends to finance by
enforcing tax revenue collection. However, the
relatively low level of tax collection is just one of a
number of economic difficulties facing the Kosovo
authorities. The low level of foreign direct investment
and high unemployment are also cause for concern.
Kosovo faces a €1.8-billion trade deficit, and its
exports amount to just 14 per cent of the value of
imports. To add to Kosovo's economic troubles, the
agreement with the European Union (EU) on
preferential treatment of Kosovo goods has not yet
been renewed.

Kosovo also suffers from the highest
unemployment in the West Balkans, estimated by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) at
almost 45 per cent, coupled with the lowest per capita
gross domestic product (GDP) in the region.
Dependency on the Kosovo diaspora, particularly
among low-income members of the rural population is
high. A recent UNDP study found that one in five
households in Kosovo receive remittances from abroad,
which amount to approximately 11 per cent of GDP.

Unresolved political issues are also contributing
to Kosovo's economic challenges, as the Kosovo
authorities seek to find a way of participating in
regional economic mechanisms with non-recognizing
States without UNMIK. In fact, UNMIK continues to
facilitate Kosovo's presence in a variety of such
regional forums, including the Central European Free
Trade Agreement (CEF TA).

This year UNMIK/Kosovo has the rotating
chairmanship of CEFTA, and intense consultations
11-23603

have taken place with all key stakeholders to find
appropriate modalities to ensure the participation of all
CEFTA members in this year's meetings. As
signatories on behalf of Kosovo, our presence is
required at CEFTA meetings; accordingly, UNMIK will
engage to facilitate Kosovo's participation and ensure
that the CEFTA process is not blocked. I urge all
stakeholders to work towards finding solutions to the
pressing economic problems facing Kosovo, and to
rethink Kosovo's budget projections as quickly as
possible in order to ensure that the population will not
face undue and potentially destabilizing hardship.

The weak economic situation is doubtless one of
the primary impediments to the returns process, but I
am concerned regarding the chilling effect on returns
of recent incidents of attacks on minority community
returnees, including the recent assault on a Kosovo
Serb in Istog/Istok municipality on 28 January, and the
attack on a Kosovo-Egyptian couple by two Kosovo
Albanian males in Decan/Deeani municipality on
23 January. The municipal authorities have condemned
these incidents, which Kosovo police are investigating.
Still, every such incident can dissuade others from
returning.

Unresolved issues in northern Kosovo continue to
be a key challenge facing Kosovo's long-term stability,
with the potential to influence the security and stability
of the region. While security incidents have largely
involved damage to property, this period was marked
by the murder of a Kosovo Bosniak whose home in
northern Kosovo was to be used as a polling station for
the elections called by the Kosovo authorities. While
police have yet to conclude their investigation,
including in respect of alleged connections with
organized crime networks, speculation that the murder
may also have been intended to intimidate those who
cooperate with the Kosovo institutions heightened
tensions.

Opposition by northern Kosovo Serbs to
engagement with the Kosovo institutions continues.
Recently, protesters gathered to prevent the
inauguration of a newly renovated park and playground
in northern Mitrovica, sponsored by the United States
Agency for International Development and the Kosovo
authorities' northern Mitrovica municipal planning
team, forcing the cancellation of the ceremony.

UNMIK continues to engage closely on a daily
basis with northern Kosovo's communities. Such
engagement, and continuing consultation and
coordination with all relevant stakeholders, are
essential in northern Kosovo. However, I have to point
out that, contrary to last year, the municipality in
southern Mitrovica has chosen not to engage in a
process of consultations to manage the next phase of
the reconstruction of houses for Kosovo Albanian
returnees to northern Kosovo. That may lead to
instability on the ground. In addition, Pristina-based
media have continued to single out members of my
staff in northern Kosovo on the basis of their
nationality, thereby exposing them to potential security
risks.

Nevertheless, UNMIK will continue to attempt to
engage in proactive mediation between the
communities and to act as a link between the leaders in
northern Kosovo and the Pristina authorities, along
with promoting economic development and stability in
close cooperation with the United Nations Kosovo
Team, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and our other partners on the ground.

We hope that the planned census in Kosovo will
be able to proceed as scheduled. The United Nations
Office for Project Services, as a status-neutral entity,
has agreed to conduct the census north of the Iber/Ibar
River. However, in recent weeks there have been calls
by representatives of the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo
and Metohija for Kosovo Serbs to boycott the census.
In my view, such calls risk harming the long-term
welfare of Kosovo's residents, regardless of ethnicity. I
urge all parties to recognize the value that a long-
overdue census can contribute to the wellbeing of
Kosovo's inhabitants, and ensure that the census takes
place on the basis of procedures fully compatible with
resolution 1244 (1999).

There will be no long-term stability and
development of Kosovo without a successful process
of reconciliation among the communities. There is
therefore a pressing need to launch the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina and to work towards
establishing viable cooperation and lasting peace and
security. Issues of missing persons and sustainable
returns of internally displaced persons and refugees
can also be most effectively addressed through
dialogue between the parties. Belgrade has stressed its
readiness to begin the EU-facilitated dialogue called
for by the General Assembly, the beginning of which
has been delayed as a result of the political instability
in Kosovo over the past few months. Now that the
formation of a new Government appears imminent, I
welcome statements that the authorities in Pristina will
also be ready to engage in this important process. We
in UNMIK remain committed to continue working
closely with the EU in bringing this process forward.

On behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish to thank the
Council for its continued support, and to reiterate our
assurance that we will continue to implement the
mandate with which it has entrusted us. For our part,
we remain firmly committed to continue operating to
the best of our ability so as to ensure lasting peace and
stability in Kosovo.

