Mr. Berteling (Netherlands): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The following associated countries ----
Bulgaria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia --
have aligned themselves with this statement. Liechtenstein
has also aligned itself with it.

The European Union believes that there is no
alternative to the peace process. The past year has
witnessed many difficult moments in the implementation
of the peace process, but also some positive
developments. The European Union was pleased when, in
January last, after long and arduous negotiations, an
agreement was reached on the redeployment of Israeli
troops from Hebron. The European Union hoped that the
Hebron protocol marked one more important step on the
road towards a- just and stable peace in the Middle East
and could provide the necessary momentum to
reinvigorate the peace process. The European Union
expressed the hope that the Hebron protocol would
strengthen the atmosphere of mutual confidence, which is
indispensable for the further implementation of the Oslo
agreements.

The European Union remains deeply committed to
the peace process. Peace in the Middle East is a
fundamental interest of the Union. With a view to
promoting and assisting the search for peaCe, the
European Union has appointed Ambassador Moratinos as
its special envoy to the peace process. Frequent visits by
representatives of the European Union to the Middle East
are a further indication of our interest in securing a
peaceful settlement. The negotiations on Hebron were
laborious, but their success offered hope for a renewal of
the Israeli-Palestinian partnership for peace.

The European Union deeply deplores the decision of
the Israeli Government to approve construction plans for
Jabal Abu Ghneim/Hat Homa on the West Bank in the
Jerusalem area. This decision poses a threat to these
eecunry LUUnCu 3mm .ueeuug \.\esu.i.pt.m. .,
Fifty-second year 6 March 1997

positive developments. The European Union has repeatedly
stated that settlements in the occupied territories contravene
international law and pose a major obstacle to peace.

The European Union again reaffirms its policy on the
status of Jerusalem. East Jerusalem is subject to the
principles set out in Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
notably the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force, and is therefore not under Israeli sovereignty. The
European Union considers that the Fourth Geneva
Convention is fully applicable to East Jerusalem, as it is to
other territories under occupation.

The Har Horna construction plans contain the building
of a settlement on the West Bank within the municipal
boundaries of Jerusalem, unilaterally expanded by Israel.
The call by Prime Minister Netanyahu for the

"new construction initiative throughout the Arab
neighborhoods of Jerusalem, which will entail the
building of 3,015 new housing units for Arab residents
of the city"

does not change the European Union's rejection of the
decision on Har Homa.

We note that the building of houses for the Palestinian
population of the city since 1967 has remained far behind
housing projects for the Jewish population. The European
Union'has stated repeatedly its concern that the Palestinians
of East Jerusalem continue to be subject to several
unacceptable restrictions.

In the interests of the peace process, the European
Union calls upon all parties to observe the utmost restraint
regarding issues that could prejudge the outcome of the
final status negotiations. We therefore greatly regret actions
taken by the Government of Israel, such as the annexation
of land, the demolition of houses, new settlement
construction and the expansion of settlements.

' The European Union believes that the upcoming
redeployment must be credible in terms of territory handed
over to the Palestinian National Authority. Anything else
might have serious implications for the peace proceSS.

The European Union remains firmly of the view that
the peace process is the only path to security and peace for
the Palestinians as well as for Israel and the neighbouring
States. The European Union calls upon Israel to respect its
obligations under international law and once again appeals
to the Israeli Government to refrain from building the new
settlement in Her Homa and to respect the rights of the
Palestinians. To do otherwise would not be conducive to
a climate in which rapid and substantial progress in the
peace process can be achieved.

The European Union confirms its attachment to such
a process and its readiness to participate and assist in
every way possible in order to achieve the long-awaited
objective of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace.

