Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank France, the United Kingdom and the United
States for calling this meeting. It was necessary that
the Security Council meet today, given the worsening
situation. We are facing the most intensive wave of air
strikes since the war in Syria began. I thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for his work and for his refusal to throw in
the towel.

Our first message can only be a firm condemnation
of the brutality of the attacks that have taken place in
recent days. The rejection of the cessation of hostilities
by the Al-Assad regime and its declared intention to
take over eastern Aleppo through assault certainly
contravenes every resolution of the Security Council
regarding this conflict. In the face of this challenge, the
international community has the responsibility to take
urgent measures. It is now up to those members of the
Security Council with direct influence on the Al-Assad
government, the Russian Federation in particular, to
put an end to the escalation of violence in Aleppo.
Despite the very serious nature of the situation, Spain
continues to believe that it is still possible to find a way
out of this conflict through diplomatic means: we are
with Staffan.

There are three key steps upon which we - the
International Syria Support Group and the Security
Council - must concentrate our efforts: first,

guaranteeing a ceasefire; secondly, ensuring
humanitarian access; and, thirdly, creating the necessary
conditions to resume United Nations mediation. Spain
therefore supports the proposal put forward by the United
States to put an end to the air strikes. We continue to trust
that it could serve as a basis for a new agreement between
the co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group.

We support that proposal primarily because we believe
that our priority should be on the humanitarian community,
which requires minimum measures of confidence so that the
conveyance of aid to Aleppo can resume. But we support it
as well because we are aware of the importance of separating
the opposition from terrorist groups. As highlighted
by our Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. Garcia-Margallo, here a few days ago (see S/PV.7774),
it is important to draw the line and make it clear to the
opposition that the time has come to make a choice, to decide
which side they are on, without any ambiguity.

We are open to considering options to improve the
supervision of the cessation of hostilities, as proposed by
France. However, the most urgent matter is to put an end to
the fighting, in particular the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians, the besieging of citizens uninvolved in the conflict
and the destruction of critical buildings and infrastructure
necessary for the survival of the inhabitants of Aleppo.

I conclude with a reference to the attack against
the United Nations/Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy
on 19 September. This is not just another serious attack
against civilians in recent days, but also a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law that cannot go
unpunished. We will attentively follow the conclusions of
the investigation opened by the Secretary-General in order
to demand accountability to an adequate extent.

