Mr. Gata MaVita Wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic ofthe Congo) (spoke in French): My delegation
would once again like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo only a few days after last week's meeting
on the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of Congo and the Great Lakes region (see S/PV.8630).

We would also like to thank all the members
of the Security Council for their comments and
views on the situation prevailing in my country. My
delegation is particularly grateful to Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for the report under the Council's
consideration (S/2019/776) and for his commitment
and personal involvement in seeking ways and means
to strengthen peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We would like to express our same gratitude to
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), who has just presented
the report to us. Kindly allow my delegation to make
some comments and observations on the report,
which will focus on the political, security, social and
humanitarian situations.

As the report under consideration points out,
after His Excellency Mr. Felix Antoine Tshilombo
Tshisekedi, President of the Republic, took office,
the political situation was successively marked by the
establishment of the National Assembly, followed a few
months later by that of the Senate before the President
of the Republic appointed the coalition Government,
led by Prime Minister Sylvestre Ilunga Ilunkamba. In
the same vein, provincial authorities have been set up
and are functioning. It is important to note here that
this stage was completed with the settlement of the
various electoral disputes by the Constitutional Court.

As we pointed out in our statement before the
Council on 3 October (see S/PV.8630), during this
period the President of the Republic engaged in intense
diplomatic activity, which took him to several countries
of the region with a view to reaffirming his country's
ongoing commitment to good-neighbourly relations and
peaceful coexistence, while respecting the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of other States. In addition
to the summits organized with his peers in Kinshasa
and Luanda, he therefore also participated in meetings
of the African Union in Niamey and of the Southern
African Development Community in Dar es Salaam.

In that context, mention should also be made of
the working visit that Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres made to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from 31 August to 2 September at the invitation
of the President of the Republic. The visit enabled the
Congolese authorities to reaffirm their trust in the
United Nations and the Secretary-General to show
solidarity with the Congolese people following the
outbreak of the Ebola virus disease, which has been
raging in the Beni area for nearly a year.

With regard to the security situation, the report
emphasizes the harmful presence of foreign and
national armed groups, which continue to cause
desolation and insecurity in the eastern part of my
country. That situation remains a great concern for the
Head of State, who has made it one of the priorities of
the Government's programme. In fact, referring to the
situation in his inauguration address, he said:

"The restoration of peace throughout the country

is a priority because the survival of hundreds of

thousands ofcompatriots, the stability ofestablished

institutions, economic recovery and the climate of

peace with all our neighbours are at stake."

Referring to the same situation from the United
Nations rostrum during the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, the
President of the Republic said the following:

"Today, the greatest challenge facing my
country is ensuring peace, security and stability.
Since our inauguration, convinced of the absolute
necessity ofpeace, we have unreservedly committed
to achieving that objective, taking into account
its full regional and international dimension."
(A/74/PV7)

In accordance with that objective, the Government
remains mobilized and determined to continue the fight
against the negative forces until their total eradication
in order to enable our people in that part of the country,
who have been aspiring to live in peace for a number of
years, to finally see their dream become a reality.

My delegation is pleased to note that, in that struggle,
the Forces armees de la Republique De'mocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO will not only
continue their cooperation but also strengthen it in
order to overcome all armed groups and restore the
long-awaited peace in that part of the country once and
for all.

The Secretary-General of the United Nations also
shares this view. Indeed, speaking of the situation of
insecurity in the east of my country, at the audience
granted to him in Kinshasa by the President of the
Republic after meeting the people ofBeni and Butembo,
he made the following observation.
"The first concern is security. I felt a sense of
frustration among the population, including
towards MONUSCO. MONUSCO must cooperate
more with the FARDC to counter the threat posed by
armed groups and the Allied Democratic Forces."

It is therefore fitting that, referring to the Secretary-
General's talks in Kinshasa with the Congolese
authorities and other figures whom he met, the report
under consideration points out in paragraph 17:

"During my visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from 30 August to 1 September, I had the
opportunity to hold meetings with representatives
of the major political forces, civil society and
institutions of the country, including President
Tshisekedi, the Speaker of the National Assembly,
Jeanine Mabunda, and Prime Minister Ilunga. The
need for MONUSCO and national security forces
to work together more effectively to address the
threat posed by armed groups was an important

conclusion ofmy meetings." (S/2019/776, para. 17).

It is in the same context that the President of the
Republic places the discussions that will continue as
part of the strategic review of MONUSCO. he made his
position clear from the United Nations rostrum:

"I note a convergence of views with the Secretary-
General on the urgent need to readjust the
configuration of MONUSCO to the developing
situation on the ground by focusing more on
the operational response capabilities of United
Nations forces alongside the Forces Arme'es de
la Republique Democratique du Congo. In other
words, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
still needs MONUSCO, but a streamlined, well-
equipped, robust MONUSCO, with an appropriate
mandate, like the Rapid Intervention Brigade that
once helped rout the Mouvement du 23 mars."
(A/74/PV7)

That means that any adaptation of that force must
above all take into account the real needs and priorities
on the ground rather than any other consideration,
particularly financial.

In that regard, the Government, which has just been
formed and whose ambitious programme of actions
includes restoring calm to the country and promoting
reconciliation, cohesion and national unity, as well as
strengthening State authority, among other things will
need MONUSCO to support it in its efforts to maintain
security and to restore State authority in conflict areas
in order to establish lasting peace and stability so as to
put people back to work and promote development.

In addition, it is important to recall that the
President of the Republic's accession to power has led
to a momentum that has driven the fighters of some
armed groups to lay down their arms. That ongoing
momentum should be encouraged by establishing an
appropriate framework to effectively reintegrate former
combatants into society. That explains the appeal by
the President of the Republic to the Secretary-General,
during his visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for consistent financial support to enable the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
of armed groups to be a programme that effectively
promotes the reintegration of former combatants.

As the Security Council knows, the situation in the
eastern part of my country also remains marked by the
Ebola virus. Given the gravity of the situation, in May
the President of the Republic set up a technical unit,
comprising international experts, under his supervision.
That unit has developed a new response strategy that is
already producing results. We have to admit, however,
that while efforts have been made to contain the
epidemic, it has not yet been eradicated. Nevertheless,
my delegation would like to reassure the Council
that we will continue to take action to control and
eradicate this epidemic with the support of our various
partners, including the World Health Organization, the
African Union, UNICEF, the World Food Programme
and MONUSCO, among many others. My delegation
would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge
the solidarity that all our partners have shown towards
our country in the fight against Ebola. I also want
to urge the international community to support the
international public-health conference to be held in
Goma in November.

With regard to the humanitarian situation
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report, and
without wishing to dwell on the subject, I want to say
briefly that this is mainly due to the armed conflicts
recurring in my country and in the region. It is because
of them that we are seeing massive displacements of
people forced to live far from their homes where the
provision of basic needs requires external intervention.
The situation is also due to epidemics and natural
disasters. My Government is requesting the support of
the partners that have always helped to support us in
coping with such circumstances.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the gratitude
of the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the United Nations and
the Security Council for their continued efforts and
dedication to my country's cause. I also want to once
again thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MONUSCO.
Finally, I wish to acknowledge the peacekeepers of the
United Nations and troop-contributing countries for the
human and material sacrifices they continue to make
for the benefit of my country.

