Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to associate ourselves with the
comments of other members of the Council in
welcoming the presence at this meeting of the Foreign
Ministers of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Deputy Foreign Ministers of the United Republic of
Tanzania and Uganda, the Adviser to the President of
Rwanda, and to thank them for their contributions to
the debate. I would also like to welcome the other
delegations that will be making statements later on. I
should like to stress that each and every statement will
be taken into account when considering the text of the

Sll'V.4437

 

draft presidential statement to be adopted at a later
stage.

The Panel of Experts chaired by Ambassador
Kassem has provided us with a report prepared with
meticulous care and dedication. The information that it
contains continues to be a cause for concern for my
delegation. As a result, Colombia would like to support
the report's conclusion that all forms of illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of the country
must end and that steps must be taken to overcome the
institutional weakness of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is currently
preventing it from monitoring and administering those
resources. Furthermore, the international community
should assist in rebuilding the institutions of the
Congolese State and continue to promote the
implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka
Agreement, which is the only means of restoring peace
to the Great Lakes region.

Colombia believes that it is right to publicly
name and shame those individuals, groups and
countries that take part in illicit activities associated
with the illegal exploitation of coltan, gold, copper,
cobalt, diamonds and timber from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

What this Council cannot do is remain indifferent
in the face of actions that imperil international peace
and security in the Central African region. Such actions
represent the improper appropriation of resources in
order to fuel war. We refuse to accept a situation in
which the natural resources of the eastern provinces of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, instead of
providing a basis for the emancipation of millions from
poverty, are used to purchase weapons, finance acts of
savagery and perhaps enrich a few individuals that we
could describe as warlords.

We therefore advocate the taking of additional
measures against the exploitation of the human and
natural resources of the Congo; some of those
measures will have to be reflected in the document that
will adopted as a result of this debate.

In this regard, first, we support the idea of an
extension of the mandate of the Expert Panel for six
months, with specific monitoring tasks being set.
Secondly, we strongly urge the transit countries for
resources originating in the conflict zone of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the contries
that receive such resources for industrial processing, to
conclude - or, in some cases, to begin -
investigations into the individuals and companies that
have been named. We look forward in particular to the
conclusions of the Porter Commission of Uganda.

Thirdly, we recommend that the Panel of Experts,
in consultation with the Kinshasa authorities, study the
economic and humanitarian effects of a possible
suspension of the import of such resources with the
aim of reducing the income of the actors involved in
the conflict.

Fourthly, we would like international arms and
munitions merchants also to be named and shamed, as
they are sustaining the fighting capacity of the armed
groups that are committing atrocities against the
civilian population of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Above all, however, we will continue to monitor
compliance with the commitments that the parties to
the Lusaka Agreement have undertaken in order to
accomplish the invaluable task of restoring peace to the
Great Lakes region. The withdrawal of foreign troops
and plans for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants, with verification by the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are the signs we
are waiting for to show that there is a will for peace.
We would also like to see progress in the inter-
Congolese dialogue, and we wish to highlight the
service to Africa being provided by the Government of
South Africa in offering to host the next meeting.

My delegation will continue to work with
determination on this issue in the Council for the
promotion of peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

