Mr. Ahmad Tajuddin (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to extend my delegation's sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for Indonesia's presiding over the
Security Council this month. I would also extend our
sincere gratitude for your having convened this timely
and important debate.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statements made
by the representatives of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela and Thailand on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), respectively.

Malaysia reaffirms its support for the central role
played by the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We pay tribute to the
sacrifices made by peacekeepers and to the devoted
men and women who have served or are serving with
unwavering dedication and great distinction in our
endeavours to keep peace.

As United Nations personnel are often deployed in
volatile and perilous locations, they must have the right
aptitude, strong survival skills and unquestionable
competency ifthey are to be effective. This is important
owing to the more comprehensive peacekeeping
mandates we are seeing today, which encompass the
necessity to protect civilians, address sexual violence
and overcome challenges to human rights, inter alia.
Malaysia therefore believes that a common training
module prior to their deployment is vital for the safety
and security of our peacekeepers.

"People, machines and methods" are three elements
embedded in Malaysian peacekeeper training and
capacity-building. We believe the right people with the
right machines coupled with the right methods allows
United Nations peacekeepers to perform as demanded.
"People" focuses on men and women's ability to
operate in a peacekeeping environment in which they
are expected to fully engage in winning the heart and
minds of the local population.

"Machines" refers to a combination of capabilities
and technology that will be employed during the
conduct of operations to enable our peacekeepers to be
more effective, alert, aware and efficient.

Meanwhile, "methods" are doctrines, tactics,
technique, procedure and skill sets that every
peacekeeper must possess during his or her day-to-day
undertaking. This element will be further reinforced
during predeployment training and is specifically
tailored to each mission's requirements.

In addition, Malaysia strongly believes that women
peacekeepers play a Vital role in the success of a
mission. To demonstrate Malaysian women's active
participation in support of United Nations efforts in
maintaining world peace and security, Malaysia is
currently deploying four female military observers
from the rank of Captain to Lieutenant Colonel; that
figure is 75 per cent higher compared to the previous
year. Further, Malaysia has also consistently deployed
40 female peacekeepers in our battalion in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Besides that, there
are about 25 female operators who are currently being
deployed at the Malaysian mission field hospital for
humanitarian assistance in Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh.

As all of us are well aware, each peacekeeping
mission is unique and distinct. We need to take into
account various challenges on the ground - such as the
mission's components, environment and coordination
among various stakeholders, particularly the host
nation - in our collective efforts to ensure better
peacekeeping operations. Malaysia also believes that it
is important for us to strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations peacekeeping operations with
regional and subregional organizations for greater
peacekeeping performance.

To conclude, Malaysia reiterates its support
for enhancing and strengthening United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We reaffirm our full
cooperation with all stakeholders because we sincerely
believe that it is only by working together that we
can ensure that all peacekeeping missions are fit-for-
purpose and cost-effective.
