Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening today's open debate
on the issue of trafficking in persons in conflict
situations, which is an issue of priority concern for the
Philippine Government.

The Philippines shares the view that in times of
conflict, women and children are particularly vulnerable
to trafficking. There is therefore a greater imperative
for Governments to address the vulnerability of persons
caught or affected by conflict against the greater threats
to their life, dignity and security. Despite challenges
in monitoring incidents and the extent of this crime
in conflict areas, the Philippine Government remains
committed to protecting the welfare of persons who are
vulnerable to trafficking in conflict situations, through
preventive measures.

The Philippines has adopted a one-country-team
and multistakeholder approach to trafficking in persons,
which consolidates the mandates, efforts, resources
and interests of the duty-bearers and stakeholders to
develop a robust response. It has resulted in promoting
the awareness and mainstreaming of interventions,
down to the grassroots level. Realizing the increased
vulnerability of populations in conflict areas, the
Government has activated a structure called the
gender-based violence cluster, composed mainly
of law enforcers, social welfare service providers
who specialize in gender issues, and civil society
representatives. The cluster is tasked with addressing
the needs of women and children in conflict situations,
in particular in mitigating vulnerabilities to sexual
violence and trafficking. The cluster develops and
implements programmes for access to protected
information, psychosocial and trauma-informed care,
protective custody and access to education and economic
opportunities. That approach has been implemented
most recently in the Philippine Government's
response to the crisis in Marawi, where, among other
notable initiatives, the Government deployed an all-
women contingent from police and military services,
representing a vital component of its post-conflict and
reconstruction activities.

To address the problem of human trafficking as
a means to finance the activities of terrorists, armed
groups and transnational organized crime networks, it
is important to examine trafficking corridors and the
business flow of trafficking. That approach has enabled
the Philippines to strategically locate victims and
traffickers in the entire process, especially at critical
points of intervention, where victims are the most visible
and can be rescued. It also allows for the identification
of critical points in the business flow in order to deal
the strongest blow to the operations of trafficking
syndicates, and to expose and develop strategies to
arrest new methods employed by traffickers.

With an estimated 4 million Filipino migrant workers
today, the Philippine Government has made it a priority
to provide them with protection from human trafficking
and exploitation, through national laws, international
arrangements, cooperation with destination countries
and initiatives in multilateral forums. An example of
international efforts is the migrants in countries in
crisis initiative, which the Philippines spearheaded
in cooperation with the United States and other
partners, and which has sought to improve responses
to assist migrants in countries experiencing conflict
or natural disaster. That comprehensive, rights-based
approach has resulted in the successful prosecutions of
perpetrators of human trafficking. The global compact
on safe, regular, and orderly migration also provides
us with an opportunity to strengthen international
cooperation to enable migrants to move across borders
safely and prevent them from falling prey to traffickers.

The response to human trafficking and all its aspects
should acknowledge and understand the political,
socioeconomic and even cultural push factors, and
bring together Government, civil society and the private
sector at both the domestic and international fronts.
The very nature of human trafficking requires cross-
border cooperation. Member States need to strengthen
international cooperation on information sharing, law
enforcement, border control and judicial systems, and
learn important lessons to enhance their own national
action plans to more effectively combat that problem.
Criminal networks, armed groups and terrorists groups
must not be allowed to further thrive in situations of
instability and chaos, to prey on the fear, hardship, and
misery of others caught in conflict and post-conflict
situations and to profit from activities, such as forced
labour, slavery and other forms of exploitation.

