Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate so early in your presidency of the Security
Council and for your chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Matters.

The working methods of the Security Council need
to be transparent, understandable and clear to allow for
the adequate participation of all concerned. Apparently,

that is not always, and not entirely, the case. That is
why we are particularly grateful to Japan, which did
us a great service by documenting the developments
and emerging practices in the revision of note by
the President S/2017/507, as adopted last August.
It now concerns the implementation of note 507, as
many speakers before me have pointed out. I would
like to make three suggestions on how to improve
implementation in concrete terms.

The first suggestion concerns the process for
developing Security Council products. We welcome
that the Council, in the new version of note 507, now
expressly encourages all its members to become
penholders. In principle, any Council member can
serve in that function. However, in practice, the list of
actual penholder countries continues to be very short.
We hope that a more inclusive practice will emerge, as
stipulated in the note.

We also share the Council's concern, as expressed
in the new note, that more needs to be done to improve
the openness and flexibility of the drafting process.
However, the note's proposals to that effect focus
entirely on the internal workings of the Council. They
are addressed only to its members. We would like to
invite the Council members to go further and to think
about progressive ideas to better involve the wider
United Nations membership earlier in the drafting
of proposals to ensure more buy-in and support from
non-Council Member States.

The second suggestion is about the relationship
between the Security Council and the police- and
troop-contributing countries. As the Council
increasingly mandates peacekeeping operations in
high-risk environments, more timely, interactive and
action-oriented consultations among the Council, the
contributing States and the Secretariat are needed.
In that regard, the revised note 507 contains a
number of proposals, which should be translated into
consistent practice.

My third point relates to the relationship between
the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). The revised note 507 elaborates on the
relationship between the Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission as "an intergovernmental advisory body".
It notes the Council's intention to regularly request,
deliberate and draw upon the Commission's specific,
strategic and targeted advice.

We are convinced that we should strengthen the
links between those two bodies to enhance the ability
of the United Nations to move more seamlessly from
crisis response to long-term peacebuilding. Germany
was recently elected Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilidng
Commission. We are ready to work with all interested
partners to enhance the Peacebuilding Commission's
advisory role. For example, one idea would be to
regularly invite the Chair of the PBC and the country-
specific configurations to participate in public Security
Council meetings.

To conclude, I would like to emphasize one thought
that many speakers before me pointed out, namely, that
reforming the working methods should continue. It is
very important that, ideally, that should go hand in hand
with more fundamental reforms, such as reforming
the Council's composition to more accurately reflect
today's political realities. However, clearly, that is a
subject for another day and another forum.

