Mr. Antonio: We fully appreciate the

participation of Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State
for External Affairs of India. We also recognize the
presence within the Brazilian delegation of high-level
parliamentarians from Brazil.

Let me start by congratulating you, Sir, on your
country's accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. The history of your
country bears eloquent testimony to its sustained
support and commitment to the search for peace and
security on the African continent, in particular in
questions regarding peacekeeping operations.

I also thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous for his very
useful briefing, and reiterate the readiness of the
African Union (AU) to continue to collaborate with
him in his endeavours.

Our participation in this timely and important
debate should first be viewed in the context of the
African Union's evolving role in addressing the
challenges of peace and security on the continent,
consistent with the principles and objectives of the AU
Constitutive Act and the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the AU Peace and Security Council.
Secondly, I wish to announce that - as you have
already mentioned, Sir - the African Union has
embarked on steps to institutionalize an African
continental policy framework on security sector reform
(SSR), which will be considered with a view to
adoption by the AU Assembly of Heads of State at the
next Summit, scheduled to be held in Addis Ababa in
January 2012. Obviously, the AU would be happy to
share the content of this framework once it is adopted
by the Assembly.

The framework document is a major milestone in
implementation of the mandate given by the January
2008 decision of the AU Assembly for the development
of a continental policy framework on security sector
reform. The 2008 Assembly decision was informed by
the outcome of a United Nations international
workshop on security sector reform held in Cape Town,
South Africa, in November 2007 and sponsored by the
Government of South Africa, in collaboration with the
Government of Slovakia.

The adoption in 2006 of the AU post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy was a turning
point in the African Union's involvement in security
sector reform. Among other things, the post-conflict
reconstruction and development policy calls for the
re-establishment and strengthening of the capacity of
African security institutions to pursue the
transformation of the organs of State, especially those
relating to security and justice.

Another important breakthrough in the
development of the draft AU policy framework on
security sector reform was the convening of a
workshop in Addis Ababa from 23 to 25 March 2009,
co-hosted by the African Union and the United
Nations, which brought together SSR experts from the
AU, the United Nations, regional economic
communities, the African Security Sector Network
(ASSN) and representatives of partners, making it
possible for the draft AU policy framework on SSR to
be endorsed by experts from AU member States in May
201 1.

Significant outcomes of the workshop held in
March 2009 were, inter alia, the development of a road
map for the AU SSR policy process and an agreement
on strategic partnership on security sector reform
entered into by the AU and the United Nations. This
partnership is essential to a coherent and coordinated
global approach, drawing inspiration from existing
AU-United Nations partnerships in the areas of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.

I wish to mention at this juncture that the AU
SSR policy formulation process would not have
reached this stage without the strong support of AU
partners, particularly the role played by the United
Nations at the very inception through its Office of the
Rule of Law and Security Institutions, as well as the
SSR unit within the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. The range of assistance includes
fundraising for various SSR activities, for which we
remain grateful to the United Nations as we look
forward to its continued support, especially now that
the African Union is moving from policy formulation
to implementation of SSR activities by AU member
States, with a primary focus on the principle of
national ownership and leadership.

The African Union has also developed a strong
SSR working relationship with the African Security
Sector Network. Both the AU and the United Nations
continue to rely on the expertise of the African
Security Sector Network in the implementation of the
AU-United Nations strategic partnership on SSR - a
role which the ASSN has performed extremely well.

The African Union wishes to also express its
gratitude to the European Union for providing the
initial funding for the AU SSR activities and for the
anticipated broader funding. Our gratitude is equally
extended to the Government of Norway for SSR
training and the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg in
support of Member States meetings on SSR.

In closing, I wish to underscore that the AU
continues to consider peace and security to be
necessary preconditions for sustainable development
through regional integration. We therefore invite the
United Nations and all partners to ensure that a
regional perspective is brought to bear in strategic
partnerships on security sector reform with Africa's
regional economic communities playing a key role, as
many speakers have already mentioned. We therefore
support the regional arrangements that are the focus of
the presidential statement adopted at this meeting
(S/PRST/2011/19), whose contents the African Union
welcomes with high appreciation.

