Mrs. Loahaphan (Thailand): First of all, let me
join previous speakers in thanking Ambassador
Denisov for his detailed presentation on the work of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC). We also
thank the Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) for his
briefing.

Terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security. All acts of terrorism
are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, whenever and by whomsoever committed.
Victims of terrorist attacks and their families deserve
our deepest sympathy and condolences. To combat
such a threat in today's world, international
cooperative efforts, particularly within the United
Nations, are needed more than ever.

In this connection, my delegation wishes to
welcome the recently adopted Security Council
resolution 1566 (2004), which, inter alia, establishes a
working group consisting of all members of the
Security Council to consider and submit
recommendations to the Council on practical measures
to be imposed upon individuals, groups and entities
involved in or associated with terrorist activities, other
than those designated by the Al Qaeda/Taliban
sanctions Committee, and to consider the possibility of
setting up an international fund, financed by voluntary
contributions and seized terrorist assets, to compensate
victims of terrorist acts and their families. We
particularly welcome the ninth preambular paragraph
of the resolution, which emphasizes the need to
broaden understanding among civilizations in an effort
to prevent the indiscriminate targeting of cultures and
religions, and to address the full range of issues,
including development concerns, all of which are
necessary for sustaining the widest possible fight
against terrorism.

In this connection, my delegation would like to
commend the CTC for a job well done since it was
established by Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). We also welcome the timely revitalization of
the work and structure of the Committee, particularly
the establishment of the CTED as a special political
mission, under the policy guidance of the Committee
plenary, with the aim of enhancing the Committee's
ability to monitor the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and to effectively continue the capacity-
building work in which it is engaged. Such
revitalization is imperative in View of the more
proactive role assumed by the Committee in its
dialogue with Member States, in evaluating the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), in
facilitating technical assistance to Member States and
in promoting closer cooperation and coordination with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
In that regard, my delegation would like to assure the
Council of its continued willingness to closely
cooperate with the Committee and its Executive
Directorate; we look forward to the CTED becoming
fully operational in the near future.

Thailand attaches great importance to the work of
all the committees established by the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council in its fight against
terrorism and thus has always extended its full and
timely cooperation to those various committees, which
have different mandates but related objectives.
Thailand also believes that intensified contacts and
dialogue with the States Members of the Organization
will contribute significantly to the work of the
committees and will enhance the efficiency of Member
States themselves in their implementation of relevant
resolutions adopted by the Security Council.

That is why Thailand is pleased to have received
a visit from Ambassador Heraldo Munoz, Chairman of
the Al Qaeda/Taliban sanctions Committee, and his
delegation, which took place only last week. During
that visit, a number of meetings requested by the
Chairman of the Committee were organized, including
meetings with the Thai Prime Minister, the Foreign
Minister, the Minister of Interior and other high-level
officials of the competent authorities dealing with the
issue of terrorism. First-hand information was provided
and exchanged by the two sides, and intensive
discussions on cooperation were held in a frank
manner. The visit has indeed enhanced the level of
understanding and cooperation between Thailand and
the Al Qaeda/Taliban sanctions Committee in their
efforts to ensure full and effective implementation of
resolution 1267 (1999).

My delegation would like to stress that measures
against terrorism adopted by States need at all times to
be in compliance with international law, particularly
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law. In order for the fight against terrorism to be
comprehensive, it is necessary that we also tackle the
symptoms and root causes of terrorism, such as
poverty, lack of development and basic necessities, and
human rights abuses. In combating the violence and
terror in today's world, more importance should be
given to the cultivation of a culture of peace,
understanding and tolerance, both within and among
countries and their peoples, in order to make it possible
for everyone to learn to live with one another's
differences and eventually to enjoy the fruits that world
peace and harmony can offer.

Before closing, my delegation is pleased to report
that on 29 September 2004 Thailand deposited with the
United Nations its instrument of ratification of the
1999 Convention for the Suppression of the Financing
of Terrorism. With the amendments to the Thai penal
code and the enactment of the Anti-Money Laundering
Act of 2003, it is hoped that we will be able to become
party to all other pending international conventions and
protocols relating to terrorism by early next year.

Additionally, Thailand has played an active role
with regard to capacity-building in the South-East
Asian region, particularly in the area of extradition,
within the legal issues working group of the Bali
Regional Ministerial Meeting on Counter-Terrorism.
Furthermore, Thailand has supported the conclusion of
treaties on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters
among the countries members of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations, which enhances
international cooperation and mechanisms in
combating international terrorism.

