Mr. Henze (Germany): The report of the Secretary-
General on violations of international humanitarian law
committed by Bosnian Serbs in the areas of Srebrenica,
Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most is a sad and particularly
worrying summary of the current state of information on
the key issues of missing persons, executions and the
involvement of Bosnian Serb leaders and of Serbian
paramilitary forces in those crimes.

Especially by the prudence of its approach, by its
matter-of-fact style and careful use of available evidence,
the report, in our View, makes a compelling case.

Together with our French partners, my delegation
has taken the initiative for the draft resolution that is
before the Council. We did so, because we felt - as did
the other sponsors - that the Council could not shy away
from a specific, clear and unequivocal reaction to the
specific crimes and violations of international
humanitarian law described in this report.

Let me reiterate the German position with regard to
two fundamental principles.

First, it is of the utmost importance that the same
legal standards, the same norms of law and the same
critical objectivity are applied everywhere - be it in the
areas in question, in other parts of the former Yugoslavia
or elsewhere in this world. There must be no selectivity,
no attempts to either "diminish" or "enlarge" violations of
international humanitarian law committed by one side for
partisan reasons of political convenience.

In the same manner, we oppose attempts to
"balance" the crimes committed by one side with human
rights violations committed by another or to equate
behaviours that cannot be equated. This would weaken
and obfuscate justice. Justice means that equal crimes
shall be treated equally, and unequal deeds shall be
treated differently.

Secondly, it is equally important that this Council
and its members honour the general principle of the
separation of powers by seeing to it that the judicial
prerogatives and competences of the international criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia are fully respected.

Obviously, this does not preclude the Council from
reiterating its strong support for the work of the
international Tribunal. As the Secretary-General says,

"States have an obligation to take the actions needed
to create the conditions essential for the Tribunal to
perform the task for which it has been created".
(S/1995/988, para. 77)

After a study of the Secretary-General's report, there
can be little doubt that the crimes and violations of
international humanitarian law committed in the areas of
Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja Luka and Sanski Most by
Bosnian Serbs are of a particularly disturbing nature, with
regard to the dimension, quantity and quality of the
crimes committed.

 

As the Secretary-General has observed, there is
undeniable evidence of a consistent pattern of summary
executions, rape, mass expulsions, arbitrary detentions,
forced labour and large-scale disappearances.

With regard to Srebrenica, the painful reality and
sombre facts of the events that took place there in July
have become increasingly clearer. On 10 August of this
year, when we adopted resolution 1010 (1995), Ambassador
Eitel asked about the missing men of Srebrenica,

"Where are they? What has happened to them? Are
they well?" (S/PV.3564, p. 3)

He added,

"We continue to hope that they are alive." (supra, p. 4)
Today, four months later, we must fear - we are almost
certain - that most of them are dead.

As the best current estimate of the number of missing
persons is between 3,500 and 5,500 men, and taking into
account the available evidence of executions, we now must
assume that such a high, yet still unknown, number of
Bosnian men have been killed in summary executions. As
executions on such a scale normally cannot be attributed to
individual acts, there must have been some kind of order or
instructions to kill the Bosnian men from Srebrenica. We
note the evidence of the involvement of the Bosnian Serb
leaders mentioned in the report. It leaves no doubt that
Bosnian Serb leader Mladic' was present in person in the
Srebrenica area during those critical days.

Bearing this in mind, what shall we say in response to
the assertions and allegations contained in the letter of the
representative of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Mr. Jovanovie, to the President of the Security Council
dated 18 December? What shall we say to the assertion that
the Bosnian Muslims who died in Srebrenica in July were
killed by other Muslims, not by Bosnian Serbs?

I do not want to comment on this. Let me simply say
that I support the comments made by the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom, Sir John Weston, as reported in
yesterday's New York Times article on this letter, a letter
which leaves one with incredulity and a somewhat bitter
aftertaste. "O, si tacites", as the Romans used to say: "If
only you had kept silent".

Over the last few months, we have all become
increasingly aware that there can be no peace, that there
will be no peace in Bosnia without achieving as much
justice as possible. Can we imagine that there will be
peaceful coexistence if there is impunity for the violations
of international law in question? Can the feelings of the
families of the victims be ignored? The answer is clear:
justice must take its course. Those who are responsible
must be held responsible.

In this respect, the draft resolution takes note that on
16 November 1995 the international Tribunal issued
indictments against Bosnian Serb leaders Karadzic' and
Mladie for their direct and individual responsibility for
the atrocities committed against the Bosnian population of
Srebrenica. They are charged, inter alia, with crimes
against humanity and genocide. The draft resolution also
recalls the provision of the Dayton Peace Agreement that
no person indicted by the international Tribunal may
stand as a candidate or hold any other public office in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The Secretary-General states that the full truth about
the human rights violations and crimes in question has yet
to be established. We believe that three aspects are of
particular importance: there must be a full investigation of
the violations in question; access to the area is crucial;
and the international community must be firm and steady
in its support of the efforts of the International Tribunal.

As the Secretary-General says in his report, the
international community bears a great moral responsibility
in this respect.

Let me conclude by saying that my delegation
sincerely hopes that, after the signing of the Peace
Agreement at Paris, this will be the last draft resolution
that is necessary on this matter. We hope that the
cooperation with the International Tribunal promised in
Dayton will be forthcoming and real. We will follow this
closely, with no illusions. But we are looking forward to
a time when people in Bosnia and elsewhere in the
former Yugoslavia - Bosnian and Bosnian Serb citizens
of Bosnia alike, as well as Croats and Serbs - will be
able to leave the memories of recent years behind and to
work together for a better future. It is in this spirit that
we will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

