Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): First, let
me thank, Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the detailed report
(S/2017/379, annex) he has just presented to us. We
reaffirm our full support to him and invite all the
parties to cooperate with him in good faith.
More than 20 years after the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, known as the Dayton-Paris Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues, despite its pitfalls,
its progress towards reunification and building a nation.

Our statement today, like the one we delivered
here in the Chamber six months ago (see S/PV.7803), is
centred around the political, economic and institutional
dimensions in Bosnia Herzegovina.

At the political level, progress has certainly been
made with the adoption, in November 2016, of the
defence review document for the country's integration
into NATO, but also the agreement and official signing
of the protocol on the adaptation of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement. However, we must
recognize that the period covered by the report also
saw a resurgence of tensions among Bosnian, Croat
and Serb communities. It was marked in particular by
nationalist rhetoric and a spiralling of activities - to
the point that the Dayton Agreement, which put an end
to a terrible war in the heart of Europe, now seems to be
fragile, if not questioned. The country's nation-building
requires an climate of serenity and open dialogue
among all communities and entities of the State, in
strict compliance with the provisions of the Dayton
Agreement and the Constitution and the laws of the
country, which are the guarantee for safeguarding
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

During the period under review, even if the
country could not fulfil its commitments within the
time frame of the International Monetary Fund, Bosnia
and Herzegovina continued to benefit from the support
and assistance provided by that financial institution,
which we welcome. Similarly, the economic progress
in the country, which we welcomed when we discussed
the previous report (S/2016/911, annex), needs to be
strengthened to promote harmonious development, the
country's stability and the well-being of its people. We
therefore call on the three ethnic groups to cooperate
even more closely and to further develop the common
will to live together in a stable, strong State that has a
voice in the community of nations.

As is stated in the report ofthe High Representative,
the presence in the country of the European Union's
military mission, with an executive mandate, is still
needed insofar as it enables his Office and other
international community actors to carry out their
respective mandates and to reassure citizens from all
ethnic groups as to security in their daily lives.

Combating terrorism is one of the challenges that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing now in a context
in which the return of foreign fighters and complex
migratory flows represent added risks to the security
of the country and the region. It goes without saying
that tangible results cannot be achieved in this struggle
without strengthening cooperation at all levels among
both State authorities and ethnic groups in the country.
It is therefore important to effectively implement the
2015-2030 plan drawn up for that purpose.

Senegal calls upon the international community, in
the context of the reform agenda, to continue to support
the efforts of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to help it
become more resilient in the face of the socioeconomic
problems that it must nevertheless have to tackle. The
same applies to strengthening the country's security
forces so that they can overcome the strategic and
operational gaps in an environment where the terrorist
threat remains.

Finally, I would like to encourage the international
community, first of all the Council, to maintain its
commitment and current level of cooperation in
addressing the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina in
order to safeguard the positive momentum the country
has experienced in the more than two decades since the
signing of the Dayton-Paris Accords.

