Mr. Savua (Fiji): It is my honour to make this
statement on behalf of the following States members of
the Pacific Islands Forum that are Members of the
United Nations: Australia, Kiribati, the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
Fiji.

Thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity to address the Security Council on the
subject of Bougainville. The countries of the Pacific
Islands Forum have been actively engaged in
supporting the Bougainville peace process for nearly
five years, including through the Peace Monitoring
Group (PMG), in which Australia, New Zealand,
Vanuatu and Fiji participated. The PMG worked
closely and cooperatively with the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB). Our support
for the peace process is continuing through the
deployment of the civilian-led Bougainville Transition
Team (BTT).

Both the PMG and the BTT reflect the
willingness of our region to work together to find
solutions to problems facing one of our members. We
firmly believe that, with the commitment and goodwill
of neighbours - and working in partnership with the
United Nations - we can work to address problems in
our region, while acknowledging that, ultimately, long-
lasting solutions must be found from within the
country. Our role is to facilitate the process by
encouraging and assisting the host nation to realize its
own goals.

We are gratified that the Bougainville peace
process has made substantial and encouraging progress.
We note in particular that an important milestone has
been passed with the recent verification, by UNPOB
Director Noel Sinclair, of stage II of the weapons
disposal process. With this development, the road is
now clear for the necessary legal changes to be made to
allow for Bougainville's autonomy. We encourage all
parties to work to reach an early decision on the final
fate of the weapons in stage III, which will result in the
weapons being permanently removed from
Bougainville communities.

The role of UNPOB is even more critical at this
stage. It must remain seized of the import issue of
concluding the formal peace process before its mandate
expires at the end of the year. UNPOB will need to
work closely with the United Nations Secretariat to
find the best way forward in the remaining months of
its time in Bougainville.

The establishment of an effective and affordable
autonomous administration in Bougainville will bring
with it many challenges. The Pacific Islands Forum
region requests the Security Council to remain engaged
with the Bougainville peace process in the crucial
months ahead. Beyond that, we know that the support
and encouragement of the international community and
the United Nations system will remain important, as
work to build a credible law and justice system, an
effective administration and a viable economic base in
Bougainville continues.

Our region has done all it can to get Bougainville
where it is today. We appeal to the international
community to help us carry these efforts further.

