Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting.
I also thank Ms. Navi Pillay, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and Mr. Adama
Dieng, Under-Secretary-General Special Adviser to the

Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, for
their briefings on their mission, which was necessary
and met the essential need to convey the fact that
impunity cannot and will not be tolerated.

I think that it is important that we are meeting
publicly, not just because of what we can say and
do today, which can help to end the hostilities and
the attacks against the civilian population, but it is
also important because, Argentina believes, for the
purpose of accountability and transparency, this is how
the meeting should be held, pursuant to the general
principles established in rule 48 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

I would like to reiterate our support for the work
and efforts that our Blue Helmets are undertaking in
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Beyond any shadow of a doubt, that work has allowed
us to prevent many deaths. I also want to underscore
the responsibility and efforts deployed by the United
Nations, together with regional and subregional bodies,
aimed at stopping the crisis and mitigating so much
suffering.

Argentina shares the condemnation in the
strongest terms of the serious violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law that have
been perpetrated by both parties to the conflict in
South Sudan over recent months. We appreciate that
during their visit, Ms. Pillay and Mr. Dieng warned
the country's leaders that the inquiries under way, or
future inquiries, will inevitably examine those parties'
responsibility for the war crimes and crimes against
humanity being perpetrated in the country. We also
believe that it is essential that they have reminded them
about their responsibility to protect civilians and the
need to put an end to hostilities as soon as possible to
prevent the situation from worsening further.

Argentina supports the work of the African
Union commission of inquiry, which is necessary if
those responsible for the atrocities are to be brought
to justice. We also believe that in all of the inquiries
under way - be they by the African Union, UNMISS
or the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights - it is extremely important to
establish who is responsible at the highest levels, as it
is not enough to merely punish those who undertook
the heinous actions; rather, it is necessary to establish
responsibility all the way up the chain of command.
There is a need to put an end to impunity so that
massive violations of human rights stop. However, it is
also equally necessary to reach a political agreement.

On that point, encouraging news from South Sudan
is scant. We note the release of the remaining 4 of the
11 detainees accused of undertaking a coup d'etat, the
progress with regard to the African Union's commission
of inquiry and that there is still hope that the parties can
truly negotiate a cessation of hostilities as they have
said they are willing to do. But they need to do that,
because the victims are not invisible. They should do
that because death speaks. The murder of civilians, of
boys and girls, women and the elderly, because of their
ethnicity, the colour of their skin; the rape of women to
destroy their dignity and in vengeance; the recruitment
of thousands of children to lead them to death instead
of bringing them to a life that is free of fear; the
destruction of hospitals in order to unleash epidemics;
the occupation of schools to nourish ignorance; the
destruction of entire towns by those whose hands
are stained with petroleum; the calls to hate aimed
at stripping communities of the opportunity to learn
respect for differences and love for peace - those
crimes are not invisible because death speaks in Bor
and Bentiu and in all corners. And we are listening.

For that reason, we too must show enormous
responsibility, not just by lamenting and condemning
atrocious acts and famines. Argentina believes that the
Security Council should continue, as the case may be,
to support, to take or to assess the following efforts as
soon as possible.

First, Argentina has no doubt that the most important
thing at this time is to provide all the necessary
protection for the tens of thousands of individuals who
have sought refuge in the hands of UNMISS and have
not found protection. It is urgent that a decision be
made with regard to the Secretary-General's request to
increase the troop numbers of UNMISS and, in should
that be approved, ensure that it is effectively done.

Secondly, we must establish what support the
United Nations can provide so that the regional force
that has been decided upon by the Heads of State and
Government of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development can be deployed.

Thirdly, we hope that the commitment to ensure
that the victims will receive justice and reparation
nationally in South Sudan is not an empty promise.
We trust that it is not a empty promise. However, we
also wish to recall that when a country cannot or will
not ensure that justice is carried out, the International
Criminal Court is there. That is a mechanism that
Argentina supports and defends.

Fourthly, we again condemn the actions of the
Government of South Sudan and the forces loyal to them
with regard to UNMISS and humanitarian assistance.
Argentina believes that the activities of UNMISS must
be solely focused on matters linked to the protection
of civilians, human rights and humanitarian assistance.
We do not believe that there is any room for the
allocation of resources to other types of tasks.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate our concern
about the regional repercussions that the conflict
could have, in particular with regard to the presence of
foreign troops in the country. I would also like to echo
the question of Ms. Pillay in the press conference of
30 April: "How much worse does it have to get before
those who can bring this conflict to an end, especially
President Kiir and Mr. Machar, decide to do so?"

