Mr. Lobo de Mesquita (Portugal): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union, the
candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia, align themselves with this statement. In
the interest of efficiency and to save time, I shall
shorten my oral statement today. The full text of my
statement is now being distributed in the Chamber.

The European Union (EU) is pleased to
participate in today's debate. We welcome the briefings
from the Chairmen of the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to monitor access to weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors. The three
Committees play an important role in the work of the
United Nations to counter the terrorist threat. We
appreciate the opportunity to hear more about their
work as part of an open and transparent debate.

Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security in the world
today. The European Union reiterates its condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We
would like to commend the United Nations for
significant progress in leading global efforts to combat
international terrorism in a sustainable way.

Countering terrorism and addressing the
conditions conducive to its spread are international
issues that require a global response. The EU is
committed to implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in cooperation with all
Member States of the Organization. It also supports the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, which
aims to ensure coordinated and coherent efforts across
the United Nations system to counter terrorism. As
members of the Task Force, the three Committees and
their expert bodies also play an important role in the
implementation of the Strategy.

The European Union continues to be committed

to reaching an agreement on the comprehensive

convention on international terrorism as soon as
possible.

The 16 United Nations counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols constitute the legal core of
anti-terrorist measures. Universal adherence to those
instruments is essential for the consistency of measures
taken by Member States and for the facilitation of
international cooperation. The EU attaches great
importance to the full implementation of all United
Nations conventions and protocols related to acts of
terrorism. In that context, the EU commends the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its Terrorism
Prevention Branch for their important work in
delivering technical assistance to enable States to
adhere to and implement those instruments.

The European Union would like to reiterate that
effective counter-terrorism measures and the protection
of human rights are not conflicting goals, but rather
complementary and mutually reinforcing ones. Our
action must be firmly based on due process and the
rule of law.

We commend the 1267 Committee for the
considerable progress made with regard to improving
the effectiveness of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime over the past few months. In doing so, the
Committee was effectively supported by the
Monitoring Team. We look forward to the issuance of
the seventh report of the Monitoring Team as an
official document of the United Nations, in order to
benefit from the analysis and recommendations made
by the Monitoring Team.

We take note of the first edition this year of the
review pursuant to paragraph 6 (i) of the Committee's
guidelines. We encourage the members of the
Committee to take full advantage of that new tool to
further improve the quality of listings. With regard to
the updating of lists, we welcome the work of the
Committee in updating the Taliban section of the
consolidated list and encourage the Committee to
continue its efforts in that regard.

We commend the Committee's efforts to enhance
transparency by updating and improving its website
and making available useful information regarding its
work and its procedures. In that context, we would like
to refer to the document prepared by the Monitoring
Team compiling experiences of Member States, which
is a useful tool in assisting us in implementing
sanctions.

The European Union has always emphasized the
need to strengthen fair and clear procedures with
regard to targeted sanctions, in order to enhance their
effectiveness. Several EU member States have
contributed to that process. We note that tangible
progress has been achieved over the past year, in
particular in the 1267 Committee. In that regard we
welcome the establishment of the focal point, which
has improved access to the Security Council by
individuals requesting de-listing from sanctions lists.
The EU will observe the implementation of the new
guidelines and procedures. In the light of that
experience, other challenges may be identified.

With regard to the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, the European Union welcomes the work
done by the Committee in approving the preliminary
implementation assessments in the framework of
resolution 1373 (2001). EU member States look
forward to receiving those assessments and stand ready
to engage in an active dialogue with the Committee in
that regard.

The European Union stresses the importance of
strengthening cooperation with international and
regional organizations in the fight against terrorism. In
that regard, we note with appreciation the organization
by the Committee of the fifth special meeting with
international, regional and subregional organizations,
which was held in Nairobi fro 29 to 31 October 2007.

I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the recent appointment of Mr. Mike Smith as the new
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The EU
looks forward to close and active cooperation with
CTED under his leadership, as well as with the CTC.
The EU strongly supports the work of both the CTC
and CTED in promoting and monitoring the
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005). Those resolutions have set ambitious standards
with regard to international cooperation and on the
issue of incitement to terrorism. However,
implementing those resolutions is, and will remain,
first and foremost an obligation of Member States.

The European Union notes that CTED's mandate
will expire at the end of 2007. It also notes the ongoing
informal discussions on ways and means to enhance its
outreach and efficiency.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and their means of delivery is a growing threat to

international peace and security. In that context, the EU

fully acknowledges the relevance of resolution 1540

(2004) as an important international instrument to deal

with that threat in an integrated and comprehensive
manner.

At this point, let me mention the European
Union's own strategy against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, which is one of the
pillars of the EU's non-proliferation policy and
contributes to the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). It includes providing assistance to States in
preparing and submitting national reports.

We understand that a new stage in the activities
of the Committee is now planned, and that that
envisages a shift from awareness and non-reporting
States to capacity building and States that have
demonstrated willingness to implement the resolution
but still lack appropriate expertise in that field. The EU
stands ready to support the Committee in that new
stage of its activities, in particular in building legal and
administrative infrastructure, sharing our own
experience of implementation and training relevant
authorities. We will do so in close coordination and
cooperation with local authorities, the Committee and
the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. In
this respect, we wish to thank Ambassador Peter
Burian for his acceptance two weeks ago of an
invitation to meet with the group of European Union
experts on nuclear non-proliferation in Brussels.

Today's debate is an opportunity to look ahead
and beyond the second implementation phase of
resolution 1540 (2004) ending in April 2008. It is
important that the mandate of the 1540 Committee be
further extended because it plays a crucial role in
preventing weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery and production from falling into the
hands of non-State actors worldwide. We would
welcome timely preparations in this respect.
Meanwhile, we believe that the Committee should not
lessen its efforts to promote full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Finally, I would like to thank the Chairmen of the
three committees once again for their work. The
European Union will continue to promote universal
adherence to the conventions and protocols that form
the legal basis for the work of the United Nations in

countering the terrorist threat and to support their
global implementation. We commend the work of the
Security Council as a vital component in the United
Nations efforts to combat the terrorist scourge, which
is a threat to all States and to all peoples.

