Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I wish on behalf of the
delegation of Nigeria to convey our congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July. May I also
express our appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of the Philippines for the efficient
manner in which he conducted the proceedings of the
Security Council last month.

The delegation of Nigeria has read the report of
the Security Council mission to West Africa, 20 to 29
June 2004, contained in document S/2004/525. The
visit was indicative of the Security Council's
continuing engagement with the situation in West
Africa, as well as a demonstration of the Council's
commitment to regular consultation with Member
States in the search for durable peace, security and
stability in the conflict areas of the subregion. It is thus
noteworthy that among the objectives of the mission
was to identify additional measures for the promotion
of sustainable peace, security and development, and for
cooperation with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) on the design and
implementation of a subregional conflict prevention
strategy, including how to tackle cross-border
problems.

Central to the realization of those objectives is
the return of trust and confidence among and between
parties to conflict in affected countries. In that process,
the value of cooperation between United Nations
missions and bodies in the subregion on the one hand
and ECOWAS on the other cannot be overemphasized.
The mission, in our estimation, not only underscored
this but also recognized the increasingly active and
valuable role being played by ECOWAS in mobilizing
countries in the region to undertake peacekeeping
missions. In that regard, we wish to underscore the
proactive role of the ECOWAS Chairman, President
John Kufuor of Ghana, President Obasanjo of Nigeria
and President Eyadema of Togo in the search for a
solution to the Ivorian political impasse.

The wide-ranging discussions the mission held
with West African leaders, including President
Obasanjo, provided insights and identified challenges
that the international community faces in the
subregion.

In Cote d'Ivoire, there is a need to support the
process of rapprochement and reconciliation. We note
that the leadership of that country is committed to
taking necessary measures that would restore
confidence and trust and would prevent relapse into
conflict. Those measures include the reconstitution of
the Government of National Reconciliation: a detailed
time-bound schedule for implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement; legislation by the National
Assembly on fundamental political reforms, as
envisaged in the Agreement; and, of course, the
holding of a regular high-level dialogue, without
preconditions, among the country's parties. We are
confident that the Ivorian parties will ensure that the
benchmarks given the mission are indeed met.

Meanwhile, we commend the positive role being
played by the United Nations Mission in C6te d'Ivoire
in the preparations for general elections by October
2005. We enjoin the Ivorian parties to accord the
Mission the requisite support and cooperation.

On Liberia, Nigeria welcomes the progress made
since the National Transitional Government took
office. Given the enormous challenges of post-conflict
peace-building in that country, we join the Council in
calling on those countries that have not done so to
redeem the pledges they made at the international
donors conference held last February. We also call on
the Security Council to consider the lifting of its
embargo on the trade in timber and other natural
resources, so that the Liberian Government can have
the necessary funds for the rehabilitation of its
infrastructure. This is consistent with the decision of
the recently concluded Third Summit of the African
Union, which was held at Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

On Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria is pleased to observe
the progress made by the Government of that country
in the political transition process. We commend the
positive role being played by the Economic and Social
Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-Bissau, as
well as by the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau.
Those efforts complement the role of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
support of a return to political normalcy in the country.
We support the mission's recommendation that the
Bretton Woods institutions and the international donor
community should remain actively engaged by
providing the necessary financial resources and
technical assistance to the country.

On Sierra Leone, Nigeria expresses its
condolences to the United Nations and to the
Governments of concerned countries, as well as our
heartfelt sympathy to the families of the peacekeepers
who perished in the recent helicopter crash in Sierra
Leone. We salute the courage and dedication of those
individuals, who paid the ultimate price in the service
of humanity.
While we welcome the progress achieved by the
Sierra Leone Government, especially in the area of
strengthening its military and police capacities, we
believe that the security situation on the ground
remains fragile. There is therefore a need for the
cautious drawdown of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone, in order to ensure sustainable peace.

Finally, Nigeria notes with satisfaction the
mission's support for the ECOWAS Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa. As the
Council is no doubt aware, the Moratorium will soon
be strengthened through a convention that will be
mandatory on all signatories. That reflects the
commitment of countries in our subregion to the fight
against the scourge of these weapons. We shall
continue to count on the Council and the international
community in those efforts.

