Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We thank those
delegations that initiated convening this briefing for the
Security Council to discuss, in a transparent manner,
the current situation in Rakhine state of Myanmar. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing, but most of all for his deep and personal
commitment to putting an end to this tragedy. This
discussion is particularly timely in light of the plight
of hundreds of thousands of innocent civilians who left
their homes fleeing violence.

Like others on the Council, we strongly condemn
the upsurge in violence in Rakhine state that has led to
numerous civilian causalities and enormous suffering.
Let me underscore from the very outset that any
targeting of civilian populations, infringements on their
human rights and other abuses are totally unacceptable.
The impunity of perpetrators must not be tolerated.
Steps must be taken to address the numerous reports of
attacks, especially against women and girls.

As we know, there are some recent disturbing
developments that were triggered by the deadly attacks
committed by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army
against security forces on 25 August. As the Security
Council, we should also look into information about
the possible involvement of external terrorist factors
in inflaming violence in Rakhine. While Myanmar
security forces took steps to respond to the attacks, we
are particularly concerned about the mounting evidence
of grave human rights violations committed over the
course of the military operation in the province. We
call on the authorities to show restraint, respect the rule
of law and protect the civilian population.

Ukraine is seriously concerned by the continuously
worsening humanitarian situation of hundreds of
thousands of refugees and internally displaced persons,
and stresses the need to ensure unhindered access
of humanitarian actors to those in need. Taking this
opportunity, we express our support to the Government
of Bangladesh in its efforts to provide shelter and aid
to the Rohingya refugees. Considering the staggering
numbers of displaced persons and refugees, the least
the Government could do in the situation is to halt all
military activities in Rakhine. The cycle of violence
has to be stopped before it is too late. We understand
that the situation in Rakhine state is an extremely
complicated and sensitive issue that cannot be solved
in the short run.

We note the efforts of the Government of
Myanmar to address those challenges, including
the establishment of the Central Committee for the
Implementation of Peace, Stability and Development
in Rakhine State, chaired by the State Counsellor, as
well as the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State,
chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan. We welcome the release
of the final report of the Advisory Commission and the
readiness of the Myanmar Government to carry out its
recommendations to the full extent and within the short
time frame. We are confident that the implementation
of the report's recommendations could help conflict
challenges in Rakhine state and achieve peace and
stability in the region.

Concrete steps are urgently needed because
what is doable and within reach today, may not be
there tomorrow. In this Chamber, we talk a lot about
prevention. Today, it is still not too late to deliver. For
the Council and wider international community, it is
imperative to be more proactive in ensuring that the
violence stops. We strongly encourage the Government
of Myanmar to seize the chance it still has and prevent
the current situation from deteriorating into a full-
blown regional crisis. Nobody around the table wants
to see the worse-case scenario. That means that we all
have to do our duty. The Security Council is the body
that is responsible for maintaining international peace
and security and the Government of Myanmar is the
primary entity responsible for the well-being of its own
people.

