Mr. Cunningham (United States): Mr. President,
let me congratulate you and your delegation for
Ireland's outstanding leadership of the Council during
this presidency. It is good to see you here. I want to
thank Mr. Vieira de Mello also for his briefing and for
his tireless and admirable efforts and those of his team
in East Timor.

We believe that Mr. Alkatiri's participation today
is particularly important, because it is the first time the
Council hears from an elected East Timorese leader.
This is a significant milestone. I also want to thank the
briefers from the World Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP). Their presence
illustrates that East Timor is not just a Council
responsibility, and that the concept of responsibility,
shared among principal interacting players, which will
be referred to in the Presidential Statement later on,
exists already in practice.

We welcomed the Secretary-General's report on
East Timor. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), working
with the East Timorese, has done very serious work,
and it shows. The United States joins other Council
members in endorsing the Secretary-General's
proposals for the way ahead, both the transition from
now until independence and the plan for a successor
mission. We endorse these recommendations in the
context of our support for UNTAET as a continuing
international presence, for UNTAET's ongoing
downsizing and for the United Nations initial work on
a reasonable and rational exit strategy.
I would like particularly to welcome the work
that the United Nations Development Programme did
in support of UNTAET, making a technical assessment
to determine which civilian posts were priority
positions for political stability to be included in the
limited core to be financed from assessed contributions
for periods ranging from six to 24 months.

Many people talk about East Timor as a United
Nations success story or talk about how we need to
invest more to ensure that East Timor is a success, and
we agree. I would like to encourage the Council, the
United Nations and the East Timorese themselves to
agree that a good definition of ultimate success will be
when the last United Nations staff members leave and
an independent and stable East Timor stands up on its
own. To get there, the United Nations and the East
Timorese will need to work with the widest range of
bilateral donors and interested agencies to ensure that,
as the extraordinary measures financed through
peacekeeping progressively diminish within two years,
other appropriate mechanisms of support are in place.

I would like to stress to Minister Alkatiri that the
East Timorese must help this process by focusing on a
democratic, harmonious and peaceful way forward,
practicing fiscal responsibility and programmatic
rigour, capturing as much as the United Nations and
others can teach and setting the right priorities.
UNTAET must help this process by staying on
schedule with the downsizing it has set for itself
between now and independence and by working even
harder to develop and implement the big picture of how
the United Nations efforts fit in with those of other
actors and in the near future by elaborating its plan for
getting, starting on independence day, to a goal of zero
or near zero peacekeeping finance support by mid-
2004. If we can all do that, we can truly talk about a
United Nations success story and a success story for
the people of East Timor as well.

