Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): The State
of Qatar attaches utmost importance to the question of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, and I
thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to participate in
today's important debate. I wish also to thank Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his
important briefing.

Today's open debate takes place 10 years after the
Security Council's first discussion on the protection of

civilians in armed conflict. That important discussion
led to the Council's adoption of many resolutions
calling for improved conditions for civilians affected
by war and its attendant humiliations. In spite of the
efforts that have been made - such as the inclusion of
protection in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
the establishment of a Council Expert Group on the
Protection of Civilians and plans to address violence of
all kinds, including killing, maiming and sexual
violence - any such developments remain of limited
value, as the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2009/277), if they do not translate the provisions of
Council resolutions into concrete fact.

In that regard, we recall the report's observation
that the protection of civilians is not a purely
humanitarian task; rather, it is a multifaceted task. The
first and most important facet is ensuring compliance
with laws on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including in situations of foreign occupation,
in accordance with international law and, in particular,
with international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. It also involves combating impunity
and ensuring the protection of civilians and their
human rights without discrimination or selectivity of
any kind.

The State of Qatar condemns the targeting, killing
or maiming of civilians in armed conflict or in
situations of foreign occupation. We condemn all acts
of reprisal against civilians or against civilian targets
such as schools and hospitals. We note the observations
in the report of the Secretary-General regarding the
core challenges to improving the protection of civilians
in armed conflict, including in situations of foreign
occupation, and we endorse the report's reference to
the fact that those challenges are fundamentally
reflected in the lack of full compliance with
international legal commitments on the protection of
civilians.

In our region, more than 1,000 Palestinian
civilians lost their lives in January's Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip. That was a result of the
consistent targeting of infrastructure, which caused
enormous damage to homes, hospitals and schools,
including schools operated by the United Nations, in
clear breach of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, specifically the Geneva
Conventions, in particular the Fourth Convention,
which includes provisions on the protection of civilians
under foreign occupation.
Another important challenge is to avoid subjecting
civilians to the consequences of hostilities, as is
currently the case in Afghanistan, and to prevent the
killing of civilians by rebel elements, as is the case in
the Sudan. Millions of civilians in zones of armed
conflict and foreign occupation are suffering, in
particular women, children, the disabled and the
elderly. Their lives and prospects are under threat both
during and after crisis situations, because there are
constraints on the needed assistance. Here, we take
note of the annex to the report of the Secretary-
General, on constraints on humanitarian access. We
stress the importance of continuing to compile
information on the humanitarian crisis facing civilians
under foreign occupation and in armed conflict
situations.

Under international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, especially the Geneva
Conventions and in particular the Fourth Convention,
which contains provisions related to the protection of
civilians under foreign occupation, primary
responsibility lies with the parties to the conflict and
with the occupier to protect those under its authority
and to provide for their basic needs.

The State of Qatar believes that hindering the
provision of humanitarian assistance constitutes
collective punishment of an entire innocent people.
This is a phenomenon that is growing in breadth and in
severity. The Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are
suffering because of unjustifiable constraints on and
measures against the provision of humanitarian
assistance. Following the Israeli aggression against the
Strip, Israel, the occupying Power, has continued to
refuse entry to the Strip of all goods, including
necessary building supplies. The border crossings
remain closed.
Education is a basic human right which is
jeopardized in zones of conflict or foreign occupation.
Educational infrastructure has been paralysed in the
Gaza Strip since last January. The situation has
prompted Her Highness Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser al
Missned, UNESCO Special Envoy for Basic and
Higher Education, to call upon the Security Council to
provide the necessary protection for education in the
Gaza Strip and to investigate the crimes committed
there, including the targeting of a United Nations school.

The occupying Power's obstruction of humanitarian
operations has disrupted education in the Strip, and we

call upon the Security Council to mandate its various
bodies to attach great importance to the right to
education in zones of armed conflict and foreign
occupation, and to focus on this issue in its future
deliberations.

Ensuring accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law, including the Geneva
Conventions and the Fourth Geneva Convention in
particular, which includes provisions on the protection
of civilians under foreign occupation, international
human rights law is the ideal vehicle for enhancing the
protection of civilians on the ground. The problem lies
in the consistent failure to implement international
legal mechanisms in a fair and equitable manner and in
the adoption of double standards and attitudes with
respect to such situations. That in turn leads to a lack
of accountability for parties that breach that law and
commit such crimes, thus allowing them more latitude
to pursue their violations at leisure.

Impunity for serious Violations of international
law has cast a heavy shadow over every initiative that
held out hope for peace and stability. Repeated
impunity frustrates victims, fuels their desire for
revenge and allows the perpetrators to feel that they are
above the law. It ultimately encourages the offender to
commit further violations.

The time has come to translate our commitments
into concrete action on the ground. We would like to
stress the importance of the Security Council's acting
to implement the recommendations of the United
Nations fact-finding panel in its investigation of a
series of Israeli attacks on United Nations facilities and
staff in the Gaza Strip, including schools run by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We also stress the urgent
need to examine one of the relevant recommendations
that a thorough and unbiased investigation be made of
all violations of international humanitarian law in the
Gaza Strip.

We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities and meet its obligations to
protect civilians in armed conflict, and to ensure
respect for the instruments of international law and the
Security Council's own resolutions, which provide the
legal basis for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, including under foreign occupation. The rule
of law is a fundamental issue in armed conflict. We
need to recognize that respect for international law
constitutes the true beginnings of world peace and
stability.

