Mr. Zerihoun: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Lake Chad basin region, a region that
continues to suffer from the combined effects of violent
extremism and a serious humanitarian crisis as well as
from human rights abuses and violations by terrorist
elements and counter-terrorism measures. Boko Haram
continues to perpetrate violence against civilians in
the Lake Chad basin region, with varied frequency
and intensity, through kidnappings, suicide bombings,
improvised explosive devices and ambushes on towns
and villages.

Since October 2016, Boko Haram has shifted
most of its assaults to military positions. It is unclear
whether the military is the intended target. However,
the upsurge in clashes with the military seems to be the
result of reaction to the counter-insurgency operations
of the Multinational Joint Task Force (MNJTF) and
a shift in tactics following the split in Boko Haram's
leadership last August between Abubakar Shekau and
his former second-in-command Abu Musab al-Barnawi.
The recent trend of attacks appears to be in line with
al-Barnawi's stated intention to focus operations less
on Muslim civilians and more on military, Western and
Christian targets.

Despite the commendable military efforts by the
region against Boko Haram, including the takeover
of its stronghold in the Sambisa Forest in Nigeria,
Boko Haram retains the capacity to carry out attacks,
as illustrated by its attack on 3 January on a military
checkpoint in Baroua in the Diffa region of the Niger,
the 7 January attack on a Nigerian military brigade in
Buni Yadi town, Yobe state, in north-eastern Nigeria,
and the multiple suicide attacks in Maiduguri, capital of
Borno state, Nigeria, on 8 January.

Far too much time has passed since the fateful
day of the kidnapping of the Chibok girls. The release
of some of the girls, especially the 21 who were set
free on 13 October following negotiations facilitated
by the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the Swiss Government, is encouraging. According
to the Nigerian Government, negotiations for the
release of the remaining girls are continuing. Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas
continues his engagement with the Nigerian authorities
and international partners to determine how best to
support the Government's efforts for the release of
the remaining abductees. In his consultations, Special
Representative Chambas continues to stress the need
for the international community to support Nigeria in
addressing the issue ofmass abductions by Boko Haram,
the rehabilitation and reintegration of abductees, and
for better humanitarian access to the north-east of
the country.

Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien will
brief the Council on the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the Lake Chad basin region and the
challenges there. The countries of the Lake Chad basin
continue to face a serious humanitarian crisis. The fact
that the number of people in need of assistance has
continued to increase underscores the seriousness of
the situation and the need to address the root causes
of the crisis, if further violence, displacement and loss
of life are to be averted. The ongoing violence has had
devastating effects in the region. It has destroyed lives,
livestock and food stocks, paralysed the local economy
and undermined the economic development of the
affected countries. The economic impact of the crisis is
substantial and is estimated at about $9 billion in north-
eastern Nigeria alone.
Boko Haram's destructive activities have been
taking place in areas of entrenched poverty and
marginalization with high levels of income and social
inequality, which has been caused, in part, by the
absence of State authority and a severe financial crisis.
The response of the United Nations, as well as that of
the States concerned and their partners, will need to
address the immediate violence and the humanitarian
needs, while simultaneously addressing the root causes
of the violent extremism and radicalization. Only a
combined approach will help to repair the material
and social damage inflicted on communities. The
overall goal of the response to the Lake Chad basin
crisis should be the achievement of lasting solutions,
recovery and sustainable development. Support should
also entail measures to help reverse the adverse effects
of climate change on the livelihoods of communities in
the affected areas, including the resuscitation of Lake
Chad and the preservation of its microeconomy.

Despite the challenges, progress has been made
in addressing the immediate humanitarian needs,
as well as in the restoration of State authority and
local governance systems in reclaimed areas. In
northern Nigeria, the United Nations has significantly
increased its physical presence so as to help improve
social cohesion, basic social services, livelihoods,
reconciliation and psychosocial support for returnees
and internally displaced persons, as well as in the
rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure and in building
the capacity of local Governments. The three-phased
reconstruction and rehabilitation plan unveiled by the
Nigerian Government on 7 January for the affected
areas in the north-east over a five-year period is a
welcome development and deserves support.

Grave human rights violations and abuses have
accompanied the Boko Haram attacks and the counter-
terrorism responses. Women and girls remain subject
to sexual violence, including sexual slavery and forced
marriage. Counter-insurgency operations, both by
national forces and by the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), have been accused of breaches of
international humanitarian law, including the detention
of Boko Haram suspects, including children, in dire
conditions, and the prolonged holding of internally
displaced persons and refugees by security forces for
screening purposes. Notable measures have been taken
by the Government of Nigeria to address the incidents
of sexual and gender-based violence against displaced
women and children in camps. We urge the authorities in
all countries of the region to strengthen their responses
to such violations and abuses, including by providing
assistance to survivors, bringing all perpetrators to
justice and providing targeted protection services in
camps and host communities.

There have been encouraging reports of the
surrender of former Boko Haram fighters in Chad and
the Niger; those fighters are mostly nationals of those
two countries. We encourage the authorities of the
countries concerned to examine their rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes for ex-Boko Haram fighters
and their families, and to enable the United Nations and
partners to better support the programmes.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of the victims of terrorism must be a priority in national
responses to acts of terrorism. Respect for due process
and prompt trials for persons detained for Boko Haram-
related offences should guide broader counter-terrorism
measures. Children detained in that connection should
be treated as victims and dealt with in accordance
with international standards for juvenile justice. All
children encountered in military operations should be
handed over to child protection actors, and standard
operating procedures should be developed in that
regard. The importance of ensuring that military and
security responses respect international human rights
law, humanitarian law and refugee law and of taking
all precautionary and preventive measures during
operations to ensure the protection of the civilian
population is self-evident. Failure to do so could
fuel pre-existing grievances and perpetuate conflict.
As the Secretary-General has emphasized, counter-
terrorism measures and the protection of human rights
should not be seen as conflicting goals, but rather as
complementary and mutually reinforcing.

In order to support the efforts of Member States
to combat terrorism and ensure that perpetrators
are brought to justice, the United Nations continues
to provide strategic counter-terrorism technical
assistance and training. Additionally, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with
the support of the European Union, held a high-level
meeting in December 2016 with Nigerian federal and
local authorities to consider approaches to prosecuting,
rehabilitating and reintegrating persons associated
with Boko Haram. The consultations underlined the
need to develop a comprehensive legal framework
to deal with persons associated with Boko Haram,
including a prosecution strategy, and to design and
implement human rights-compliant and gender-
sensitive rehabilitation and reintegration strategies.
Similar consultations will be proposed to Cameroon,
Chad and the Niger during a visit by the Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee planned for early this
year. The visit will aim at facilitating the development
of national comprehensive and integrated approaches
to prosecuting, rehabilitating and reintegrating persons
associated with Boko Haram, and at promoting regional
cooperation in criminal law and other related matters.

The Multinational Joint Task Force is now
undertaking military operations in the area of the thickly
forested shores of Lake Chad and its many rivers. The
operation faces unique challenges, including difficult
terrain, a lack of dedicated airlift capacity, especially
for casualty evacuation, logistics and the sustenance of
troops, as well as the lack of amphibious capabilities,
improvised explosive device detection equipment, night
vision equipment, reconnaissance assets and long-range
field communication equipment. The contribution of
€50 million by the European Union Commission to the
African Union Commission in support of the MNJTF
and the funds provided by other bilateral donors need
to be disbursed in a timely manner to the Lake Chad
Basin Commission so as to enable the regional force to
address the challenges it faces.

A military approach will not bring an end to Boko
Haram. The countries affected must simultaneously
tackle the humanitarian consequences, as well as the
root causes that led to the emergence of the group.
Military operations should be followed by stabilization
measures, the restoration of State authority and efforts
to address the social, economic and political grievances
of marginalized communities. The four countries ofthe
Lake Chad basin region are, without distinction, equally
affected by the Boko Haram scourge, in a context of
dire financial crisis and associated political and social
tensions. They need the support of the Security Council
and the wider international community if they are to
succeed in their efforts to bring about stability and
build the resilience of affected communities.

The United Nations remains committed and ready
to support regional efforts to address the consequences
and root causes of the Boko Haram crisis. However,
the apparent failure of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to hold
their long-planned joint ministerial summit on Boko
Haram continues to be a concern. The United Nations
continues to encourage the region to develop a common
strategy to address the drivers of the Boko Haram
crisis. The support of the Security Council in urging
ECCAS and ECOWAS to convene their joint meeting
will underscore the urgency of the matter.

