Mr. Butagira (Uganda): On behalf of my
delegation, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. Uganda attaches
great importance to the issue of the maintenance of
international peace and security. Because of time
constraints, I will try to be brief in my intervention.

First of all, the responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security is primarily that of
the Security Council, in line with the provisions of the
Charter. However, this issue concerns us all. Indeed,
the 2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) brings out this issue clearly. Its
paragraph 71 states:

"We acknowledge that we are living in an
interdependent and global world and that many of
today's threats recognize no national boundaries,
are interlinked and must be tackled at the global,
regional and national levels in accordance with
the Charter and international law".

Unfortunately, some conflicts, especially in
Africa, tend to disappear from the international radar. A
case in point is the situation in Somalia, which until
recently had enjoyed low visibility. Therefore, it is
incumbent upon the international community, and
especially the Security Council, to give equal attention
to conflicts that may threaten international peace and
security wherever they occur.

There are many causes of conflict; I will
highlight just two. First, in developing countries,
especially in Africa, poverty is a serious threat to peace
and security. The need to address poverty, therefore,
can hardly be overemphasized. The Security Council
should see poverty as a threat to international peace
and security, and therefore exert the necessary pressure
and attention towards poverty alleviation, especially by
2
giving the necessary support to policies designed by
Member States to eradicate poverty.

Secondly, democracy can be both a blessing and a
curse. It is a blessing because, where it is genuinely
applied, it allows citizens to participate in determining
the way in which they are governed. However,
democracy can also be a curse if it is viewed as one-
size-fits-all. Here, it is important to recall what our
leaders stated in paragraph 135 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome:

"We also reaffirm that while democracies share
common features, there is no single model of
democracy, that it does not belong to any country
or region, and reaffirm the necessity of due
respect for sovereignty and the right of self-
determination".

There has been an unfortunate tendency on the
part of some Western democracies to push their model
onto developing countries without due regard for
peculiarities and circumstances in those countries. In
Africa, for instance, where there is a multiplicity of
ethnic groups, the rush to introduce democracy without
first building a nation can be a disaster. For example, a
predominant tribe that exploits its numerical strength
may emerge a victor if the model of "one man, one
vote" is adopted. It may therefore monopolize power,
to the exclusion of minority tribes. The minority tribes
that are thus marginalized and excluded from power
may resort to violence in order to redress the power
imbalance.

In that scenario, therefore, what is required first
is to build a nation by introducing measures that
transcend tribal affiliation. For instance, the use of a
common language, as was the case in Tanzania with
Swahili, can be a useful tool; hence, the need to move
cautiously before a rush to introduce multiparty
democracy in developing countries. Yes, elections and
multiparty democracy can be useful, but, as I have
outlined, they cannot be the only considerations with
regard to the issue of democracy.

I want to comment on the role of the Security
Council with regard to peacekeeping. Traditionally, the
approach adopted by the Security Council has been the
following: where there is no peace to keep,
peacekeeping operations should not be authorized.
Sadly, that has been the case with Somalia. In my view,
the Security Council should liberate itself from this
tight box and, where circumstances demand, actively
07-4920]
promote peacemaking as well. The presence of United
Nations peacekeepers in conflict-ridden areas may
itself help efforts towards peacemaking. Hence, we
have been urging the Security Council expeditiously to
deploy United Nations peacekeepers in Somalia to
replace the African Union (AU) force.

Ironically, by proxy or indirectly through the
authorization of African Union peacekeepers, the
Security Council is in fact already taking part in
peacemaking. We cannot, therefore, understand the
logic that prevents the Security Council from directly
authorizing a United Nations peacekeeping force now,
instead of postponing the matter to a possible
deployment in the future, as called for by Security
Council resolution 1772 (2007). Uganda, whose troops
are in Somalia under the African Union Mission in
Somalia, is proud to make its humble contribution
towards peacemaking in that country.

In its role of maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council should dwell more on
preventive measures, without, of course, minimizing
the importance of resolving conflicts when they flare
up. Lastly, the Security Council should press for the
necessary logistical and financial support to be
provided to those countries that are undertaking
peacekeeping operations on its behalf under Chapter
VIII of the Charter.

