The Secretary-General: I am here to report on the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), which the
Council adopted unanimously on 24 February. But I am
keenly aware that I am doing so just as the bloodletting
in Syria enters its eighth year. I would like to highlight
just one stark fact on this grimmest of anniversaries,
which is that in 2017, more children were killed in Syria
than in any other year since the war began. I am deeply
saddened by the immense loss and cascading suffering
of the Syrian people. And I am deeply disappointed by
all those who, year after year, by action or inaction,
design or indifference, have allowed this to happen.

My grief and frustration are compounded by all that
I know of the people of Syria. As United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in the aftermath of the
Iraq war, I saw the remarkable hospitality of the Syrian
people in hosting 1.5 million Iraqi refugees - not in
camps, but in their communities across the country.
Syria was a place where refugees could live in security
as they tried to rebuild their lives and raise their
families. Today, so many of those generous Syrians
who shared so much have themselves been forced
from their homes, becoming refugees or internally
displaced. In neighbouring countries - whose
enormous hospitality I have also witnessed, but who are
burdened by overwhelming needs - the vast majority
of Syrian refugees live below the poverty line. Many
of the Syrians who journeyed even farther from home
in search of safety have found the doors that they once
opened to others in need shut in their faces. A country
known for its ancient civilization and a people known
for their rich diversity have been betrayed, and Syria
is bleeding inside and out. There should be one agenda
only for all of us - ending the suffering of the Syrian
people and finding a political solution to the conflict.
And the Council has a particular responsibility in
that regard.

Let me now turn to the implementation of resolution
2401 (2018) and the issue of the compliance of all the
relevant parties in Syria. I do so with a caveat. The
United Nations is following developments closely, but
we do not have the full picture, owing to our limited
presence and restricted access on the ground. Resolution
2401 (2018) demands that all parties "cease hostilities
without delay, and engage immediately to ensure full
and comprehensive implementation for a durable
humanitarian pause for at least 30 consecutive days
throughout Syria", while still countering Da'esh and
other groups designated as terrorists by the Council.
It is true that in some areas, such as Deir ez-Zor and
Douma, where there has been a recent ceasefire that
I will address later, the conflict is diminishing in
intensity. Yet there has been no cessation of hostilities.
Violence continues in eastern Ghouta and beyond,
including in Afrin, parts of Idlib and into Damascus
and its suburbs. In eastern Ghouta in particular, the air
strikes, shelling and ground offensives have intensified
since the resolution's adoption and have claimed
hundreds of civilian lives. Some reports even put the
toll at more than 1,000.

The resolution further demands the enabling
of "the safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and services". Despite some limited
convoy deliveries, the provision of humanitarian aid and
services has been neither safe, unimpeded or sustained.
The resolution calls on "all parties to immediately
lift the sieges of populated areas, including in eastern
Ghouta, Yarmouk, Fo'ah and Kafraya". No sieges
have been lifted. The resolution demands medical
evacuations of the critically sick and wounded. To our
knowledge, not one critically sick or wounded person
has so far been evacuated. But I will come back to
that later in relation to a recent announcement. The
resolution reiterates its demand "reminding in particular
the Syrian authorities, that all parties immediately
comply with their obligations under international law,
including international human rights law, as applicable,
and international humanitarian law, including the
protection of civilians". And I remind all involved that
even efforts to combat groups identified as terrorists by
the Council do not supersede those obligations. Yet we
see egregious violations, indiscriminate attacks and a
failure to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Since the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), my
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and I have been
focused on helping to create the conditions for a
cessation of hostilities in eastern Ghouta, where, as I
said to the Council two weeks ago, people have been
living in a hell on Earth (see S/PV.8185). As the Special
Envoy told the Council a few days ago, eastern Ghouta
is the most urgent situation, because it is where we have
the clearest potential to try to support the de-escalation
in concrete ways, and because we have been concretely
approached. On 26 February, the Russian Federation
announced a five-hour daily humanitarian pause in
eastern Ghouta. I will speak to that later in my remarks.

On 27 February, the President of the Security
Council and I received a letter from the Syrian National
Committee conveying another letter from the three
armed opposition groups in eastern Ghouta - Jaysh
Al-Islam, Faylaq Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham. They
expressed their commitment "to the full implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2401 (2018)", and to expelling from eastern
Ghouta "the armed groups of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham,
the Al-Nusra Front and Al-Qaida and all of those
belonging to them". They also promised to ensure
humanitarian access and the facilitation of the work
of United Nations agencies. On receiving the letter,
the Office of the Special Envoy opened channels
with all three groups, inside and outside the enclave.
The respective commanders issued further letters,
expressing the groups' readiness to negotiate with the
Russian Federation in Geneva.

In parallel, both I and my Special Envoy engaged
with the relevant authorities of the Russian Federation.
My team on the ground did likewise, and also engaged
with the Government of Syria. We offered the good
offices of the United Nations to facilitate and observe
any meeting between the representatives of the armed
opposition groups, the Syrian Government and the
Russian Federation. Despite our best efforts over the
course of a few days, it was not possible to schedule
any meeting.

Meanwhile, on 6 March, the Syrian Government
addressed a letter to me and to the President of the
Security Council. That letter stated that Syria positively
welcomed resolution 2401 (2018), as it

"stresses firm commitment to the Syrian State's

sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity

in accordance with the provisions of the United
Nations Charter and calls for implementing
a humanitarian truce across Syria to ensure
a safe, sustainable and unhindered access of
humanitarian aid."

That same day, my Special Envoy informed the
Russian Federation of his intention to invite the three
armed opposition groups to a meeting with the Russian
Federation in Geneva three days later. On 7 March, his
interlocutors replied that they did not think a meeting
in Geneva was the best option and were pursuing
contacts on the ground with the relevant armed
opposition groups.

As those diplomatic efforts were taking place,
fighting went on. The Syrian Government and its allies
intensified air strikes and launched a ground offensive,
progressively gaining control ofparts of eastern Ghouta
from about 10 per cent of the enclave on 3 March to
more than 60 per cent today. The offensive initially
took place in less populated areas, steadily moving to
urban centres and forcing large-scale displacement.

In the follow up to the efforts I have described,
it was possible on 8 and 10 March to convene two
meetings between Russian officials and Jaysh Al-Islam
in the outskirts of eastern Ghouta, with the United
Nations as an observer. In those meetings, progress
was made in relation to the removal of a number of
members of the Al-Nusra Front, as well as other aspects,
including the potential for a ceasefire and improved
humanitarian access. The first group of Al-Nusra Front
fighters and their families were since evacuated from
eastern Ghouta.

Nevertheless, it has not been possible to facilitate
contact between the Russian authorities and Faylak
Al-Rahman. The group insisted that the meeting take
place in Geneva. The Russian Federation insisted that
the meeting take place on the ground. On 10 March,
Government forces intensifiedtheir offensive, capturing
the city of Misraba in a movement aiming at dividing
the enclave into three separate areas. On the evening
of that same day, the Russian Federation informed the
United Nations that a unilateral ceasefire would take
place at midnight, in relation to Jaysh Al-Islam in
Douma. It was agreed that a meeting would be held on
11 March with the facilitation of the United Nations. On
that day, with the ceasefire between the Government
and Jaysh Al-Islam forces largely holding in Douma,
the meeting took place, followed by a meeting today.

As I speak to the Council now, I have not yet
received a full report on the results of today's meeting.
But I was informed by our people in Damascus as I was
entering the Chamber that there has been progress with
regard to civilian evacuations and humanitarian aid.
Furthermore, I take note of a statement issued today by
Jaysh Al-Islam:

"[i] n the context of Security Council resolutions
2254 (2015) and 2401 (2018), an agreement was
reached with the Russian side through the United
Nations for ahumanitarian medical evacuation of the
wounded for treatment outside of eastern Ghouta."

We are also hearing reports of tentative initiatives,
both by tribal leaders and the Russian Federation, for
contact with other groups on the ground. I wish to
underscore the urgency of seeing medical evacuations,
civilian protection and full, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access as soon as possible.

Meanwhile, attacks on other parts of eastern
Ghouta continue, with the enclave now split into three
separate pockets. During this whole period, the shelling
from eastern Ghouta to Damascus was also ongoing,
causing dozens of civilian deaths and injuries, with
some reports putting the number close to 100.

My Special Envoy and I have remained apprised
at each step of the diplomatic engagement, offering
support and guidance to ensure the implementation in
letter and spirit of the resolution. In short, as my Special
Envoy has said to the Council, we are leaving no stone
unturned in trying to bring all major stakeholders
to the table and contribute in a concrete fashion to
find a sustainable solution for the implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018).

As the situation continues to unfold, the Turkish
offensive in Afrin - pursued with armed opposition
group allies - intensified with air strikes and ground
advances against Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat/People's
Protection Units fighters, reinforced, in turn, by
elements coming from eastern Syria, where they were
combating Da'esh. Pro-Syrian Government forces have
also deployed inside of Afrin. The fighting resulted
in significant civilian displacement, with reports of
numerous casualties and damage to infrastructure.
With the cooperation of Syrian armed opposition
groups, Turkish forces established a so-called buffer
zone inside Syrian territory, linking northern rural
Aleppo and Idlib, and surrounding Afrin from three
sides. The offensive is now pushing ever closer towards
the city, with its large civilian population.

Allow me to now turn to our efforts to address
the humanitarian crisis. When resolution 2401 (2018)
was adopted, the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners stood ready to deliver. Plans were in place
for multiple convoys each week to agreed-upon
locations, in response to independently assessed needs.
Unfortunately, the actual delivery did not match our
plan. Let me describe what it was possible to do in the
past two weeks.

On 1 March, humanitarian organizations delivered
assistance to some 50,000 people in the hard-to-reach
areas of Afrin and Tell Rifaat, north of Aleppo. On
4 March, a convoy of 19 trucks organized by the United
Nations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and partners
reached Dar Kabira, in northern Homs. It provided
assistance to 33,500 people of the requested 40,250.
However, the Government of Syria did not allow the
delivery of life-saving medicines, such as insulin,
nor key items, including solar lamps, syringes and
paediatric scales.

As I mentioned earlier, in eastern Ghouta, the
Russian Federation unilaterally announced a daily
five-hour humanitarian pause in the fighting, starting
from 27 February, to prevent civilian victims and to
enable civilians to leave the enclave. In reality, few
civilians left. On the one hand, sufficient protection
standards were not in place for voluntary movement.
Moreover, armed groups prevented others from leaving.

In that context, even though the five-hour window
was insufficient to enable the safe, unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and services,
as demanded in the resolution, on 5 March the United
Nations sent an inter-agency convoy of 46 trucks
to Douma, in eastern Ghouta, with food for 27,500
people, along with health and nutrition supplies. Yet
those 27,500 represented only a third of the requested
beneficiaries, all in desperate need. And most of the
health supplies were removed by the Syrian authorities,
including basic medicines, dialysis treatments and
trauma and surgical materials, such as burn dressings
and adrenaline, despite the provisions of paragraph 8 of
resolution 2401 (2018).

According to the World Health Organization, only
about 30 per cent of medical supplies in the convoy
were allowed in. United Nations personnel from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
accompanying the convoy were also denied access
to eastern Ghouta. Violence rendered the operation
extremely perilous, despite prior assurances from the
parties to the conflict. The insecurity forced the team
to reluctantly halt unloading and to return to Damascus
with a large share of the food aid still on the trucks.

On 9 March, a convoy of 13 trucks reached Douma,
delivering the remaining food assistance that could not
be offloaded four days earlier. Once again, shelling
occurred nearby, despite assurances having been
provided by all parties. In those difficult circumstances,
I commend the valiant humanitarian workers risking
their lives to provide assistance and protection to
people in need.

But we are obviously far from safe, unimpeded and
sustained delivery of humanitarian aid, as demanded
in resolution 2401 (2018), as well as other relevant
Security Council resolutions. And so the humanitarian
and human rights situation is becoming more desperate
by the day. In Douma, relief workers who reached the
city last week described conditions as shocking and
overwhelming. People are sheltering in overcrowded
basements. Access to food, water and sanitation is
limited. In relation to Douma, we have a convoy ready
that I hope will be allowed to proceed in the coming
days, especially after the results of today's meeting.

As in all conflict settings, the specific needs of
women are not receiving sufficient attention, including
access to safe spaces, critical health services, medicine
and baby formula for their children. In eastern Ghouta,
health partners on the ground advise that more than
1,000 people are in urgent need of medical evacuation.
The United Nations is ready to support these medical
evacuations, in cooperation with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and other partners. A prioritized list of those
in greatest need, mostly children, has been shared
with the Syrian authorities. I urge a positive response,
hoping that today's meeting will allow these actions to
take place in the immediate future.

The Syrian Arab Red Crescent has announced
its intention to send a relief convoy to Afrin as soon
as security conditions allows. A United Nations
humanitarian mission is awaiting Government
authorization to immediately deploy to Raqqa for
assessments of security and needs. There are also new
disturbing allegations of the use of chlorine gas. Even
if we cannot verify them, we cannot ignore them. I
continue to urge the Council to find unity on this issue.

Having said what I said, I believe that despite all
the difficulties, lack of trust, mutual suspicions and
cold calculations, it should be possible to implement
resolution 2401 (2018). It should be possible to have
a cessation of hostilities. It should be possible to
deliver aid. It should be possible to evacuate the sick
and wounded. It should be possible to lift the sieges.
It should be possible to accelerate humanitarian mine
action throughout Syria. It should also be possible to
remove Security Council-listed terrorist fighters from
conflict zones without massive and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure.

We cannot give up, for the sake of the Syrian people.
I appeal to all parties to ensure the full implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) throughout the whole of
Syrian territory. The United Nations is ready to assist in
any effort to make that happen. I call on all States with
influence to exercise it in support of the efforts of the
United Nations and the implementation of the resolution.
I hope that this week's Astana ministerial meeting,
which will gather the guarantors of de-escalation, will
concretely restore de-escalation arrangements, and take
real steps on detainees, abductees and missing persons.
The dramatic situation I have described - the calamity
across the country, the rivalries, the cynicism, the
cruelty - highlight the need for a political solution.
My Special Envoy continues to work towards the full
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).

On Thursday, the conflict will enter its eighth year.
I refuse to lose my hope to see Syria rising from the
ashes. To see a united, democratic Syria able to avoid
fragmentation and sectarianism and with its sovereignty
and territorial integrity respected, and to see a Syrian
people able to freely decide their future and choose
their political leadership.

