Mr. Othman (Malaysia): Ijoin others in welcoming
and thanking our briefer today and commend you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate.

Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

For decades, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has cast
a shadow over the Middle East. The region continues to
experience a vicious cycle of war, political tensions and
divisions. Many have been killed, injured or displaced.
For Palestinians, humanity is on the brink of failure.

Let me be clear: the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
not just about a land dispute. All Palestinians, including
women, young people and children, are entitled to
the same rights as we are - the right to a dignified
life, justice, freedom from fear and prosperity. But
our solidarity with the Palestinian people must not be
based only in empathy, as worthy as that is. We have an
obligation to them to do everything in our power to end
their long ordeal.

For the same reason, Malaysia continues to extend
its support and commitment to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which provides assistance, protection
and advocacy for over 20 per cent of the world's
refugees. This is not a matter of charity. We see this
as the responsibility of the international community to
protect and promote the human rights and dignity of
our Palestinian brothers and sisters.

The recent violence in Gaza and the West Bank
continues to undermine hopes for a peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine. We cannot continue to
stand idle and allow Israel to continue to carry out its
brutal occupation and repressive policies that violate
numerous United Nations resolutions and international
law, including humanitarian law.

Malaysia cannot and will not recognize any
blatant seizure of Palestinian land by Israel for its
settlements, as that constitutes a flagrant infringement
of the Palestinian people's rights and their right to self-
determination. We also reject any unilateral action
regarding the final status of Jerusalem.

Malaysia therefore calls upon the international
community to act swiftly and decisively to prevent any
further loss of defenceless, innocent Palestinian lives.
When we served on the Council in 2016, Malaysia, along
with other Council members, succeeded in adopting
the historic resolution 2334 (2016), which, inter alia,
demanded that Israel immediately and completely cease
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. We remain hopeful
and urge the relevant parties to ensure full respect for
and the implementation of this important resolution.

Malaysia also firmly upholds its position that a two-
State solution with the Palestinians and Israelis living
side by side in peace, based on the pre-1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, is the
only viable solution to the conflict.

The tragic circumstances surrounding the
Palestinian people are nothing new. The Council has
arduously debated them for decades. We must act now.
It is absolutely necessary to work collectively to reverse
any threat to the two-State solution. We must continue
to encourage dialogue and demonstrate our faith in
diplomacy and multilateralism.

We also need to do more to bridge or possibly even
close the gap between words and deeds. We need strong
political will, and if we are to succeed in resolving
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, we believe that such
success may create new openings to forge progress
towards broader and peaceful conflict resolution in
other parts of the region.

