Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): At the outset, we would like to express our condolences to the families and friends of those Oxfam workers mentioned by Mr. Lowcock who were killed. I thank Mr. their briefings. Pedersen and Mr. Lowcock for I agree very much with my German and my American colleagues. I am not going to rehearse the figures that Mr. Lowcock has so starkly set out, but I would like to echo High Commissioner Bachelet who asked how can anyone justify carrying out such indiscriminate and inhumane attacks. She also said that 93 per cent of the deaths since 1 January were caused by the Syrian Government and its allies. I would therefore like to put the High Commissioner's question back to the Russians and the Syrians - specifically to their representatives in this Chamber today. How can they justify carrying out such indiscriminate and inhumane attacks? What are they doing to uphold international humanitarian law? What are they doing to protect the people who were fleeing? Where do they expect those people to flee to? What are they doing to protect medical facilities and ensure that the people that Mr. Lowcock so vividly described get the help that they need? And when does this start to end? We have now heard that the Syrian Government has said that it will continue its offensive. How can the regime do that in the face of the accounts that we have heard today, when the entire international community - barring about three countries - is condemning it for what it is doing to the people of Idlib? I agree with the German and American representatives: Astana is not working. We have all given it a chance and we have waited in effect too long. We need to come off Astana and we need to work with the United Nations to get the political process under way and uphold resolution 2254 (2015). There is one area where I disagree with Mr. Lowcock, if I may. It is not that the Security Council is doing nothing; 13, possibly 14, members of the Security Council are ready to act, but what the Syrian Government is doing on the ground is protected by a Russian veto. This was not the purpose of establishing the Security Council and it was not the purpose of giving the five permanent members a veto - so that these innocent people on the ground could suffer not just once but multiple times under the cruelty and barbarity at the Syrian regime. I would also like to echo what my German and American colleagues said about Turkey. We need the attacks on Turkey to stop. Turkey has made efforts to seek a peaceful solution in Idlib and we are concerned about the impact of the escalation on Turkey, which has already borne the burden of hosting over 3.5 million refugees forced to flee Syria. I therefore look forward to hearing what the Turkish representative has to say later. I join the others in calling on Russia to end its support for this murderous campaign and the barbaric Syrian Government. I join the Secretary-General in calling for an immediate, genuine and lasting ceasefire in Idlib and for a lasting solution to the situation there. We once more call on Syria, Russia and Iran to observe their obligations under international humanitarian law and to give us an answer on what they are doing to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Turning to what Mr. Pedersen said about the Constitutional Committee and the political process, we remain deeply disappointed at the stalling of the Constitutional Committee. It is hard to believe that not only do we have a barbaric situation on the ground, but that the Syrian authorities are actually hindering the political process. They should come to the table. I want to place on record once more the United Kingdom's support for the United Nations Special Envoy in his efforts to restart the Committee, and I want also to assure the United Nations that the United Kingdom stands ready to support any United Nations-backed agreement and that we continue to support the Special Envoy's work under resolution 2254 (2015).
