Mr. Van Rompuy (European Union): Let me start
by thanking President Obama and all members of the
Security Council for holding this meeting.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
poses a dreadful threat to security not only in Syria
and Iraq. Beyond the Middle East, ISIL is also a grave
threat to us all. We must respond jointly by undertaking
direct actions to destroy ISIL's military and economic
capability, by increasing our support to affected
countries and by stopping foreign fighters fromjoining
ISIL. No doubt, ISIL will portray whatever we do as a
fight against Islam, but this is a common fight against
cruelty and barbarism. That is why public statements
by Islamic leaders are so important.

As we gather here today, United Nations States
Members are joining forces to fight ISIL. Its positions
are under international attack. The League of Arab
States has spoken clearly, and many of its members
are taking part in those actions, with the United States
and European countries. Last month, the European
Council - our assembly of 28 Presidents and Prime
Ministers - backed the decision by individual member
States to provide military material to Iraq. In line with
the measures now endorsed by the Security Council,
we then also agreed to use existing sanctions regimes
more effectively. We will work to block ISIL's financial
flows and weapon flows and cut off illegal oil revenue.

We must also strive to strengthen the resilience of
affected countries and the immediate region. Violent
dynamics are spreading instability in all directions,
into North Africa and the Sahel. The new Iraqi
Government needs to rally the support of all Iraqis.
Efforts to find a political solution to the conflict in
Syria must continue. European Union Governments
are ready to assist countries in the region with border
and aviation security and counter-terrorism capacity.
We will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
the affected populations and to help countries provide
shelter to refugees.

However, the crackdown must also take place
in our own countries. We cannot allow citizens from
Europe, Africa or Asia to feed ISIL's ranks. Foreign
fighters also represent a dangerous threat back home.
In Brussels, my own hometown, at the Jewish Museum,
three innocent people were murdered earlier this year
by a returning jihadist. Plots are being foiled.

We must renew our efforts to prevent radicalization
and extremism in our cities. We must cooperate better
in sharing intelligence, police and judiciary information
to track down terrorists. In that context, the European
Union is accelerating work on its Passenger Name
Record. It is about detecting and disrupting suspicious
travel. Foreign terrorist fighters will be investigated,
prosecuted and convicted.

The European Union welcomes today's resolution
2178 (2014), which calls on United Nations States
Members to make it a criminal offence to travel abroad
for terrorist purposes.

We know this will be a major endeavour. The
strategic defeat of ISIL requires determination, long-
term engagement and unity from all of us. The European
Union and its member States are ready to play their part.
