Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing and Foreign Minister Trujillo
Garcia for his presence today in the Security Council.

I would also like to thank the delegations of Peru
and the United Kingdom, as well as the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the Colombian
authorities for organizing our trip last week. As all
my colleagues who preceded me have said, it was
a valuable opportunity for the Council to express its
support for the peace process and to better understand
the challenges facing Colombia in the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.

Belgium welcomes the strong commitment
expressed by all parties during the visit. From
President Duque Marquez, leaders of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC), heads
of peace-agreement institutions, representatives of
civil society organizations and former combatants
from Santa Rosa to Cauca and the communities with
which the latter live, the main message we heard was
the need and desire to make the peace agreement work.
I personally left Colombia convinced that, despite the
considerable challenges, the country continues to set a
shining example to the regions of the world in conflict
that need inspiration.

The request to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia is a clear sign
of this commitment. We also recognize the progress
made in the reintegration of ex-combatants, the pursuit
of a pragmatic solution for the 24 concentration areas,
the approval of national and regional development
plans and the proposal to strengthen the land registry.
It is now important to bolster these reintegration and
rural-reform efforts.

The October elections will be an important stage
in the political reintegration of the FARC. We urge
the authorities to protect social leaders, human rights
defenders, candidates and FARC politicians in the run-
up to the elections. Women leaders, in particular, are
vulnerable. It is deeply worrying to note that, since the
signing of the peace agreement, the murders of 123
former combatants and several hundred social leaders
have been confirmed. Too often, the perpetrators have
not been held to account. Security guarantees are
therefore needed, especially in the context of a broader
extension of the full presence of the State into former
conflict areas.

Belgium welcomes the adoption of the statutory
law of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which is
consolidating its autonomy and independence and
is the cornerstone of the restorative-justice model
in Colombia. I also commend the work of the Truth
Commission and the Unit for the Search for Persons
deemed Missing in the Context ofand Due to the Armed
Conflict. These transitional-justice institutions must be
given adequate resources to carry out their mandate.
While recognizing that the vast majority of former
FARC combatants are honouring their commitments
under the peace agreement, I stress that it is crucial
that all FARC leaders set an example and actively
contribute to telling the truth in all the cases being
considered by the Special Jurisdiction. The actions of
a small minority of detractors of the agreement must
not be instrumentalized by others to undermine the
implementation of the agreement, which requires the
continuous courage of all political actors.

Belgium is monitoring, in particular, the situation
of children in armed conflict. We encourage the
Government to prioritize the protection of children,
and I commend the Colombian Family Welfare Institute
for its work. We remain very concerned about the
sharp increase in the recruitment and use of children,
primarily by non-State armed groups.

We regret the persistent polarized atmosphere
around elements of the peace agreement, which
demonstrates the need for inclusive dialogue among all
political actors. Everyone must overcome mistrust and
unite behind peace.

There is no doubt that the historic decision to
end the armed conflict was the right one, despite the
current challenges. This morning, we spoke at length
about the now-famous tomatoes (see S/PV.8580), and
it is true that to see these ex-combatants, who for years
lived with weapons in their hands, today devoting their
energy to growing tomatoes is a powerful image.

I assure all parties ofBelgium's unwavering support
for the peace process.

