Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Lord Ashdown and President
Meron for their briefings, which complement the report
of the High Representative.

I would like to make three comments. First, I
reaffirm France's support for the action undertaken by
Lord Ashdown in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We share
the priorities that he has identified for his mission: the
rule of law and justice; economic reform and
development; combating organized crime; structural
reform; and return of refugees and displaced persons.
His resolve has allowed for considerable progress on
various matters.
I cannot be exhaustive, but I am pleased to
highlight the fiscal reforms, which he mentioned, with
the establishment of a State value-added tax and of an
integrated customs service; the stepped-up campaign
against organized crime and corruption, even if, as he
pointed out, much remains to be done; the planned
transfer of some cases from the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to the Bosnian
judicial system; and, finally, the agreement by officials
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to defence institutions
reform proposed by James Locher's Commission. This
progress also fosters the building of a modern State
compatible with European integration and, within this
framework, a transfer of responsibility to the Bosnians,
which we so fervently wish to see.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the need to
be extremely vigilant in the implementation of the
reform which the High Representative has been able to
achieve. We note that local resistance, particularly from
political parties, often prevents the implementation of
these priority reforms. We should be similarly vigilant
about cooperation with the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We note with
regret the lack of cooperation from the Republika
Srpska, despite the demands of the international
community, reiterated in resolution 1503 (2003) of 28
August.

Political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
approve the reforms put forward by the High
Representative, with the support of the international
community. We would like to be convinced, however,
that they will choose to effectively implement their
commitments in principle, because by doing so they
will foster the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina
into the various arrangements of European cooperation.

Thirdly, I believe it is important to emphasize -
and I fully agree with the statement to be made by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the European
Union - the considerable and growing commitment of
the European Union in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a
political, human and financial commitment. The dual
function of Lord Ashdown, who is also the Special
Representative of the European Union, reflects this.

Since 1991, Bosnia and Herzegovina has been the
major beneficiary of community assistance to the
Balkans. We hope that the donor conference to be held
in The Hague at the end of the month will enable the
European Union to make an overall contribution to an
exit strategy for the International Criminal Tribunal to
show our determination to ensure the success of
international justice.

The European Union has also chosen to have its
police mission take over from the International Police
Task Force. In the area of security, currently covered
by the Stabilization Force (SF OR), plans for
involvement by the European Union are now being
studied in cooperation with our major partners.

In this way, closer ties between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union are under way.
The European Commission is preparing a feasibility
study for a future stabilization and association
agreement, and it must report its conclusions by the
end of the year. It is up to all Bosnian leader to act in
order to speed up this process.

