Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing given
today by Mr. Geir Pedersen, who can count on our
full support. Of course, I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your masterful steering of the work of
the Council. We congratulate you and your entire team
on your presidency. The Dominican Republic welcomes
the efforts to bring the relevant actors in the political
process closer and to build bridges between them, and
we commend the broad consultations conducted in the
framework of the quest for an inclusive and sustainable
political solution to the conflict in Syria.

As a guarantor of the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), the Council is called on to
ensure that the conditions that make a comprehensive,
credible, revitalized and inclusive peace process viable
and founded on the confidence of the entire Syrian
population are preserved. That includes the millions
of refugees who are out of the country and who will
eventually return. However, it is impossible to build
trust when the civilian population is still living in
conditions of uncertainty, unrest and insecurity,
and when so many families are separated without
information about the fate of their relatives. The
Dominican Republic understands that the combination
of all these elements makes the political process even
more fragile, and we emphasize that the Council must
do everything to ensure the protection of the civilian
population throughout Syria. It is therefore imperative
to insist on the need for all parties to the conflict to
comply with international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. Measures to stop attacks on
civil infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, must
be taken immediately.

While it is still not enough, we acknowledge the
progressthathasbeenmade onformingthe constitutional
committee. We believe it is essential to make progress
on designating the outstanding names, outlining the
rules of procedure and establishing a concrete mandate
for the committee' work. We hope that a solid agreement
on those key aspects of the process will be reached at
the upcoming consultations. We believe it is crucial to
ensure that all those arrangements are fully aligned
with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and that
they promote the consolidation of the United Nations as
facilitator of the process. We reiterate the importance
of including specific provisions to ensure the active and
meaningful participation ofwomen at every stage, not in
parallel or as contributors, but as entities with their own
voices at the negotiation and decision-making table. In
that regard, we urge the parties to exercise the greatest
possible degree of flexibility and constructiveness in
the consultations and not to lose sight of the need to
alleviate the suffering of a people battered by years of
conflict and to chart their course towards a new future.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that the goal
proposed by resolution 2254 (2015), of promoting a
broad political process that culminates in the holding
of free, transparent and fair elections under the
supervision of the United Nations, is still achievable.
Despite the exhaustion that all of us who want a
peaceful and sustainable solution to this crisis certainly
feel, we must keep this legitimate aspiration alive and
undertake all the necessary efforts to build the political
will that the current situation deserves and achieve
agreements in every area.

