Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me, first of all, to express my gratitude for the briefings
by the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jamal Benomar; the former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, Mr. Benjamin William Mkapa,
in his capacity as East African Community Facilitator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue; and Ambassador Jiirg
Lauber, in his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

Uruguay is concerned about the situation in
Burundi, which has not yet recovered from the
electoral crisis of 2015 and continues to face numerous
challenges, in particular serious and persistent human
rights abuses and Violations, economic deterioration
and the mass displacement of the population. In that
regard, we urge all Burundian parties concerned to put
their country's interests above their own and commit
in good faith and without preconditions to a genuine
inclusive and credible dialogue based on respecting
the Arusha Agreement. It is worth repeating, time and
again, that dialogue is the only way to resolve political
differences in a peaceful way.

For more than two decades, the United Nations
has been working closely with Burundi in search of
a more solid and stable future for the country. We
are concerned that, for various reasons, cooperation
between Burundi and the United Nations is currently not
at its optimum level, particularly after the suspension of
cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other difficulties
experienced with the Office of the Special Adviser in
the country.

We believe that it is imperative to restore mutual
trust between the Government of Burundi and the
United Nations system, which will allow efforts for
the development and stability of the country and the
well-being of its population. In that vein, we call for a
renewed commitment between the United Nations and
Burundi shaped by concrete actions such as the signing
of a status-of-mission agreement with the United
Nations, allowing the Office of the Special Adviser
to operate freely, and the conclusion of the agreement
for the resumption of activities of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Burundi.

Lastly, I should like to say that, if we do not act
decisively and immediately through an inclusive
dialogue, the suffering of the population will intensify
and we will run risk ofunravelling more than a decade's
work of peacebuilding in the country.

