Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish first to thank you for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank Under-
Secretaries-General Susana Malcorra and Alain Le Roy
for their presence and their briefings, and to General
Agwai, Force Commander of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

Secondly, I should like to express my
delegation's appreciation of the indisputable efforts of
the Security Council throughout this year to achieve
more fluid and substantive interaction with troop-
contributing countries.

Several initiatives and actions have been
undertaken on this issue in the United Nations in recent
months. Uruguay appreciates them all and is convinced
that, although there is still much to be done in order to
agree consensual responses to the principal challenges
facing peacekeeping operations, these exercises are of
intrinsic value and have already allowed certain basic
understandings to emerge.

In our view, the central understanding that has
taken shape pertains to strengthening the concept of the
partnership involved in United Nations peacekeeping.
The future of peacekeeping operations is inconceivable
without a broader and deeper dialogue among the
major actors of the system - Member States, in
particular troop-contributing countries, the host State,
the Security Council and the Secretariat.

The question is how we can extend and deepen
that partnership. From the perspective of a troop-
contributing country like Uruguay, it is essential to
deepen and, in some cases, effectively utilize existing
mechanisms. With respect to the Security Council, that
would not only entail convening meetings pursuant to
resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001), but also
involve the consultation mechanism referred to the
note of the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2002/56.

As recent meetings of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations convened by the Japanese
delegation have clearly shown, substantive meetings
between troop-contributing countries, the Secretariat
and the Working Group on specific missions can be
very productive. It is important that such meetings be
convened in a timely manner before mandates are
approved or renewed, as well as at key junctures during
a mission. We therefore encourage the effective
implementation of that mechanism.

It is also important that we continue to convene
meetings such as today's on a regular basis in order to
address this issue in a general manner and specific
matters of sensitivity to all Member States. As we have
stated since the beginning of the year, we must not
underestimate the importance of ensuring a broad basis
of support for Council-approved mandates, especially
if we take into account the nature of the new tasks
being integrated into those mandates. These tasks are
more complex and require more robust rules of
engagement, for example in the protection of civilians.

While we recognize that the Security Council has
promoted the development of such tasks, seeking as
broad a consensus as possible among all Member
States would not only ensure the greater legitimacy of
and weaker resistance to such action, but would also
generate stronger commitment among all those
involved in its implementation. Thus, the role of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations must
be re-evaluated, and to that end we must all strive to
build confidence among those involved.

Moreover, the relationship with the Secretariat is
fundamental in this respect. It is clear that there is
plenty of room for the troop-contributing countries and
the Secretariat to improve and deepen their dialogue,
and both sides must work to that end. In addition to
seeking to deepen and ensure that mechanisms for the
exchange of information and consultation become more
substantive, there is a clear need to improve the level
of representation for the troop-contributing countries at
Headquarters and in the field, particularly at the senior
level. We stress this point not solely to emphasize the
issue of geographical distribution of office, but also
because we fully believe that communications in the
field and between the field and Headquarters regarding
the implementation of mandates would be significantly
improved by enhanced feedback between national
systems and the Organization.

This discussion of the New Horizon project and
the new partnership agenda is an excellent opportunity
to build broad consensus on such practical aspects as
the definition of critical strategies to address current
and future peacekeeping operations. The documents
submitted by the Departments of Peacekeeping
Operations and Field Support provide an excellent
basis for the debate on these issues in the months to
come, to which we hope to make a constructive
contribution.

