Mr. Kusljugie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset allow me to take this opportunity to thank the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor Meron, and Chief
Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte for their annual report and
their very clear and straightforward messages in regard
to the Tribunal's current problems. Bosnia and
Herzegovina once again reaffirms its support for the
Tribunal and commends its entire staff for their efforts
to prevent impunity and bring justice to the victims of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
thus setting new milestones in international criminal
justice.

In the eleven years of its existence, the Tribunal
has established itself as an impartial, professional and
competent institution. Its role has been twofold: on the
one hand, its historical role has been to set the record
straight and individualize the responsibility for some of
the most gruesome crimes against humanity, thus
relieving the participants in the conflict of collective
guilt; on the other hand, its second role has been to be
a pioneer in international criminal justice, paving a
path for establishment of the International Criminal
Court. Prevention of impunity has in the meantime
become a widely accepted international principle, and
investigations, processes and verdicts of both Tribunals
have become an important part of international
jurisprudence.

One hundred four accused war criminals have
been brought before the Tribunal. Fifty-two of them
have received Trial Chamber judgement; 30 have
received their final sentence and 10 convicts have
already served their sentences. It is not without regret
that we learn from the President, Honourable Judge
Meron, that international financial assistance to the
tribunal is evidently drying out, and therefore, I would
like, on behalf of my country, to reiterate the appeal to
the main contributors to continue their support for the
Tribunal for as long as it is necessary. On a more
optimistic note, it is commendable that, in the elections
held last week, 12 out of the 16 permanent judges at
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia were re-elected to serve until November
2009. That will enable the Court to carry on with the
same consistency it has shown in the past.

Bosnia and Herzegovina underlines in particular
the role of the Tribunal in individualizing war crimes
as a precondition for sustainable inter-ethnic
reconciliation in the country and in the region as a
whole. Notably, gestures made by indictees - who not
only pleaded guilty but also expressed remorse to the
Victims - represent the cornerstone of the
reconciliation process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains determined to
continue meeting its obligations as regards cooperation
with the ICTY. Our record with respect to the arrest
and transfer of indictees still at large, requests for
documents, access to archives and ready availability of
witnesses has improved in the last year. Therefore, it is
not without disappointment that we learn that the most
recent activities of the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular those of Republika Srpska,
are not recognized by the ICTY, since the Chief
Prosecutor still reports that "there is no cooperation on
the part of Republika Srpska".

On 11 October, the European Union took the
decision to freeze all the assets and bank accounts of
persons indicted by the ICTY. Just a few days later, the
Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina followed suit
and imposed the same measure. Furthermore, on
15 November, special forces of the Ministry of Interior
of Republika Srpska arrested eight persons indicted for
war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity:
Veselin Cancar, Goran Vasic, Svetko Novakovic, Jovan
Skobo, Momir Glisic, Zeljko Mitrovic, Dragoje
Radanovic and Momir Skakavac. Warrants for their
arrest were issued by the cantonal court in Sarajevo
following investigations conducted in collaboration
with the ICTY, and the indictees were handed over into
the Court's custody. The action was accompanied by a
statement of the Minister of Interior of the Republika
Srpska, who said, "This is the first action taken to
improve Republika Srpska's cooperation with the
ICTY. Such actions will continue until Republika
Srpska's cooperation with the ICTY is deemed
satisfactory."

In spite of the evident progress achieved in
cooperation with the Tribunal, many of the indicted
war criminals have still not been apprehended; this
creates a major obstacle to inter-ethnic reconciliation,
since, for the country to come to terms with its tragic
past and to move on, all indictees, especially the two
most notorious, Radovan Karazdic and Ratko Mladic,
must go to The Hague to face justice.

The absence of full cooperation with the ICTY is
also the reason that Bosnia and Herzegovina was
denied membership in the Partnership for Peace at the
NATO Istanbul Summit held in June. Let me cite what
NATO leaders said about this in their Istanbul
communique:

"We are concerned that Bosnia and
Herzegovina, particularly obstructionist elements
in the Republika Srpska entity, has failed to live
up to its obligation to cooperate fully with [the]
ICTY, including the arrest and transfer to the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal of war crimes
indictees, a fundamental requirement for the
country to join the [Partnership for Peace]."

The European Union too also emphasizes that full
cooperation by the countries of the western Balkans
with the ICTY remains an essential element of the
European Union Stabilization and Association Process,
underlining that failure to cooperate fully with the
ICTY would seriously jeopardize further movement
towards the European Union.

Thus, it is clear that the failure to cooperate fully
with the ICTY is now the main obstacle to Bosnia and
Herzegovina becoming a stable, peaceful and
prosperous European democracy.

Criminal files against some 5,908 persons have
been submitted to the Prosecutor's Office for review,
but only around 100 persons have been brought before
the courts. Thus, hundreds 4 even thousands - of
perpetrators of serious war crimes committed in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have not even been charged. They
include community members, outsiders who may have
contributed to the outbreak of violence, and bystanders
who did not participate in crimes but did not intervene
to stop them either.

Based on its completion strategy, the ICTY
intends to transfer to the domestic courts dossiers of
unfinished investigations and investigative materials. It
will then be up to the domestic judicial and
prosecutorial authorities to act on those cases. That
will start happening next year and will represent a
serious test of the maturity of the domestic courts. It is
also an important step in the building of institutions of
justice in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which will
contribute to significant progress in the creation of a
society based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
cooperation of the ICTY and the Office of the High
Representative in the process of the establishment of a
special chamber for war crimes prosecutions in the
State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and calls upon
Member States to provide the technical and financial
support necessary for its functioning. In that respect, it
is very important to complete the process of staffing
and budgeting for the special chamber for war crimes
of the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, bearing
in mind the considerable workload that would be
placed before it in the near future.

We also fully support the significant work being
done by the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) mission in the region to promote
rule of law, including by strengthening national judicial
systems and supporting police reform. Monitoring
domestic war crimes trials constitutes an essential
contribution in that context. We welcome proposals for
greater involvement of the OSCE in supporting the
ICTY completion strategy.

