Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing. Poland would
like to convey its full support and appreciation to his
Office for its pivotal role in maintaining stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Consistent with our previous
statements, we also support the use of Bonn powers
if the situation requires it. I would also like to thank
Ms. Selma Korjenie for her briefing.

Poland aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later during this meeting on behalf of the
European Union. In addition, we would like to make
the following general remarks.

We welcome the unanimous adoption today of the
resolution 2496 (2019), which extends the mandate of
Operation EUFOR Althea for another year. We also
welcome the conclusions of the European Council on
14 October confirming its readiness to continue the
mission's executive military mandate to maintain a
safe and secure environment. As contributors to the
mission since its inception, we are proud to be a part
of that effort.

We regret that, more than a year after the country's
general elections, Governments are still not formed at
state and federal levels. We call on political leaders
to proceed with Government formation with a sense
of urgency and in a spirit of compromise, so that the
country can continue to move forward.

We note with appreciation the progress that Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made on the path to European
integration and look forward to the issuance of the
European Commission's opinion on the country's
application for European Union membership. European
Union integration remains the main unifying objective
shared by all political parties and is seen by a majority
of citizens as a strategic goal for the country.

We would welcome an equal sense of purpose
and unity around the submission of the first annual
national programme under the NATO membership
action plan. It is in the best interest of all citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to be able to enjoy, in the
foreseeable future, stability and security within Euro-
Atlantic structures.

Also yet to be implemented are the comprehensive
reforms of the electoral law in accordance with the
standing rulings of the European Court of Human
Rights and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

There are still many concerns regarding the
internal situation in the country. Unemployment
remains high and the outflow of younger generations
continues, depriving the country of future elites while
incoming migration bound for the European Union
swells to alarming levels. Corruption and organized
crime are rampant and are not tackled effectively.
They need to be curtailed and effectively prosecuted to
bring the country up to modern democratic standards.
Its reform agenda must be consistently and vigorously
continued and the new socioeconomic reforms should
be implemented without delay.

Since this is the last time we will speak on this
subject from our seat in the Security Council, let me
once again say that Poland has been and will continue to
be vitally interested in seeing Bosnia and Herzegovina
as a united, prosperous and modern democratic country
strongly rooted in Euro-Atlantic structures.

