Ms. Power (United States of America): This
should not have been a contentions draft resolution
(S/2016/1085). The United States proposed a draft
resolution meant to show that the architects of
mass atrocities and those who defy the demands
of the Security Council day in and day would face
consequences. We urged members of the Council to
stand with South Sudan's people, who are suffering
immesely due to the actions of their leaders. And
we urged that we use an arms embargo and targeted
sanctions to help end the culture of impunity and
reduce - at least - the violence. We are grateful to
those who supported this effort.

Some Council members decided to prevent the
Council from acting, from heeding the pleas of the
Secretary-General, who has been appealing for these
steps for more than a year. History is going to be
a very hard judge of their decision. The atrocities in
South Sudan and the displacement into neighbouring
countries are increasing every day. A number of false
arguments have been made in recent days, and I would
just like to address them head-on.

Some have said that this draft resolution should
have imposed either an arms embargo or targeted
sanctions, but not both. They argued that putting
both the arms embargo and the designations into the
same draft resolution was costing us votes and that
we might be able to get the draft resolution adopted
if we just submitted a clean arms embargo or clean
designations. That isjust false. We told every abstaining
country - all eight abstainers on the arms embargo
and the designations - that we were completely open
to doing a clearn arms embargo or clean designations
to try to get at the culture of impunity and the leading
architects of theviolence. In response, we were told that
a change of that nature would not earn us a single vote.
We engaged every member who abstained in the voting.
Let nobody say, in retrospect, "Had only the Americans
put forward half of what they included in that draft
resolution, we would have been fine". That is false.

Secondly, some have said * and this is a memorable
quote for me - "We need actions not sanctions". That
is an exact quote. But the representative who said that
and all the other abstainers proposed no actions. Not
one of them came forward despite repeated pleas from
me personally and everybody who is part of the United
States Mission and is working on this issue. No one came
forward to say, "Okay, do not do this, but let us do this
instead. Here is an idea. Here is something that we can
rally behind". Instead what the abstainers have rallied
behind is treading water, and it does in fact constitute
the definition of insanity, which is to do the same thing
over and over again and expect a different result.

The road to how we got here, I believe, illustrates
that. After another serious outbreak of violence in
July, the Security Council made a set of demands (see S/PV.7730). We demanded unfettered access for all
people in South Sudan. Some 1,830,000 people are
internally displaced in South Sudan, and approximately
4.8 million people - more than half the country - are
severely food insecure. When we made those demands,
and the Government of South Sudan failed to comply.
We demanded that the Government of South Sudan
stop blocking peacekeepers from the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) from carrying
out their mandate. We saw in person and heard from
contingent commanders and troops that they needed
written permission 48 hours in advance to be able to
move in convoys to protect people, even though they had
a civilian-protection mandate. We therefore demanded
that the movement be improved and increased with
freedom of movement. The Government of South Sudan
failed to comply.

We authorized the immediate deployment of a new
UNMISS regional protection force to help improve
security around the capital. The Government failed to
comply. The situation then grew worse on our watch,
and we regularly received briefings from United Nations
folks who were doing their best to sound the alarm. We
heard on television, radio and online sources a dramatic
increase in vile rhetoric wherein people were inciting
ethnic tensions, as Government officials did little to
stop it, despite muzzling the media in a whole series of
other respects. Soldiers began preparing in very overt
ways for large-scale attacks, including, at least, 4,000
militia recently staged in the Equatorias.

The Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Head of the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan and the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide all
issued their warnings. They came here, and the lights
flashed red - not yellow and certainly not green. It
does not happen in the Security Council very often
when a string of United Nations officials comes and
describes the gravity ofwhat lies ahead. The Secretary-
General used his last appearance here (see S/PV.7846)
on the subject of South Sudan to appeal to us to take
heed of his warning and that of all of his team. Three
thousand people on average have fled South Sudan into
Uganda every single day this month. Is that because
the situation is getting better or is stable? With 3,000
people fleeing every day and fearing for their lives, that
is why we felt that we had to bring this draft resolution
to a vote. It has been hanging around. We have tried to
solicit textual input and changes and said that we are
flexible while, again, we heard nothing in reply.

Had it been adopted, this draft resolution would not
have been a panacea. We are not naive. It would have
not solved the underlying political crisis at the heart of
what has divided South Sudan, but the arms embargo
would have had some significant effects. It would have
made it impossible for the Government of South Sudan
to continue to use the precious resources at its disposal
to buy heavy weapons armaments. Would their have
been smuggling - an issue I heard raised by a lot of
Council members? Of course, there would have been
smuggling, but we would have significantly reduced
arms sales by United Nations Member States to a fellow
United Nations Member State that, instead of feeding
its people, is amping and arming up for a conflict that
is becoming increasingly ethnic in nature.

The individual sanctions targeted three individuals
Paul Malong, Riek Machar and Michael Makuei with
asset freezes and travel bans. People asked what good
would asset freezes and travel bans really do? Those
are three leaders with lengthy resumes for fuelling
violence. They have stoked ethnic conflicts, unleashed
violence against civilians and, especially in the cases
of Mr. Malong and Mr. Makuei, attempted to portray
UNMISS as a party to the conflict. Members of the
Council have all seen the rhetoric. Many of them have
soldiers who are on the ground in South Sudan. Those
soldiers are more vulnerable because of the threats
and the caricatures that those individuals have put out
concerning UNMISS, while conveying that the Mission
is just a tool of the opposition. That is a vulnerability
for all of our people who are present on the ground
whether they be aid workers, diplomats, private citizens
or peacekeepers.

The adoption of the draft resolution would have
shown that, at least when it came to the people who were
doing the most to stoke the atrocities and the violence,
there would have been costs. Would the designations
have changed the world? The answer is no, but does
sending a signal and message of impunity - as we
have doing every day that we have not voted on those
designations, even though we know the record of the
individuals involved ~ do so? A record of impunity and
that inability to impose a cost as a Council is a green
light, and that is a green light with which everyone who
abstained in the voting of this draft resolution is going
to have to live.

What is the alternative? I know people on the
Council care a lot about South Sudan. Many of us
travelled together to the region a couple of times over
the past year. Is the alternative just to trust that South
Sudan's leaders are going to change course? There are
some really principled people in the South Sudanese
Government, and they are outnumbered or outranked.
There are such individuals. We all talked to them. We
know that there are people of good will who would like
to change course, but, unfortunately, not least because
of the actions oftwo of the people whom we designated
in the Government, that has proven to be something
that the Government is not prepared to do. Do we
just then sit on our hands until the Government calls
off the militia and stop some of the most significant
sexual violence that he have seen in any conflict in our
life times?

The Council members who did not support this draft
resolution are taking a big gamble that South Sudan's
leaders will not instigate a catastrophe. Ifthose Council
members are wrong - and every report that we have
heard in this Chamber suggests that they are - it is
the people of South Sudan who will pay an unbearable
price. It was not an easy decision for us to propose
this draft resolution. We debated it deep into the night
because having a draft resolution that is not adopted,
of course, is not how one wants to spend one's day. I
believe that the South Sudanese people were watching
for the outcome of this vote, and we knew the signal that
this would send. At a certain point, drifting along and
internalizing the constraints imposed by those Council
members who do not want to take action in the face of
the violence, that is not an option. We learned that from
Rwanda, Srebrenica and chapters past.

The next time that soldiers and armed groups
fire on civilians, the next time that the Government
prevents peacekeepers from going on patrol, which has
probably already happened during the time that I have
been speaking, and the next time that a village goes
hungry because the Government withholds permission
for an aid delivery, each of us will need to find a way to
justify our response. The leaders of South Sudan should
not misinterpret this vote. All of us will be watching
closely what happens on the ground. The abuses will
continue to be publicized. We will continue to hear
appeals from the United Nations about what it feels it
needs in order to reduce violence on the ground. We will
continue to be relentless in demanding accountability,
and we will be ready to return to the Council to vote
again on the proposed arms embargo and targeted
sanctions as soon as those who did not support action
today come to understand the human costs of imposing
no cost for attacking civilians, for importing massive
amounts of arms instead of feeding one's people and for
not pursuing the cause of peace.

All of us have the opportunity to make an
explanation of vote today. I would be very grateful to
those who abstained in the voting to clarify what it will
take and what they are for that we have not already tried.

