I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We appreciate his relentless efforts and good offices in promoting the political process in Syria. The Syrian crisis has entered its tenth year. The prolonged conflict has caused tremendous suffering for the Syrian people. It is incumbent on the international community to stop the crisis and endeavour to find a fundamental solution as early as possible. It is China's consistent position that the Syrian issue must be addressed in a holistic way, taking into account political, security, counter-terrorism, economic and humanitarian factors in an integrated manner. In the current situation, I would like to remark on four priorities. First, the political process must be accelerated. This is the only way to achieve lasting peace and stability in Syria. The parties concerned should actively and pragmatically participate in and advance the inclusive political dialogue within the framework of the Constitutional Committee. We hope to see the parties concerned strive for an early solution that fits Syria's national conditions and takes into account the legitimate concerns of both sides. The United Nations should play its role as the main channel for mediation towards a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process while the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria are safeguarded. Mr. Pedersen just briefed the Council on preparations for the third round of the Syrian Constitutional Committee. We call on all parties to demonstrate political will and bridge their differences through dialogue and consultation, so that the meeting can go smoothly and achieve positive results. China appreciates the active support of Russia and other countries for the United Nations-led process through their own efforts. Secondly, the security situation in Syria should be substantially improved. There are still a large number of terrorists and extremists in the Idlib region, launching frequent attacks and harming civilians. All parties must stick to a unified standard and strengthen coordination in counter-terrorism actions. As Mr. Pedersen proposed, more effective, cooperative and targeted counter-terrorism actions must be in place to promote peace and stability in Syria and the region. Russia and Turkey have conducted regular joint patrols along the M4 highway in recent months, in accordance with the relevant agreement, which has helped to maintain the overall ceasefire in north-western Syria. With regard to the recent air strikes against Syrian Government-controlled areas, the party concerned is called upon to exercise restraint and take no more such actions. Thirdly, unilateral sanctions against Syria must be lifted immediately. Unilateral sanctions have seriously undermined the livelihoods of the Syrian people and caused great harm to innocent civilians, especially women and children. We urge relevant countries to heed the repeated appeals of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy. Instead of imposing new illegal sanctions, those countries should immediately lift existing unilateral sanctions against Syria and take concrete actions to improve the humanitarian situation on the ground. China attaches great importance to the humanitarian situation in Syria and sympathizes with the sufferings of the Syrian people., Through bilateral and multilateral channels, we have provided a large amount of humanitarian assistance, including medical supplies to combat the coronavirus disease, to people in Syria and refugees outside the country. China will continue to support and assist the Syrian people in accordance with their needs. Fourthly, further efforts should be made to help Syria with economic reconstruction. This is the urgent need of the Syrian people and the foundation for sustainable development and durable peace of Syria. The international community should support the reconstruction efforts of the Syrian Government and people and help them to rebuild and recover as soon as possible in areas that have suitable conditions. China will assuredly make its contribution in this regard. The future of Syria should be decided by the Syrian people themselves. China will continue to stand with the Syrian people and play a positive and constructive role in the political settlement of the Syrian issue.
