Germany will continue to support the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, both politically and financially. We consider it essential for the legacy of the institution that the Court complete its activities in good order and with sufficient means, as has been done to date. We commend the Court on the way forward this year. In particular, we are delighted to see that, through creative means, the Mechanism was able to commence, resume and conclude the in-court hearings that had previously been postponed due to the coronavirus disease pandemic. In the light of the various challenges posed by the pandemic, we also appreciate the efforts undertaken by the Mechanism to ensure the health of those in its custody. We remain deeply concerned about the denial of genocide in the situations under the jurisdiction of the Mechanism. History is not to be twisted so that it fits into today's political narratives. A common understanding of the historic facts is fundamental for much-needed reconciliation and improving neighbourly relations. We urge political leaders to actively work on promoting reconciliation and ensuring accountability for war crimes. We would like to highlight once again the crucial contribution the Mechanism makes to our common fight against impunity. We renew our congratulations to the Office of the Prosecutor for its extraordinary work regarding the arrest of Felicien Kabuga. The detention of Kabuga is a visible example of what can be achieved when Member States and the Mechanism work together. Unfortunately, in some concrete cases, cooperation with the Mechanism is not as it should be. We would like to congratulate President Agius on the efforts made to minimize delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Thanks to those efforts, the remaining cases originating from the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia appear to be on track. To further minimize delays, we call on all the relevant States to respond to requests for assistance issued by the Office of the Prosecutor in a timely manner. We are very disappointed to hear that Serbia has decided not to implement the arrest warrants for Jovica StaniSi¢ and Franko Simatovic. They have been indicted for extremely serious crimes. We urge Serbia to implement the decision of the Appeals Chamber and extradite both men to the jurisdiction of the Mechanism. Justice for crimes of war has to be - and will be - served. That is also a major concern if a country wants to become a member of the European Union. In 2020 we commemorated the twenty-fifth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica - a stark reminder of the essential role of the Mechanism. Despite the constructive work conducted by the Mechanism, the issue of war crimes remains an open wound in the Western Balkans. We note with grave concern a rise in incendiary rhetoric and historical revisionism regarding war crimes and their perpetrators in the region. I have also previously highlighted the fact that, in Republika Srpska, there is a university dormitory named after Radovan Karadzic, which is something that has not been condemned by everyone here. I would urge the representative of Serbia to address that and follow in the footsteps of President Vuei¢, who actually went to Srebrenica and paid tribute to all of the victims. It would also be good to hear a condemnation of the fact that Karadzic is experiencing a revival in Republika Srpska. In previous meetings, we heard the representative of Serbia complain that Ratko Mladie¢e was unwell. We looked into the matter and did not hear anything from the International Committee of the Red Cross. Mr. Mladi¢ is in very good health. We are more concerned about the 8,000 dead in Srebrenica and their families, as we should be. On the Mechanism's work relating to Rwanda, resolution 2529 (2020) underscored the importance of finding a solution for the resettlement of the nine acquitted and released persons presently residing in Arusha, who are unable, or afraid, to return to their country of citizenship. We are encouraged to hear that efforts to that end have been enhanced and a strategy is being prepared. Germany urges all States called upon by the Prosecutor to implement requests made by the Mechanism to assist in the apprehension of fugitives for whom arrest warrants have been issued. As members of the Council, we also bear a particular responsibility. It is not only a legal but also a moral obligation to hold accountable those who are responsible for such horrific crimes. My plea is that the representative of South Africa report about this meeting back home to ensure that everything is done by all institutions, including the Ministry of the Interior, so that when Prosecutor Serge Brammertz visits South Africa next month he will not leave empty-handed.
