Mr. Lambertini (Italy) (spoke in French): Italy
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
2381 (2017) extending the mandate of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to include
monitoring the temporary bilateral ceasefire between
the Government and the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN). We also commend the adoption
of presidential statement S/PRST/2017/18. on the
conclusion of the mandate of the first United Nations
mission in Colombia. The swiftness and flexibility
with the Council has responded to the parties's requests
demonstrate yet again the determined support of the
United Nations to the peace process.

Italy. as a member of the group countries providing
support and cooperation to the negotiations in Quito,
welcomes the conclusion of the ceasefire agreement
with the ELN, which bears Witness to the parties'
commitment to the search for a sustainable political
solution to the conflict and the shared priority
objective of protecting civilians. We encourage them
to remain on this path with courage and resolve, and
we join in the appeal made by the Pope during his
visit to Colombia in early September. We also support
the essential implementation of measures on security
reintegration provided for by the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), and their
verification pursuant to the mandate of the second
mission of the United Nations.

The peace process made historic progress last year,
but there are now major challenges in its implementation
phase. The United Nations can play a key role - the first
mission, which recently concluded its work, bore witness
to that - and will continue to support the efforts of the
Government and the FARC-EP through the Verification
Mission. The clarity of its mandate and its presence
on the ground near the communities most affected by
the conflict, and now exposed to the fragility of the
transition, leave no doubt in this regard. However, the
commitment and determination of the parties involved
is the primary condition for the success of this process
so that its scope and potential for regeneration can offer
all Colombians new opportunities to participate in the
political, social and economic life of the country.

To conclude, I wish to renew our appreciation for
the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and his team, and for the unity and effectiveness
of the Security Council's work, to which Italy has had
the honour of contributing.

