Let me start by congratulating France on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June and reiterating our support to its efforts towards making this vital organ more effective and responsive to the numerous challenges we are facing. I would like to thank the Secretary-General, Antonio Guterres, and the African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya, for their informative briefings on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), and to assure them of Tunisia's full support for their vision of a peaceful and prosperous Mali and, more generally, Sahel region. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank all MINUSMA personnel and commend them for their efforts and dedication in the fulfilment of the Mission's mandate, despite the difficult and challenging conditions, and to present my condolences to the families of the fallen soldiers who died in service. The situation in the Sahel is still characterized by a deteriorating security environment owing to persistent terrorist attacks targeting security forces and civilians, which is exacerbated by intercommunal violence, the effects of climate change and, more recently, by the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Meanwhile, the region remains crippled by cross-border trafficking and organized crime on a massive scale. Despite those challenges, the Malian authorities and people remain committed to implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, signed in Algiers in 2015, which remains the only viable process conducive to stability, security, and State-building in Mali. In that regard, we welcome the recent progress in the transition process, as reflected in the conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue, as well as the successful second round of legislative elections that witnessed, to our great satisfaction, the candidacy and election of a significant number of women. We strongly believe that the more women, civil society and community leaders are involved in the implementation of the Agreement, the better the chances of achieving peace, stability and development in Mali. While operating in a highly challenging security environment and trying to adapt to the evolving situation in Mali, MINUSMA has shown its ability to carry out its mandate and deal with multiple tasks, ranging from facilitating the implementation of the Agreement to protecting civilians and helping the Malian authorities exercise their full operational control over areas previously under the control of terrorist and extremist groups, especially in the north of the country. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and the redeployment of reconstituted units are crucial in that regard. Tunisia is proud to contribute to MINUSMA's operations through an air transport unit, which has been instrumental in achieving recent progress on various fronts. We also appreciate MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) in countering terrorism and violent extremism in the Sahel region. The provision of life support consumables by MINUSMA is crucial for the operationalization of the Joint Force, and we thank the European Union for its funding. Nevertheless, as outlined in the reports of the Secretary-General, the current support model has its limits. Beyond options identified by the Secretariat to overcome transportation challenges, Tunisia believes that the G-5 Sahel Joint Force deserves a comprehensive support package funded through United Nations assessed contributions in order to fully and effectively operate across the region. That would secure sustainable and predictable funding for the Force and, at the same time, would release MINUSMA from a heavy burden, thus allowing it to dedicate its efforts entirely to supporting the peace process in Mali. Peace and security in Mali and the Sahel are vital, not only to the region but also to the entire African continent and even beyond. The Pau summit, held in France in January, as well as other international and regional initiatives testify to an increasing awareness of the multiple challenges in the Sahel and the need for the international community to assist countries of the region in strengthening their stabilization efforts to deal with emerging threats and development challenges. Fighting terrorism and violent extremism is a global responsibility and requires a broader approach that goes beyond security. It should integrate development, poverty reduction and good governance, as well as secure the full implementation of the African Union vision on silencing the guns in Africa. Hence the need for the international community to support all bilateral and multilateral initiatives aiming at mobilizing political will and resources to address the challenges in the region, such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which was endorsed by the Council in 2013 and crucially needs to be implemented. We believe that the region has the capacity to extract itself from the present crisis by working on such an integrated road map, with the support of the international community and the engagement and ownership of its youth and communities, to lay the foundation of a prosperous future.
