Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland): At the outset, let me
state that Switzerland is deeply shocked and saddened
by the terrorist attacks committed in the recent weeks.
Switzerland strongly condemns those heinous acts,
which go against the fundamental values of any society.
We extend our deep condolences to the families of the
victims and to all affected countries.

Peace and security, development and human rights
are closely linked. That observation is not new, yet we
are still struggling to adequately directing our efforts.
In that regard, it seems necessary to recall one of the
conclusions of the review of peacekeeping operations,
namely, the need to find political solutions to safeguard
peace and avoid conflicts. Switzerland welcomes this
opportunity to discuss ways that might enable us to
better meet the different aspects of this problem. I will
focus my remarks on three points.

First, Switzerland calls for boosting conflict
prevention. Conflicts are straining the countries
concerned and represent a step backwards in terms of
development. Moreover, efforts to stabilize countries
emerging from conflict and help them to build
sustainable peace are costly. The best way to lower
those costs and, above all, to avoid suffering is to
prevent conflicts. Strengthening human rights and the
rule oflaw are among the ways the Security Council can
contribute to a preventive agenda. Careful monitoring
of contexts in which human rights violations occur can
serve as an early warning mechanism, while timely
Security Council reaction following such violations
can contribute to the swift adoption of measures. More
generally, the Security Council could play a more
robust role in promoting accountability - for example,
by referring specific situations to the International
Criminal Court or by adopting sanctions against
perpetrators of violations. Nevertheless, conflict
prevention is not only about tools and instruments; it is
first and foremost about political will and leadership at
the national, regional and international levels.

Secondly, the United Nations has a broad range of
tools at its disposal. It is crucial to use them in a flexible,
consistent and context-specific manner. In that way it
will be possible to resort more often to light-footprint
engagements that take into account existing United
Nations capacities and draw on them for support. Those
capacities, which include mediation, good offices and
special political missions, should also be strengthened
institutionally and financially. In particular, we should
make better use of the capacities of the peacebuilding
architecture, which is strengthened by its mandate to
address the root causes of conflict and to build bridges
among the different actors in the field. It is particularly
well placed to support an appropriate response.

Thirdly, the commitment of the United Nations to
peace needs to be more consistent. That is particularly
visible in situations of transition between the different
forms of United Nations engagement. However, in
order to ensure smooth transitions, we must encourage
consistency as soon as the Security Council begins to
take up the situation in a country. That consistency
must not be driven by any institutional or financial
consideration. United Nations efforts must be guided by
the needs on the ground. In that connection, joint and
participatory analysis and planning, conducted prior to
deployment in the field, are essential. The Human Rights
Up Front initiative is of particular value in that regard,
as it enables all stakeholders to respond in a coherent
and comprehensive manner and it ensures that field
expertise is taken into consideration. Finally, not only
does the United Nations have to assume responsibility
in this area. The establishment of partnerships is also
crucial - with the World Bank, for example.

In recent months, we have seen both a decrease in
available resources and a continuing increase in the
needs in the areas of peace and security, development
and humanitarian affairs. Switzerland is aware of
the growing number of challenges our world faces,
including that of the shrinking space in the field for
civilian, humanitarian and development actors. Based
on their long-standing presence on the ground, United
Nations funds and programmes can often play a
positive role in peacebuilding, as demonstrated by the
Joint Programme of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Political Affairs on
Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention
and the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and
Corrections, which are supported by Switzerland. That
gives us the confidence that we have the necessary
expertise and capacities at our disposal.

