Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the delegation of Austria for convening and chairing
this meeting, and to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of November. Today in particular I would like to
thank the Foreign Minister, Mr. Spindelegger, for
making the issue under discussion such a priority, and
for his presence here today. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for their statements.

This week Europe and America commemorate the
ends of two world wars, international conflicts
conducted between States and empires. Since then, the
nature of conflict has evolved. Where 60 years ago
State actors were the central players in international
war, today asymmetric warfare with non-State actors is
increasingly common. Now, children walk into markets
with bombs strapped to their chests. Girls become
targets just for trying to go to school. Aid workers are
threatened specifically because they do so much good.
The protection of civilians is an issue of growing
importance for us all.

The Geneva Conventions, signed 60 years ago,
remain central to our understanding of our
responsibilities in conflicts. But in Afghanistan, our
enemies do not respect even these most basic rules of
war. The Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups
show complete disregard for human life; even more,
they deliberately target anyone, civilian or military,
who does not embrace their extremist philosophy. They
target those with no conceivable military connections:
teachers, health care workers, students on their way to
school. It is estimated that as a result of terrorist
activities more than 5,000 people were killed, injured
or kidnapped in Afghanistan in 2008 alone. These
groups cannot hope to defeat the world's greatest
armies with their military strength. Their strength lies
rather in their brutality and viciousness, which they use
to lend an atmosphere of control and inevitability to
their fight. The Taliban will never be able to provide
security, governance or development. Their goal is not
to build an alternative State; their goal is to prevent
any State from being built.

Civilian casualties in this fight are both a human
and a political tragedy. The human tragedy is obvious:
from January to August this year, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) recorded
the deaths of 1,500 civilians in the country, an increase
of 24 per cent over the same period in 2008. Sixty-
eight per cent of these attacks can be attributed to the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations.
This percentage has grown steadily as the terrorists
rely increasingly on bombs and indiscriminate attacks.

The political costs are more subtle but equally
damaging. The Taliban's main tactic is to encourage
the alienation of the international community from the

3]

Afghan people. The people of Afghanistan know from
past experience exactly how brutal and repressive the
Taliban are, and they show consistent resistance to
them. However, they have higher expectations of the
international community. Afghans want to see their
Government and our international partners acting as
their protectors. When we fail to protect and respect
the Afghans, the Taliban and their allies use the
people's disappointed expectations to strain the
partnership that is so central to this fight and damage
our ability to earn the trust and engagement we need to
succeed.

We should adopt a strategy that values the
protection of people, respects their lives, rights and
property, and enables positive and constructive
interaction with local communities. We fully support
the new NATO strategy, which emphasizes the
protection of civilians and introduces important follow-
up mechanisms to ensure accountability. We appreciate
the increased sensitivity that has been shown in
response to concerns about the conduct of searches and
arrests, and we support other strategic changes that
have been proposed to improve protection of civilians.
Moreover, we stress the need for an increased emphasis
on training the Afghan National Security Forces.
Afghans are eager to take increased responsibility for
the security of their country and the protection of their
people. Unfortunately, a lack of capacity and resources
continues to hobble our progress; we hope to address
this with the international community in the coming
years.

We appreciate the steadfast condemnation voiced
by the Security Council in response to terrorist attacks
around the world, and in particular the Council's strong
and unwavering support for UNAMA following the
appalling attacks in Kabul on 28 October. Groups that
deliberately target civilian populations should continue
to be strongly condemned in this Organization, and
their unwillingness to obey even the most basic rules of
combat should strip them of any legitimacy in our
eyes.
The blood of Afghans has been continuously
spilled amid 30 years of local, regional and global
power struggles. In 2001 we undertook to rebuild this
shattered country and ensure that it could never again
be used as a launching pad for regional or international
terror. As I mentioned on Monday at the 40th plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, eight years ago we
were debating how to build what did not exist. Today
we are debating how to take what we have built and
make it better. That is a substantial achievement.

Nevertheless, violence still threatens the lives of
Afghan civilians. International military forces should
take all necessary measures to ensure the protection of
civilians, and we have a shared responsibility to
condemn with the utmost severity any attack by the
Taliban, Al-Qaida or their allies that targets civilians or
results in civilian deaths. We must enforce the rules of
war that bind us all and make it clear to our enemies
that targeting civilians will only alienate them further
from the international community and from the
population they seek to control.

