Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset, Sir, to say how pleased we are to
have worked over the past weeks under your
distinguished and effective presidency. I would also
like to thank you for having chosen the important
subject that brings us together today.

As shown by the experience acquired over recent
years and by our daily work, the United Nations is
increasingly confronted by complex crises, which
obviously call for a special effort towards coherence
and coordination. In that connection, I welcome the
statements made at the beginning of the meeting by the
President of the Economic and Social Council and by
Mr. Egeland, which clearly highlighted both the
expectations arising from the United Nations response
to such crises and the need to improve our tools. My
delegation is particularly pleased to have participated
in the Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Burundi, which has provided us with
valuable lessons.

The non-paper you conveyed to us, Mr. President,
sums up the situation clearly, and I subscribe entirely
to your analysis of the various aspects of the problem.
As already recommended by the Brahimi report
(S/2000/809), we must devise more complete and
better integrated strategies to truly build peace. We
must also provide ourselves with the means to
implement them and to follow up on their
implementation. This must be one of the highest
priorities in future years if we wish to avoid some of
the errors of the past. Our States collectively made that
commitment at the Millennium Summit, as you said in
your non-paper. We therefore think that this question
will become one of the important issues at the meeting
of heads of State or Government in 2005, the principle
of which has been decided by the General Assembly
and which is to be devoted precisely to the Millennium
Declaration goals. The High-Level Panel established
by the Secretary-General to address threats to
international security and necessary reforms can
undoubtedly also make useful contributions.

I would like to make only a few specific
comments today, based on the questions that the
President suggested to us regarding strategies for
responding to and following up on crises and on the
inclusion of peacekeeping operations in such strategies.

First, the concept of integrated strategy has made
considerable headway over recent years. I would like in
particular to welcome the efforts of the specialized
agencies - in particular the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) - to work with the
World Bank to prepare joint need evaluations, as
occurred in the cases of Iraq and Liberia, and, I
believe, will soon occur in Haiti. This is an
indispensable tool, of course, in designing global
strategies. We can therefore only hope that the
methodology for such joint assessments will be further
refined and that it will set a standard.

Work on ways to guide a country from
humanitarian emergency to sustainable development
has also made considerable headway. It is clear that the
various problems relating to transition cannot be dealt
with sequentially, for example by dealing with security
before humanitarian issues and humanitarian issues
before development. To the contrary, responses must be
devised at the outset in an integrated and coherent
fashion. The inter-agency report prepared under the
aegis of Ms. Carol Bellamy posits these principles
clearly and proposes concrete action to adapt our
traditional instruments to crisis situations and to
strengthen coordination. We must support their
implementation and continue the exercise, expanding it
to the World Bank, for example. It is particularly
important to articulate the various aspects of these
strategies in areas where diverse competencies must be
combined. Programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which are, as we
know, crucial, provide an example. The Secretariat and
the agencies, together with the international financial
institutions, could, based on past experience, agree to
define a framework that could then be applied
according to specific situations. We must also think
about financial instruments that would be best suited to
these integrated strategies. This is a complex issue, and
a realistic analysis of the options might be a first step.

Finally, I should like to emphasize the question of
follow-up to strategies, which is probably one of the
greatest weaknesses in the systems established by the
international community. The lack of stringent follow-
up machinery is, from our standpoint, quite probably
one of the causes of some of the failures that have
occurred. Experience has shown that, once the crisis
has passed, political attention and international
mobilization decline sharply. However, transition
requires a sustained commitment over several years; a
capacity to adapt to priorities depending on how events
unfold; and, if necessary, immediate responses if
serious difficulties arise.

We must therefore consider political and
administrative mechanisms that enable an effective
follow-up of the progress made, warn of obstacles and
propose remedies. Such mechanisms must involve the
members of the Security Council, the countries
concerned, major donors, regional and subregional
organizations, and international financial agencies and
institutions. They must be active in the field as well as
in New York or Geneva. The small group that we
established under the resolution on Haiti falls into that
category. Groups established by the Economic and
Social Council are also designed to devise a response.
This formula, to which we are quite naturally turning,
must be more clearly defined and used more widely.

Secondly, as many of us said in the course of our
discussions on 17 May, peacekeeping operations,
which often play a decisive role, must be part of
overall peace-building strategies. This is particularly
true in the case of complex crises, whose various
aspects are interdependent and could each doom to
failure the activities undertaken by the international
community.

I will not reiterate the suggestions made by our
delegation, among others, during our initial discussions
under the presidency of Pakistan, but I would like to
stress two points in particular.

First, planning for peacekeeping operations is
crucial. Is it possible to involve, at an earlier stage of
the process, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his assistants, including the
person in charge of humanitarian action and
development? Could we not make better use of the
experience of United Nations agencies, which often are
already active in the area at the time when planning
begins? Could we bring the phase of the assessment of
economic and social needs - which must involve the
World Bank - closer to that of the design of a
peacekeeping operation? We believe that these
questions should be considered by the Secretariat,
which could then share its observations with us.

Secondly, the institutional structure of a
peacekeeping operation and the selection of its
personnel must also take into account this requirement
for coherence. The appointment of an assistant special
representative of the Secretary-General who would also
be a resident coordinator and humanitarian coordinator
would be part of that framework. The skills and
experience of such an individual, whose task is indeed
complex, obviously are an important factor in the
success if the operation as a whole. Special
representatives themselves should also be, insofar as
possible, familiar with humanitarian and economic
issues. If that is not the case, appropriate training could
be provided in order to enable them better to discharge
their duties.

Experience has shown that, perhaps in this kind
of situation more than in any other, the United Nations
is indispensable in the process of the design and
implementation of responses to complex crises. The
United Nations, however, must be able to meet such
expectations through its own resources and by bringing
together all of the actors involved. It seems to me that
our discussion today is itself a contribution to that
effort.

