Mr. Swe (Myanmar): Mr. President, I thank you
for the opportunity to speak to the Security Council in
connection with Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari's visit to Myanmar under the Secretary-
General's good offices role mandated by the General
Assembly. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General
for his statement. I am also gratified to learn that
Mr. Gambari, after reporting to the Secretary-General,
has briefed the President of the General Assembly
earlier today.

Mention was made of a statement to be made
today on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN). I also understand that my colleague,
the Permanent Representative of Singapore, will also
be making a statement. Yesterday, when I contacted
him, he was kind enough to clarify to me that his
statement will not be on behalf of ASEAN.

At the meeting of the 10 permanent
representatives from ASEAN countries just before the
present meeting, the Permanent Representative of
Singapore was kind enough to share his statement with
us. Six permanent representatives, including Myanmar,
made known their views to Singapore, the recurring
chair of ASEAN, that they regard the statement in
question as a national statement by Singapore. The
statement is indeed forward-looking, but there are
some elements with which we have some difficulty,
particularly with regard to the reference to sanctions.

In the life of every nation, there are times when it
has to face challenging situations and overcome them.
Myanmar went through that experience very recently.
In fact, what Myanmar went through was indeed a
daunting challenge. However, we have been able to
restore stability. The situation has now returned to
normalcy. Currently, people all over the country are
holding peaceful rallies within the bounds of the law to
welcome the successful conclusion of the national
convention, which has laid down the fundamental
principles for a new constitution, and to demonstrate
their aversion to recent provocative demonstrations.

Let me now turn to Special Envoy Gambari's
visit to Myanmar. In that connection, I wish to deeply
thank Mr. Gambari for his briefing.

We had already agreed for Mr. Gambari to visit
Myanmar in November. However, after Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon met with my Foreign Minister
on 26 September and expressed his desire to dispatch
Ambassador Gambari to Myanmar at an early date, the
Government of the Union of Myanmar invited
Ambassador Gambari to visit Myanmar commencing
29 September.

Ambassador Gambari was accorded access and
full cooperation by the Myanmar Government during
his visit. He was received by Senior General Than
Shwe, the Chairman of the State Peace and
Development Council. He also had the opportunity to
hold separate meetings with the Acting Prime Minister
and Government spokespersons, led by the Minister for
Information. In addition, he met twice with Daw Aung
San Suu Kyi. Ambassador Gambari travelled to
northern Shan State and was able to witness the
prevalence of peace and stability even in those far-
flung areas. He witnessed a rally in support of the
successful conclusion of the National Convention by
some 120,000 people in Lashio. He also had occasion
to meet with the leaders of an armed group that had
returned to the legal fold and that had participated in
the National Convention.

Prior to the Visit of Ambassador Gambari,
maximalist positions were articulated by a number of
countries that Ambassador Gambari must meet our
Head of State and that Ambassador Gambari must also
meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Ambassador
Gambari has accomplished even more than what was
expected from his visit. Following the visit,
Ambassador Gambari passed through Singapore and
called on Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong in his
capacity as Chair of the ASEAN Standing Committee.
Subsequent to the meeting, the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Singapore issued a press release which
mentioned that Prime Minister Lee "was encouraged
by the access and cooperation given by Myanmar
Government to Mr. Gambari".

In view of the improved situation of peace and
stability in the entire country, and in particular in
Yangon and Mandalay, the curfew hours imposed in
those two cities have been shortened. The authorities
initially detained a number of people for questioning.
Those who had not infringed any serious laws were
later released. To date - as mentioned by Ambassador
Gambari - a total of 2,095 people, including 722
monks, have been released. Those who were released
also include the remaining locally recruited employee
of the United Nations Development Programme and
her family. More releases will follow.

On the political front, Myanmar will continue
with its policy of national reconciliation. We will
resolutely implement our seven-step road map to fulfil
the aspirations of the people. As part of the national
reconciliation process, our Head of State has relayed a
message through Ambassador Gambari to the effect
that, should Daw Aung San Suu Kyi renounce her
obstructive and confrontational stance, he would be
ready to meet her personally. I am also happy to inform
the Council that Ambassador Gambari has again been
invited to visit Myanmar some time in November.

We are encouraged by the position that was
expressed by the Secretary-General that no one can
address the complex challenges facing Myanmar better
than the Myanmar people themselves. I would like to
recall, as Ambassador Gambari just mentioned, what
Ambassador Gambari said to this body in an earlier
briefing: the good offices role is a process and not an
event. Patience, time and space are needed.

Cooperation with the United Nations is a basic
tenet of Myanmar's foreign policy. It is in that context
that we cooperate fully with the Secretary-General and
Ambassador Gambari in connection with the good
offices role mandated to the Secretary-General by the
General Assembly. The process is proceeding well.
More importantly, despite the recent tragic events,
the situation in Myanmar is not - I repeat, not - a
threat either to regional or to international peace and
security. I would like to express my deep appreciation
to the members of the Security Council that, both here
and at their capitals, have taken that position. No
Security Council action is warranted with regard to the
situation in Myanmar.

I would therefore like to call on the Security
Council to refrain from any action that would be
detrimental to the good offices role of the Secretary-
General mandated by the General Assembly. On our
part, we will continue to cooperate with the United
Nations. In that regard, I can do no better than to quote
my Foreign Minister, who, in his address to the
General Assembly, stated: "We will continue to work
closely and cooperate actively with the United
Nations" (A/62/PV.]3).

