Ms. Nehring (Germany): It is high time to send a
strong signal to all parties involved that the fighting has
to stop. That is what we heard today from many members
of the Security Council. It has to stop immediately. All
the parties and their international supporters must hear
it loud and clear from the Council: the only solution to
this conflict is political, not military.

The conflict in Libya has caused a humanitarian
disaster. We strongly condemn all attacks against
civilians, civilian infrastructure and humanitarian and
health workers. We urge all parties to the conflict to
comply with international humanitarian law to avoid
further casualties and protect the lives of civilians in
Libya. In particular, the most vulnerable people in
conflict-affected areas need immediate protection. A
tragedy like the one in Tajoura has to be prevented by
any means necessary.

Germany calls for the immediate closure of all
detention centres. We call upon all parties to return
to the negotiating table and commit to an immediate
ceasefire. We strongly support the call by Special
Representative Salame to institute an immediate
ceasefire and revive an inclusive political process under
United Nations auspices.

We are very concerned about ongoing violations
of the sanctions regime. We urge all States to
immediately take the necessary measures to ensure
the implementation of the arms embargo. The Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011), concerning Libya, made that very clear in
its letter of 17 July, reminding Member States of their
obligations to uphold the embargo. We need to take
more action in the Council. It is a question of credibility,
a question of whether we stand up for international law
and the decisions of the Council.

Let me conclude with some words on the release
of Mr. Moncef Kartas. We are very relieved about
the release of Mr. Kartas, one of the members on the
Committee's Panel of Experts. However, we reiterate
that Tunisia must abide by its obligations under the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations, and close all legal proceedings against
Mr. Kartas or ask for authorization to continue the
proceedings in line with the Convention.

