Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Since
this is the first time my delegation has taken the floor
during your presidency, Sir, I am pleased to extend
to you our sincere congratulations on the occasion of
your great country, the Russian Federation, assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June.

My delegation takes note of the excellent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2014/342) of 15 May 2014
and thanks the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Cote d'Ivoire, Ms. A'ichatou Mindaoudou,
for her briefing on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire. I must
say that my delegation fully shares the view of the
situation in Cote d'Ivoire she has just provided, and I
would like at this stage to make a few brief remarks to
buttress that shared perspective.

I note with satisfaction and welcome the exemplary
cooperation that characterizes the relations between my
country and the United Nations, in particular through
the presence of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire (UNOCI). The remarkable advances that Cote
d'Ivoire has seen since the end ofthe crisis it experienced
have been a result, in particular, of how excellent those
relations are. Indeed, we note that UNOCI has spared
no effort in supporting cote d'Ivoire in its various post-
crisis reconstruction projects.

In terms of security, the situation remains broadly
stable, and security sector reform is accelerating, as is
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. That
led, on 1 May, as noted in the report, to the disarmament
and demobilization of 22,590 ex-combatants.

Political dialogue is ongoing and is taking place
in a responsible manner. In that respect, the United
Nations facilitation, in particular that of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, has proven
very valuable. The national reconciliation process has
been successfully relaunched following the renewal of
the mandate of the Commission on Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation.

Economically, growth is increasing, and the
Government intends to focus on the fight against
poverty in order to make that economic growth more
inclusive. We are please to be able to corroborate that
the good results in various areas that are mentioned in
the report of the Secretary-General are a result of that
exemplary cooperation.

I would also like to highlight that my Government's
constructive cooperation with the Security Council has
led, after a transparent review of the sanctions regime in
Cote d'Ivoire, to the lifting ofthe embargo on diamonds
produced in Cote d'Ivoire and the partial lifting of the
arms embargo, in accordance with resolution 2153
(2014) adopted on 29 April.

All those positive developments have supported the
return of normalcy and stability in Cote d'Ivoire, and
that is why my delegation fully endorses the plan to
progressively reduce UNOCI's military contingents, as
proposed in the relevant paragraphs of the Secretary-
General's report on the issue. It is evident that, given
all those developments, the main challenge remains the
consolidation ofa stable security situation, in particular
given the upcoming elections in 2015.

In that regard, the President of the Republic, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, and his Government
are focusing all necessary efforts on the elections being
held in a peaceful climate in order to ensure lasting
stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

In conclusion, and given all the foregoing, I would
like to state that my delegation supports the renewal of
UNOCI's mandate, is very interested in the project to
create a regional quick-reaction force, as mentioned in
paragraphs 68, 69, and 70 of the Secretary-General's
report, and supports their effective implementation.

