Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Brahimi for his briefing on
the situation in Afghanistan. Under Ambassador
Brahimi's gifted leadership, the United Nations has
played an indispensable role, first in brokering a
political settlement between the Afghan parties, and
secondly in coordinating the international response to
the crisis in Afghanistan. Ambassador Brahimi's
effective defusing of tensions between the Afghan
parties continues to reinforce the fragile but growing
peace that exists in Afghanistan today.

The sustained commitment of the international
community will be vital to ensure that the people of
Afghanistan see tangible benefits from the political
process, and that those who would spoil the peace are
deterred from doing so. Canada is committed to
playing its full part in providing support to the people
of Afghanistan in their struggle to rebuild and reform
their country in the long term. After decades of war
and years of domestic conflict, confidence in civil
authority in Afghanistan is a precious and rare
commodity. If it is to endure and broaden, Afghans
must also see that they are full participants in a fair and
open political process.

(spoke in English)

We believe that the Loya Jirga in June was a
turning point, marking the first time in a generation
that political authority passed peacefully from one
Afghanistan Administration to the next. We were
heartened by the participation of thousands of Afghans
throughout the country. We were particularly
encouraged by the effective participation of some 200
women delegates in the Loya Jirga itself. We welcome
the appointment of three women to positions of
authority in the transitional Administration and the
appointment of a fourth to head the Human Rights
Commission of Afghanistan. This is a very good start.
We look to President Karzai and his Administration to
ensure that women are included going forward at every
level of decision-making and that women benefit fully
and equitably from the country's reconstruction.

The restoration of the rule of law and the
enjoyment of tangible benefits of peace throughout
Afghanistan are key both to breaking the cycle of civil
conflict and suffering and to ending the country's use
as a terrorist base. We are therefore deeply concerned
by reports of serious human rights violations in
Afghanistan, including attacks against minorities,
women and international humanitarian staff, to which
many other speakers here today have also referred. We
look to the transitional Administration to bring about
respect for international humanitarian and human rights
laws in Afghanistan as a priority.
Like others in the international community, we
were shocked and saddened to learn of the
assassination on July 6 of Vice-President Qadir. We
extend our condolences to his family and to the
Government and people of Afghanistan for their tragic
loss. We welcome the cooperation between the Afghan
authorities and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in the investigation of this crime. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. Mr. Qadir's
murder underscores the need to support the efforts of
the Afghan authorities to rebuild the country's security
and justice systems.

Canada was the Chair this year of the G-8, and I
am pleased to be able to say that the G-8 countries are
continuing their work with the Afghan Administration,
particularly with respect to security sector reforms and
peace-building, as well as reconstruction. G-8 Foreign
Ministers met in Whistler, British Columbia, in June
and agreed there to make security sector reforms in
Afghanistan a special focus of the G-8's work on
conflict prevention. It is equally clear that
humanitarian assistance is still urgently needed and
will be urgently needed for some time. The restoration
and maintenance of peace and security is essential if
reconstruction and development investments are to
endure in the long term.

In her meeting with President Karzai and others
earlier this month, Canada's Minister for International
Cooperation was apprised of the needs, priorities and
concerns of the Afghan authorities. She heard that the
international community has been slow for the most
part in translating its commitments of assistance into
tangible disbursements.

Canada is contributing to the security of
Afghanistan through the deployment of some 2,000
Canadian Forces combat personnel as part of Operation
Apollo, in the coalition campaign against terrorism.
Following the scheduled withdrawal of the 900-strong
Canadian battle group this summer, Canada will
continue to contribute to the coalition campaign
through Special Forces and a sizeable sea and air
presence.

The return of more than one and a quarter million
Afghan refugees and internally displaced persons this
year is a sign of hope and determination. The Afghan
diaspora, including a sizeable community in Canada,
represents a pool of talent and good will that could
prove instrumental to the reconstruction effort.
However, as they often lack even basic mechanisms of
support, returnees remain particularly vulnerable to the
difficult circumstances that await them at home. There
is a need to effectively link humanitarian and
transitional activities so that these returns can be
sustained.

The transitional Administration faces a shortfall
in its budget of $377 million needed to pay civil
servants, security sector personnel and teachers. In
recent meetings in Canada, G-8 leaders and Foreign
Ministers, as well as G-7 Finance Ministers, have
acknowledged the need to translate pledges of support
into actual programming in Afghanistan and have
undertaken to ensure that donor commitments are
delivered without delay. We have therefore announced
the $10 million contribution to the Afghanistan
Reconstruction Trust Fund, which will help defray
recurring costs of the transitional Administration and
provide for quick-impact projects to demonstrate the
benefits of peace to the Afghan people.

Canada has now disbursed or approved a little
over $40 million of the $100 million that it pledged in
Tokyo. Disbursement of the remaining $60 million will
proceed apace. We recognize that we, like others, will
have to do better than we have done. Canada will
support a broad range of peace-building, security and
humanitarian assistance, transitions and reconstruction
initiative over the rest of this year.

The needs of Afghanistan are profound and
immediate and require more than our rhetoric to
address. The Afghan people are counting on the donor
community to make good their commitments. And we
do all need to do better.

