Mr. Gambari: Last Friday, the Secretary-General
reported on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006) (see S/2006/670). The Council
has been regularly briefed on the situation in Lebanon
and northern Israel. Indeed, the Secretary-General's
Envoys Terje Roed-Larsen and Vijay Nambiar are
today concluding meetings in Israel, after earlier
consultations in Lebanon, as part of the process of
preparing the report requested by the Council in
paragraph 10 of resolution 1701 (2006). Today's
briefing will therefore be focused on the Palestinian
issue. In the light of the emphasis, in paragraph 18 of
resolution 1701 (2006), on the need for comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East based on
Security Council resolutions - starkly highlighted by
events of the last two months - it is necessary, in our
View, to step back from the events of the past month
and consider the state of the peace process in the
region in the light of the developments of the past year.
For that reason, I will not report in detail on the events
of the past month alone, serious as they have been.

This time last year, Israel was disengaging from
Gaza and part of the northern West Bank. Led by the
Quartet, the international community was working to
ensure that that step would lead the parties back to the
road map, and to the revival of the economy of the
occupied Palestinian territory. Sadly, those hopes have
not been fulfilled. Far from advancing towards the
vision of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security, we have seen that vision slip
further away during the past year. There are, in our
opinion, several reasons for that unfortunate
development.
06-47530
The first is the political positions and actions of
the parties. While President Abbas remains firmly
committed to his platform of peace, the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority, appointed pursuant to the
25 January elections, has not fully committed itself to
the basic principles of the peace process: non-violence,
recognition of Israel and acceptance of previous
agreements. Although factional tensions persist, a
broad spectrum of political and other Palestinian forces
are currently engaged in a dialogue to put in place a
national unity Government with a new programme. In
the meantime, While efforts to strengthen Palestinian
border management and the security services that fall
under the purview of the President continue, the
Palestinian reform agenda is largely frozen, and with it
Palestinian compliance with road map obligations.

On the Israeli side, the coalition Government has
stated a readiness to commence negotiations if the
Palestinian Authority accepts the basic principles of the
peace process and implements road map obligations.
But Israel has not transferred approximately $500
million it owes to the Palestinian Authority under the
Paris Protocol, and has itself failed to implement road
map obligations, including the freezing of settlement
activity and the removal of outposts. Meanwhile, it has
been planning for the future based on unilateral moves
to disengage from parts of the West Bank while
consolidating Israeli presence in other parts.

The second measure of the stagnation of the
peace process is the degradation of the Palestinian
Authority, the most tangible symbol of Palestinian
hopes for statehood, as well as of Israeli hopes for a
viable partner. The Palestinian Authority was already
facing serious difficulties at the end of 2005. While the
international community praised aspects of the
Palestinian Authority's response during the
disengagement process, the Authority's performance in
the months following disengagement was at best
mixed. The wage bill continued to grow as the
Palestinian Authority recruited more officers into the
security forces; security in Gaza deteriorated; and
rocket attacks on Israel continued.

By December of last year, key donors were
reconsidering their support to the Palestinian
Authority's budget, which was already depleted. The
Authority's domestic revenues have plunged further
since the January elections. The cumulative worth of
value-added-tax transfers collected by Israel but
withheld from the Palestinian Authority will be
06-47530

between $480 and $560 million by next month.
Palestinian Authority workers, who support a third of
the Palestinian population, have received only a
fraction of their salaries over the past six months.
Absenteeism in some areas of the civil service has now
reached over 40 per cent.

Restrictions on movement mean that the
Palestinian Cabinet has actually never met in one
place, and that ministers are confined either to Gaza or
to the West Bank. Moreover, several cabinet members,
including the deputy Prime Minister, and now both the
Speaker and the Secretary-General of the parliament,
are in Israeli detention. Other ministers are in hiding or
abroad, leaving ministries without policy direction and
creating disillusionment among the managers and
employees who remain at their posts.

Several ministry buildings in Gaza have been
damaged by Israeli shelling. Ministries increasingly
resort to United Nations assistance for fuel, transport
support and office equipment. As an indicator of the
deteriorating position of the Palestinian Authority, no
annual budget was published for the year 2006. The
Hamas Government's approach to running
ministries- for example, its promotion of Hamas
members into senior civil service positions - may
have also contributed to disillusionment. There have
also been constant tensions between the presidency and
the Government over the security services.

Mechanisms such as the Temporary International
Mechanism and the consolidated appeal of the United
Nations itself have been put in place to ensure that
basic goods and services are delivered and that
minimum cash payments are made to the needy. But
those mechanisms cannot replace the Palestinian
Authority. They do not generate economic growth and
they do not provide hope for Palestinians. The
Palestinian Authority has shown major weaknesses in
the past on security and on fiscal management. But
today its capacity to deliver is in rapid decline. The
continuation of that trend could lead to the collapse of
a key provider, stabilizer and interlocutor in the region,
to say nothing of Palestinian hopes for a Palestinian
State.

A third measure of the state of the peace process
is the most terrible of all, that is, suffering, destruction
and death from Violence. Israeli land, air and sea
operations, despite being said to be aimed at militants
or military targets, have killed large numbers of
3
civilians, including many children, and have caused
heavy damage to civilian infrastructure such as private
homes, bridges and power plants - particularly in
Gaza, where violence is a daily fact of life. In the West
Bank, too, Israeli incursions are a regular occurrence,
particularly in Nablus and Jenin, often causing
fatalities.

There have also been several Palestinian suicide
attacks in Israeli cities over the past 12 months. The
last was in April, but Israeli authorities report that they
have foiled many other attempted operations. Israeli
civilians living in towns and kibbutzes near Gaza have
endured regular Qassam rocket attacks. No Israeli
civilians have yet been killed by those rockets since
disengagement, but there have been injuries. If the
attacks continue, it will only be a matter of time before
there are fatalities.

The cycle of attack and counter-attack only leads
to increased human suffering, which is intolerable, on
all sides. As an illustration, in the past year a total of
41 Israelis have been killed, and nearly 480 injured, by
Palestinian violence. In the same period over 450
Palestinians have been killed, and over 2,500 injured,
by Israeli Violence. One hundred and ninety of those
deaths occurred since the capture of Corporal Shalit, on
25 June; meaning that the rate of Palestinian casualties
is comparable to the rate during Operation Defensive
Shield, at the height of the second intifada.

Meanwhile, no progress has been made in
securing the release of Corporal Shalit, despite calls for
his unconditional release. His parents have not even
received a "sign of life", which is the least his captors
could provide. Nor have the long-standing efforts of
President Abbas to secure Palestinian prisoner releases
yet borne fruit, despite his unrelenting efforts.

A fourth reason for the lack of progress towards a
negotiated two-State solution is the creation of facts on
the ground that would appear to prejudice final-status
issues. Settlement activities continue, with some 3,000
units reportedly under construction within existing
settlements. And despite several statements of intent
which have been reported to the Security Council,
unauthorized settlement outposts have not been
dismantled.

The barrier, large parts of which are on occupied
Palestinian territory, is now 51 per cent complete,
despite the July 2004 advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Once it is finished, in

addition to the 180,000 Palestinians in East Jerusalem,
approximately 60,500 West Bank Palestinians will
reside in areas between the barrier and the Green Line,
with restricted access to health, education and
employment services in both the West Bank and East
Jerusalem.

In East Jerusalem, the combination of settlement
activity, including in the E-1 area, barrier construction
and other administrative measures points to the
encirclement of the city that is intended to serve one
day as the capital of two States, while effectively
dividing the West Bank into two separate geographical
areas.

A fifth measure, in our opinion, is the economic
situation, since development is a building-block of
peace. The impoverishment in the Palestinian
territories is more severe now than it has ever been,
including during the period at the height of the second
intifada. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, some 70 per cent of
Palestinians are living below the poverty threshold, and
85 per cent of the population in Gaza is currently
receiving food aid. One simple indicator of increasing
Palestinian desperation is the fact that the number of
applicants to the emergency job creation programme of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East has doubled since
December 2005 .

The single biggest impediment to Palestinian
economic growth, according to the World Bank, is the
closure regime. The number of Israel Defense Forces-
manned and unmanned physical obstacles in the West
Bank has increased by 43 per cent since Israel's
disengagement from Gaza, despite the terms of the
Agreement on Movement and Access, which are
designed to achieve exactly the contrary. Meanwhile,
the Rafah and Karni crossings have been only partially
operational, at rates far lower than foreseen under the
Agreement on Movement and Access, in the light of
Israeli security concerns. Although the recent trends
have been positive, at least for imports, our monthly
reports show that, during 2006, less than 10 per cent of
Gaza's minimum daily export targets under the
Agreement have been achieved. Rafah has been closed
for all but two days of the past seven weeks, preventing
people from leaving or entering Gaza. Thousands of
Palestinian expatriate workers, who had come home for
family visits, are at risk of losing their visas and jobs if
they are not allowed to leave Gaza to return to the
countries where they work. Other aspects of the
Agreement on Movement and Access, including the
Gaza-West Bank link and progress on the airport and
seaport, are dormant.

The sixth measure of the state of the peace
process is perhaps the most worrying development of
the past year, difficult to quantify but easy to discern. It
has been in the attitudes of ordinary women and men.
Opinion polls suggest a woeful decline in confidence
in the peace process and in the prospects for a
negotiated settlement on both sides. This trend, already
plain before the recent conflict between Hizbollah and
Israel, may well have been strengthened by it. Few
people on either side believe that an end to the conflict
is in sight. On one side, the result could well be further
radicalization and support for violence and terror,
while, on the other, it could well be support for harsh
and excessive military action and unilateral measures.
Positions may thus be hardening, and they could
harden further unless a credible political process is
somehow revived.

I have described the reality of the peace process
today by seeking to describe what has actually
happened in the past 12 months. I have given reasons
why, in our view, we have reached this sorry juncture
in the Middle East peace process so that we can
reorganize and address the challenges ahead of us all.
The purpose is not to assign blame; no useful purpose
is ever served by that. I also recognize fully that
making peace is not easy. But the absence of a credible
political horizon, while in large part a consequence of
decisions, actions and inaction by the parties
themselves, is also partly a cause of some of those
decisions, those actions and that inaction. We must also
remind ourselves, as the Group of Eight stated at its
summit in July, that the absence of a comprehensive
solution is the root cause of the region's problems.
Progress towards a two-State solution would
undoubtedly facilitate the resolution of conflicts
elsewhere in the region, and vice versa.

The stalled state of the peace process should
therefore be regarded as unacceptable, both on its own
merits and because of its broader regional implications.
There are many concrete steps, some immediate, which
need to be taken in order to get out of the current crisis
and back towards a political path. As the Secretary-
General stressed on 11 August, something more is
needed: a renewed international effort in which the
various crises in the region are addressed not in

isolation and not bilaterally, but as part of a holistic
and comprehensive effort, sanctioned and championed
by the Security Council, to bring peace and stability to
the region as a whole. The tragedy we have witnessed
in the last month should, in our view, be converted to
an opportunity to take prompt, concerted action by all
parties to resolve the problems and issues in the region,
which have confronted us, without resolution, for far
too long.

