Mr. Rivard (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like at the outset to thank France for having convened
this open debate. I also wish to express my
appreciation to Ms. Amos, Mr. Le Roy and
Mr. Simonovic' for their remarks to the Council today.
The protection of civilians is a cross-cutting issue
involving various dedicated actors. Close collaboration
among these actors is key to ensuring that our approach
is effective, comprehensive and coherent.

Since the last open debate on this item (see S/PV.6427), the evolving situations in Libya, Cote
d'Ivoire and, most recently, Syria have once again
drawn the attention of the international community to
the protection needs of populations affected by
violence and armed conflict. Canada welcomes the
strong protection of civilians mandates for Libya and
Cote d'Ivoire adopted by the Security Council in
resolutions 1970 (2011), 1973 (2011) and 1975 (2011).
Deliberate and targeted attacks on civilian populations
must not be tolerated. In Libya, Canadian forces have
proudly joined other NATO allies and regional partners
in implementing these resolutions.

I would like to focus on three specific areas
where the Council's attention and action are required.

First, Canada believes that continued efforts are
required to ensure a coherent United Nations approach
to addressing protection issues. It is essential that
United Nations agencies work in close collaboration
with each other and build on each other's expertise.
The Security Council can play a leadership role
ensuring a comprehensive approach to addressing
protection issues. To that end, Canada strongly
encourages Council members to use all the tools at
their disposal, such as the aide-memoire
(S/PRST/2010/25, annex) and the informal group of
experts on the protection of civilians, to ensure greater
consistency in the manner the Council addresses
protection issues.

Secondly, it is critical that international
protection norms and comprehensive protection
strategies be more effectively implemented. That is
why Canada welcomes the framework for drafting
comprehensive strategies for the protection of civilians
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, which will
assist senior mission leadership to develop
comprehensive mission strategies. Building on this
initiative and past lessons learned, we also urge the
development of effective operational guidance on the
tasks and responsibilities of peacekeeping missions in
the implementation of protection of civilians mandates,
as recognized in resolution 1894 (2009).

Success can be truly achieved, however, only
when protection strategies are fully integrated into the
day-to-day work of United Nations country teams and
peacekeeping missions. Protection mandates need
therefore to be taken into account from the earliest
planning stages of a United Nations mission. It is
important that protection objectives be adequately
resourced and that training for military and civilian
mission staff be more consistent and readily available.
New missions to be deployed in the near future, such
as that in South Sudan, will offer opportunities to put
these concepts into practice.

(spoke in English)

Humanitarian access is also an important
component of a protection strategy. Humanitarian
actors require full, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to populations in need of assistance. The access
challenges facing humanitarian workers in Libya
highlight the challenges that remain. Canada calls on
the Council to continue efforts to systematically
monitor and analyse constraints on humanitarian
access.

It is also important that protection strategies be
clear, concrete and measurable. That can be ensured by
drawing on clear indicators and benchmarks, which can
help demonstrate where progress is being made and
where additional efforts are required. Monitoring and
reporting mechanisms contribute to ensuring that
violations of international human rights and
international humanitarian law are documented and
reported to the Council for consideration and action. In
this regard, Canada welcomed the Security Council's
adoption of resolution 1960 (2010) in December 2010,
which calls for the establishment of monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements to address
conflict-related sexual violence.

Finally, accountability for those who violate
international law by targeting civilian populations is
fundamental. Canada has been a consistent supporter of
the international courts and tribunals that strive to hold
individuals to account and contribute to the prevention
of such crimes. The recent decision of the Security
Council to refer the situation in Libya to the
International Criminal Court sent a clear message that
there will be consequences for committing serious
international crimes, including for those who have
ordered and incited illegal attacks on civilian
populations.

Strengthening accountability mechanisms in
national jurisdictions is also key, as it is States that
bear the primary responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting violations. Recent convictions of high-
ranking army officers for mass rape in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are providing a useful example,
and Canada commends these efforts.

In closing, Canada welcomes the Council's
continued attention to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. It is essential that the implementation
of protection strategies be strengthened through
concrete, effective and measurable actions. The
Council can count on Canada's full support so that
together we develop a better understanding of the
challenges that remain, identify effective means to
address the gaps and ensure that civilians everywhere
are better protected from the harms of armed conflict.

