Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland associates itself fully
with the earlier intervention of Spain, which was made
on behalf of the European Union.

As the Council is aware, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the European Union member States
held an extraordinary meeting in Luxembourg this
evening. I would like to draw attention to the important
statement made to the press afterward by Foreign
Minister Pique of Spain to the effect that the European
Union Ministers are in agreement that the most urgent
requirement is the implementation - immediately and
in their entirety - of resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002). This very night, Foreign Minister Pique and
High Representative Solana are travelling to the region
with the objective of meeting at the highest level with
the Government of Israel and the Palestinian Authority.

Ireland shares the grave concern of the Secretary-
General at the further aggravation of the situation on
the ground. We commend the clarity of the Secretary-
General's public statement of last Monday and the
leadership that he is showing at this very difficult time.
We strongly support what he has said. This is not a
time for the Security Council to take one side or the
other. Truly, in the current situation there is a great deal
of right and a great deal of wrong on all sides. It is for
the Council to help the parties get out of the current
crisis. They are incapable of doing so unassisted,
embedded as they are in impasse.

In welcoming the adoption of resolution 1402
(2002) last Saturday, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ireland, Mr. Brian Cowen, made a strong appeal for
the Israeli Government and the Palestinian Authority to
implement immediately and in full the terms of the
resolution and to respond to the wider appeals of the
international community. He said there can be no
justification for further killings or hostile actions which
serve to deepen hatred between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples. The peace and security of Israel
and a free and independent State of Palestine can be
secured through political negotiations alone. The
policy of violence, coercion and revenge which
currently prevails will lead only to further unnecessary
grief and suffering. Mr. Cowen went on to say that the
Security Council is acting on behalf of the international
community in pointing the way to the resolution of this
crisis. Israeli and Palestinian leaders must grasp this
opportunity and work together to overcome those who
would seek to perpetuate the conflict between their
peoples.

We are greatly disappointed, and we cannot
accept that even on the same day when resolution 1402
(2002) was adopted, key elements of the resolution
were downplayed and even repudiated. Since then, the
situation has deteriorated further. Let me add that it is
no virtue for any party to state that it has "not rejected"
resolution 1402 (2002). Member States of the United
Nations are, under the Charter, required to implement
resolutions of the Council.

Again, we condemn unreservedly the murder of
civilians by suicide bombings. Equally, we call for an
end to Israel's military attack on Ramallah and other
Palestinian towns, and we condemn unreservedly the
violations of international humanitarian law and of
United Nations conventions that have accompanied it.
We call for an immediate end to Israel's siege of
President Arafat, which is deeply dangerous and
unwise. We reject outright any intention to oblige the
elected leader of the Palestinian people to re-enter
exile. We deplore all violations of the blue line
between Lebanon and Israel. Ireland deeply deplores
widespread denials of human rights, including, first
and foremost, the right to life of Palestinians and
Israelis alike.

The overall context for forward movement is
clearly set out in resolution 1397 (2002). The elements
for immediate progress are clear. These are crystallized
in paragraph 1 of resolution 1402 (2002). Every
member of the Council expressly declared through the
Council President on 30 March that no sequence is
implied or required in the implementation of these
elements. We agree with the Secretary-General that we
need to take into account the legitimate security
concerns of Israel and the legitimate political
aspirations of the Palestinians at the same time.

There is a need to encourage most strongly the
continuing efforts of the "quartet". An even-handed,
sustained and determined engagement on the part of the
"quartet" - which is comprised of envoys of the
Secretary-General, the President of the United States,
the European Union and the Russian Federation - is
central and crucial. The "quartet" may in the
deteriorating circumstances need strengthening on the
ground at the political level. It would be
unconscionable and unacceptable if the "quartet" or
members of it were to continue to be prevented from
meeting with President Arafat. We call on all parties to
cooperate fully with the efforts of the "quartet".

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
question of deploying a third party on the ground
deserves to be further examined. It is, of course, crucial
that the Council maintain its active engagement with
the current crisis. The international community expects
and deserves no less. We should continue to receive
regular briefings from the Secretary-General in the
light of reports from his Special Coordinator.

The Government of Ireland, for its part, has been
in direct touch with Secretary-General Annan and both
sides in recent days, and we will continue to do our
utmost within the means available to us nationally, as a
member of the European Union, and here in the
Security Council to help deliver the parties and the
region from the current catastrophe.

