Mr. Henze (Germany): Like others, we are grateful
to you, Sir, for initiating an open debate on a subject
which is both of prime importance and, unfortunately,
very topical and also of major interest to my country.
Germany has been and continues to be one of the most
important havens for refugees and displaced persons.

Given the threat to security and stability posed in
some regions by massive flows of refugees across
international borders, in particular as witnessed in the
Great Lakes region, it is only appropriate that the Security
Council should turn to this question and examine ways to
contribute to protecting humanitarian aid to refugees and
displaced persons. What we are attempting to do today
cannot be but a first gathering of ideas and comparing of
concepts and we shall certainly have to revert to the
subject more often in the coming months and years.

My delegation would first of all like fully to endorse
what the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands
stated on behalf of the European Union.

Over the last couple of years, we have witnessed
some counter-current tendencies: on the one hand, an
increasing willingness, coupled with an improved
capability, on the part of the international community to
provide humanitarian assistance to refugees and other
affected populations; on the other, a worrisome
development whereby civilian populations are denied
humanitarian assistance by the Powers in control of the
territory, in clear breach of the norms of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The consequences of
these actions are nefarious and far-reaching. They range
from brutal death by starvation or lack of medical
attention to massive displacements of whole populations
striving for survival.

 
Apart from the traumatic consequences for the
individuals concerned, this also engenders problems for the
wider outside world. Neighbouring countries are faced with
problems of the instability and economic and financial
burdens that come with large refugee flows, but assistance
to refugees also places a considerable financial strain on the
international community as a whole. It can reduce resources
which are urgently needed for assistance in long-term
economic and social development.

It is important to distinguish between humanitarian
assistance and peacekeeping. Humanitarian agencies and
their personnel must preserve their impartiality and
independence so as not to be drawn into the conflict itself.
There are many situations in which humanitarian aid has
been and is still being delivered without the need for a
peacekeeping operation or where humanitarian agencies can
work side by side with such an operation without a special
need for protection. This is how it should be. But
sometimes, unfortunately, there simply is no choice.

When the neutrality of a humanitarian operation is
questioned by the parties to a conflict, when humanitarian
organizations are arbitrarily denied access to refugees and
displaced persons or access is prevented due to the security
situation in the area, and people's lives are put at risk
because of a lack of food and shelter, then the Security
Council is asked to take action.

This same idea was ably expressed in the Supplement
to "An Agenda for Peace". In many humanitarian crisis
situations,

"the resulting horrors explode on to the world's
television screens and create political pressure for the
United Nations to deploy troops to facilitate and
protect the humanitarian operation. While such images
can help build support for humanitarian action, such
scenes also may create an emotional environment in
which effective decision-making can be far more
difficult." (S/J995/J, para. 18)

Support for humanitarian action has often become an
important part of peacekeeping. Examples range from
Somalia and the former Yugoslavia to the latest conflict in
the Great Lakes region and Albania. To a large extent, it
was the humanitarian problem that started these operations.

On the other hand, the quotation also hints at an
underlying problem: since decisions regarding humanitarian
emergency situations are often influenced by pressure of
international public opinion, a considerable degree of ad
hoc decision-making often prevails. In other words, the
"emotional environment" is not always conducive to the
best, most logical or most feasible solution.

From this follows the need for political guidance.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, in
its report adopted just a few days ago, made an
interesting suggestion in this respect. While emphasizing
the need to differentiate between peacekeeping operations
and humanitarian assistance, it

"considers that peacekeeping operations can play a
role, subject to the mandates established by the
Security Council, in contributing to the creation of
a secure environment for the effective delivery of
humanitarian relief assistance. Accordingly, the
Special Committee believes there would be value in
achieving improved coordination between
peacekeeping operations and the United Nations and
other agencies or organizations within their given
mandates."

The role of the Security Council in this respect
begins with the mandate. Mandates have to be clear,
balanced and feasible. If they are not, the humanitarian
support operation may forfeit the consent of the parties
and is likely to fail. Mandates should also be clear about
who does what. This does not mean that they must deal
with all humanitarian assistance aspects as such. But they
must at least strive to assign a clear role to the
peacekeepers in this respect. Obviously, humanitarian
assistance, as a rule, should not be done by peacekeepers.
But, on the other hand, there may often be a reason for
some kind of dual role, both military and civilian, for
peacekeepers as well. In any event, it seems doubtful
whether there really is a clear-cut fault line between
peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance in a conflict
environment. Even humanitarian assistance as such will
be drawn, in one way or another, into the conflict's own
very specific logic. A mandate in an international
operation must take this into account, or else it will fail.

Coordination is not a one-way street. It calls for the
involvement of all competent bodies in the decision-
making process leading to a humanitarian operation. This
may include individual Member States, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and United
Nations and other agencies or organizations. The aim
must be to achieve a maximum of synergy between the
peacekeeping component and the activities of the other
actors, and to use their respective comparative advantages.
Efforts should be made to improve the flow of

 

information in all directions - to the Council in the form
of expertise, and from the Council as a political frame for
action.
At the field level, the coordinating role of the special
representative of the Secretary-General must be enhanced.
He or she must be the head of the family. But how far, in
real life, does this authority reach? Experience shows that
the special representative of the Secretary-General may be
able to have his say within the broader United Nations
family. But when it comes to individual Member States or
to non-governmental organizations, there is a clear limit to
such coordination. What, then, could be done to ensure that
the whole international community in the field, in a given
relief operation, moves in the same direction?

It is evident that a debate such as today's will of
necessity leave a number of questions open, yet those
questions constitute precisely one of the reasons for having
such an exchange. The issue of whether the Security
Council should, under certain circumstances, try to enforce
the delivery of humanitarian assistance, remains one of the
most contentious and thorny ones. Just one week ago, the
German President, Mr. Herzog, raised a similar point right
here in New York. He asked whether human rights should
be safeguarded using military means if need be, and
whether we were not even under a moral obligation to be
prepared to use military means in cases of actual or
potential genocide.

The situations we are discussing today tend to be
complex; distinctions between respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law, so clear in theory, are often
blurred in present-day conflicts. But while we might differ
as to whether a certain case constitutes a violation of
human rights or international humanitarian law, or whether
we should indeed consider enforcement operations to ensure
that humanitarian assistance can reach people in need, there
is another point we should be able to agree upon: United
Nations organs and individual Member States must not
leave any doubt, vis-a-vis the violators of these norms, that
they will be held accountable for such action or negligence.
We have seen encouraging signs over the past few years:
war-crimes tribunals have been established, and negotiations
on an international criminal court are currently under way.

We have witnessed dramatic changes in Zaire, or the
Democratic Republic of Congo. A number of events which
have occurred there over the past months have a direct
bearing on the subject of today's debate. My Government
urges President Kabila to reaffirm his commitment,
previously given to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), and to extend to
it his full cooperation. We also call on the new
Government to enable the Commission of Enquiry, which
was mandated by the Commission on Human Rights, to
expeditiously fulfil its task and extend to it, too, its full
cooperation.

As I stated at the outset, today's debate can only be
a beginning. We look forward to continuing this debate
with all other interested delegations so that we can come
up with pragmatic and viable solutions for those in need,
who have set their hopes on the United Nations.

