Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by thanking Ms. Rosemary A.
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and Ms. Ursulla Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for their comprehensive and
detailed briefings on the political situation in Ukraine,
as well as the humanitarian situation.

The Minsk agreements remain the basis of the
international community's commitment to the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Ukraine. We therefore
call on the parties to the conflict to respect the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, signed in
February 2015 and endorsed in resolution 2202 (2015),
as the only way to achieve stability in the region.

Reducing tensions requires the cooperation and
effort of the parties involved in the conflict. That is
why the continued non-compliance with the ceasefire
on both sides is of great concern. In that regard, we
condemn and regret the assassination of Mr. Alexander
Zakharchenko on 31 August and call on the parties
to respect the maintenance of the ceasefire and to
cooperate and assist in reducing tension.

We encourage the parties to refrain from actions
that could aggravate and destabilize the situation,
thereby undermining the efforts of the international
community, including those of the Security Council, to
seek a peaceful solution to the crisis. We remind the
parties that the solution to the crisis in the region can be
achieved only by peaceful means through direct, frank
and inclusive negotiations, and that they should aim
for a final and just solution that will help to strengthen
harmonious relations among the different ethnic groups
of Ukraine and between Ukraine and the countries of
the region.
Of concern is the impact on the civilian population
of the violence and instability of the protracted conflict,
which is causing economic and human losses in the
region, aggravating the suffering of the population and
forcing the displacement of people from their homes.
In that regard, we appreciate the work and effort of the
humanitarian actors and the Office of the Coordinator
of Humanitarian Affairs in providing humanitarian aid.

The solution to the crisis in Ukraine cannot
be military but must be political. Therefore, the
international community must continue to support
all diplomatic efforts for a political solution to the
crisis. In conclusion, we stress the need for the parties
to continue to make use of established means to help
resolve the conflict, such as the Normandy quartet, the
Trilateral Contact Group and other key actors.

