The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Costa Rica, Egypt, Finland, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Kenya, Monaco, Mongolia,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, South
Africa, the Sudan, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Republic of
Tanzania and Zambia, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhadi
(Afghanistan), Mr. Baali (Algeria), Ms. Coelho Da
Cruz (Angola), Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh), Mr. Sychov
(Belarus), Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina),
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Ms. Rasi (Finland), Mr. Insanally (Guyana),
Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia),
Mr. Hasan (Iraq), Mr. Takasu (Japan), Ms. Odera
(Kenya), Mr. Boisson (Monaco), Mr. Enkhsaikhan
(Mongolia), Mr. Chomar (Mozambique), Mr. Powles
(New Zealand), Mr. Hanningstad (Norway),
Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines), Mr. Monteiro
(Portugal), Mr. Lee (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Ubalijoro (Rwanda), Mr. Tomka (Slovakia),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan),
Mr. Beyendeza (Uganda), Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine),
Mr. Mwakawago (United Republic of Tanzania) and
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, if I hear no
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation to the Permanent Observer of
Switzerland to the United Nations to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Maurer
(Switzerland), took the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

The first speaker on my list is the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara Otunnu. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.


