Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): The adoption of
today's resolution marks another step forward in Haiti's
progress towards a fully functioning democracy. The
resolution pays well deserved tribute to the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), to the Secretary-General's
Special Representative and to those countries which have
contributed to the Mission. UNMIH is well on the way to
achieving the goals set out for it in resolution 940 ( 1994).
My Government takes particular note of the
Secretary-General's belief that, as envisaged in that
resolution, the mandate extension for UNMIH which this
Council has just authorized should enable the Mission to
complete its tasks.

My Government wishes to congratulate UNMIH on
the smooth transition from the multinational force and on
the success of its mission so far. We welcome the holding
of legislative elections, but we share the concerns of others
at reports that irregularities occurred during the process. It
is important that those responsible for organizing the next
round of elections focus on solving the logistical and
administrative problems which emerged.

My Government will continue to support the efforts of
the international community to restore security and
democracy in Haiti, but the final responsibility for this rests
with the people of Haiti itself. It is therefore essential that
all political parties should participate in the electoral
process, with a view to achieving the conclusion of the
mandate of UNMIH as outlined in the Secretary-General's
report.

We are encouraged by the confidence of the Secretary-
General that the monthly cost of UNMIH will be contained
within the amount already authorized by the General
Assembly. This welcome evidence of effective management
should not, however, divert us from the need to find an
equitable long-term solution to the problem of financing
peace-keeping operations. As my delegation has made clear
on other occasions, we would not wish to confront a
situation in which the sponsors of a resolution and the
direct beneficiaries of enhanced regional stability were
unable to assure the United Nations of their ability to pay
their contributions to the United Nations in full while
others were doing so.

In conclusion, my delegation looks forward to the
continued consolidation of representative Government and
peaceful civil society in Haiti over the coming months
and to the conclusion of UNMIH's mission after a
successful presidential election and inauguration early
next year.

