Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I would like, Mr. President, to commend you
and thank you for having taken the initiative of this
public debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The fact that you personally are presiding
over this debate, Mr. Minister, reflects the importance
that your country, Algeria, in particular, and Africa in
general accord to this topic. I would also like to
express by gratitude to the Secretary-General, who,
through his periodic reports on this topic, has
continued to focus the attention of the Security Council
on the protection of civilians. We can never repeat too
often that that issue is critical for the maintenance of
international peace and security, which is the principal
role of the Security Council. And finally, our thanks go
also to Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator. We were most grateful for the clarity and
the comprehensive nature of his introductory briefing.

Upon the initiative of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations has been more mobilized to protect
civilians, especially since 1999. As he mentioned in his
report contained in document S/2004/43l, the
Secretary-General initiated an agenda on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict five years ago, long after
the world silently witnessed genocide in Rwanda.
Since then the Security Council, through its resolutions
and on the basis of proposals made by the Secretary-
General in his nearly annual reports on the subject
under consideration today, has made a number of
important commitments to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Council enshrined those
commitments in the form of a lO-point platform and
included them in resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000). The Council also broadened the mandates of
peacekeeping operations to include the physical
protection of civilians under imminent threat of
violence.
Lastly, in its field missions and its cooperation
with regional organizations, the Council has
demonstrated the importance it attaches to the issue
and to the effective implementation by all parties to an
armed conflict of the Council's pertinent resolutions.
For its part, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, thanks to the excellent help spontaneously
given by contributing countries, has been able to
deploy peacekeeping forces more quickly to avert
immediate crises with regard to protection, as well as
to re-establish order.

Much more still needs to be done, however,
despite the generous support of the United Nations
system, which is developing a common and clear
concept of the notion of protection, the strengthening
of the general policy framework and coordination
between United Nations agencies.

In considering the areas that the Council has
identified as priorities in the protection of civilians, the
Secretary-General has noted some lingering
shortcomings and suggested more in-depth actions that
he considers relevant. Cote d'Ivoire endorses his
analysis, supports his recommendations and echoes his
conclusions. In that connection, we would once again
like to draw the Council's attention to the several
following points.

First, there is a need for the United Nations to
abandon the cliches born of previous conflicts that it
mechanically applies to conflicts currently being
resolved. A case in point is the presumed existence of
hate media in my country, C6te d'Ivoire, without any
specific evidence being presented for such a serious
allegation. It is important that the Ivorian situation be
put in its proper context. This is a case in which the
media in rebel-held areas have been used for rebellious
propaganda against the State, without eliciting any
reaction whatever from the international community.
Moreover, although in the Government of National
Reconciliation the dossier of the Minister of State in
charge of communications is held by a minister who
comes from the rebellion, State media and newspapers
in Government-held areas are banned from rebel-held
areas, even though newspapers that defend rebel
positions circulate freely in the Government-held area.
This is a paradox that must be kept in mind before
passing hasty judgements.

Secondly, in addition to warring parties, all parts
and members of society should be represented so that
there may be gender equality in peace processes and in
order to establish a favourable climate for lasting
peace.

Thirdly, peace agreements should include a
commitment to proceed to disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation (DDRR)
at the beginning of a peace process. By making it
possible to begin as soon as possible efforts on behalf
of women and children - who are usually the most
disadvantaged and harmed members of civilian
populations - DDRR programmes also contribute to
the re-establishment and gradual strengthening of
mutual trust.

Fourthly, as in the case of the conflict in C6te
d'Ivoire, all of today's conflicts also have a regional
dimension. Peace agreements should therefore be
negotiated and implemented in that context. Efforts to
strengthen peace after conflict should also be made
regionally. That is not merely for the sake of
regionalization itself, but because of the enormous
need to place peace agreements in a regional context as
the only way of giving such agreements a realistic
chance of being implemented successfully through
region-wide partnership, responsibility and solidarity.
Those are all things that the Council's experience has
taught it are irreplaceable.

Fifthly and lastly, the international community -
and primarily the Security Council - should now
reaffirm their dedication to the principles of
international law, international humanitarian law and
human rights, all of which are founded on justice,
respect for human dignity and the dignity of nations,
the prevention of conflict and the peaceful resolution
of disputes and which favour the force of law and not
the law of force. C6te d'Ivoire therefore reiterates its
call to immediately integrate the forces of Operation
Licorne into the United Nations Mission in Cote
d'Ivoire, for reasons that have been put forth in recent
correspondence to the President of the Council and the
Secretary-General. Likewise, we once again note the
urgent need for the Council to respond to our request to
send an impartial international commission of inquiry
to Cote d'Ivoire to look into the events that have taken
place since the beginning of November. As the
President is aware, those events have led to a chorus of
allegations of shooting at unarmed civilians and bare-
fisted protesters. All of us know the sad results of those
events, namely, over 60 dead and more than 2,000
wounded.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that the protection of civilians in
armed conflict is undoubtedly part of broader respect
for international law, international humanitarian law,
human rights and combating impunity. The obligation
incumbent upon Member States to respect those
universal principles must not be a selective one. The
credibility of the Organization depends upon it.

