Mr. Whitely: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia,
align themselves with this statement.

We warmly thank today's briefers, in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, to whom we lend our full support.
We also thank the French presidency of the Council for
organizing today's debate.

The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has strengthened the obligations for our
States to make progress on the promotion and protection
of the rights of the child, including on eliminating
all forms of child labour and the recruitment and
use of child soldiers. We welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821), which shines a light on gross violations
of child rights and the dire condition of children in
many conflict situations. The annual report plays a
crucial role in providing us with verified and impartial
information collected through the monitoring and
reporting mechanism.

We welcome the commitment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhancing
engagement with Member States with a View to
preventing violations before they occur. The European
Union stands ready to support her in her efforts.

Earlier this year, we marked the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 51/77, which created the mandate on
children and armed conflict. Since then, we have
seen significant progress in the protection of children
in conflict situations. Since 2000, more than 115,000
child soldiers have been released, 29 action plans have
been signed with parties to conflict, and the Security
Council has adopted 11 resolutions on children and
armed conflict. There have been 167 ratifications of
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict. Recent success stories include the two new
action plans in Mali and the Sudan, and the release of
significant numbers of children in the Central African
Republic and in the Philippines.

Despite this progress, the Secretary-General's
report highlights some very worrying trends. Children
continue to be exposed to an unacceptable risk of
killing and maiming, with an alarming increase in child
victims in a number ofconflict situations, while in some
country situations the recruitment and use of children
has considerably worsened. We strongly condemn the
use of abhorrent tactics of warfare by a number of
parties to conflict, including forcing children to be
suicide bombers. The denial of humanitarian access to
children has also been highlighted as a worrying trend
in the Secretary-General's report.

The EU is committed to preventing and responding
to these violations. At the end of last year, the EU began
the implementation of selected projects in Colombia,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Lebanon and the occupied Palestinian territory targeted
at children associated with armed forces and groups and
children affected by armed violence, supporting efforts
to secure their release and ensure their comprehensive
and successful reintegration into societies through
long-term interventions, but also working on preventing
their recruitment and use.

In his latest annual report, the Secretary-General
documents attacks on schools in almost all countries
on the children in armed conflict agenda, with 753
incidents verified in 2016 alone. The EU condemns
such attacks, which are incompatible with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and which also exacerbate the barriers to education that
exist in conflict-affected countries.

The EU is deeply concerned by the continued
practice of the use of schools for military purposes,
which not only puts students and teachers in danger
by turning schools into military targets, but also
hinders access to education, causes damage to school
infrastructure and lead to interruptions of classes.
Education is a key component in preventing the
recruitment and use of children by armed forces and
groups, offering safe spaces for children displaced
by conflicts.

The EU attaches great importance to the protection
of the right to education and the provision of safe,
inclusive and quality education in conflicts. Up from
1 per cent in 2015, the EU's commitment to education in
emergencies has reached 6 per cent of the humanitarian-
aid budget in 2017 and will increase to 8 per cent in
2018, significantly above the global average. EU
humanitarian funding has supported the education of
over 4.7 million children in 50 countries.

Girls' right to education is particularly affected
in times of conflict as their schools are often directly
targeted by attacks. Even when schools are operating
in situations of armed conflict where girls' enrolment
rates were high prior to the conflict, some parents
prevent girls from going to schools due to insecurity or
because the facilities are being used by armed actors.
Girls are also significantly affected by the recruitment
and use of armed forces and groups, with some
estimates indicating that as many as 40 per cent of
children associated with armed forces or armed groups
are female. Given these additional challenges for girls,
the EU focuses on ensuring that the specific obstacles
to education of girls in emergencies are taken into
account in its activities and programming. Girls should
no longer constitute the invisible side of reintegration
programmes for children released from armed forces
and groups.

Birth registration plays an important role in
protecting children under 18 years of age from unlawful
recruitment by armed forces and groups. Following
an initial pilot programme, the EU has committed
€4 million to UNICEF for a regional programme in
Africa on strengthening birth-registration systems,
which adds to the numerous projects the EU is supporting
to strengthen national services for civil registration and
vital statistics as a matter of good governance.

It is also important to ensure that recruiters of
children in armed forces and groups are held accountable
for their acts and face justice. We must expand our
efforts for the construction of robust justice systems
aligned with international standards in all countries,
protecting children and preventing Violations of their
rights. We must ensure a better access of children to
justice with stronger juvenile-justice systems.

