Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation appreciates the
convening of this meeting and the important briefings
delivered by our guest speakers: Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix, High Commissioner Bachelet and
Executive Director Viaud, whose heartfelt words
touched everyone here. I would also like to welcome
the presence of His Excellency Haitian Minister for
Foreign Affairs Bocchit Edmond.

The Dominican Republic and Haiti are two nations
that are irrevocably tethered by geography and history.
Our past is as connected to our neighbour's as our
future undoubtedly is, and that requires a common
commitment to the well-being of our peoples. That is
why, at the bilateral level, our solidarity with Haiti is
ongoing, as is our desire for the relations between our
two countries to make progress in all areas.

At the multilateral level, we are pleased to note
that all those present also recognize the importance of
ensuring that Haiti receive all possible support in order
to fully develop its capacities and improve the living
conditions of its citizens. We therefore support all the
initiatives that have so far been implemented by the
United Nations for the stabilization and reconstruction
of Haiti.

The transition from the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti to the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in October
2017 marked a milestone by moving from a stabilization
operation to a justice support Mission. In doing so, the
progress made was recognized, which led to elections
that the international community recognized as valid,
both for their transparency and smooth running. The
emphasis is now on supporting and reinforcing areas
such as the training of the Haitian National Police and
the judicial institutions. Since then and according to
the report of the Secretary General (S/2019/l98), we
have seen clear progress made in the strengthening of
those areas, with greater capacity for the independent
action of the Haitian National Police, the uptick in
the number of officers and its increased access to
training programmes.

We are also optimistic about the successes of
MINUJUSTH'S community violence-reduction
programme, as well as the drafting of a new law to
combat gender-based violence, among other actions.
That programme will be of particular benefit to young
people, given that they have support in cases of risk and
access to psychological assistance, vocational training
and leadership opportunities. Young Haitians need to
be able to count on having opportunities to develop
their skills and receive and acquire knowledge, as they
are the driving engine of the sustainable development of
their people. We recently made available to the Office
of Rule of Law and Security Institutions our experience
in the area of social inclusion with a view to spurring
the implementation of similar projects in Haiti.

We are steadfast in sharing the Secretary-General's
desire to move towards a new stage in the relations
between the United Nations and Haiti. However, we
also believe that it is important to not rush, so as to not
jeopardize the gains already achieved. We believe that
only once the achievements made in Haiti have proved
to be sound and sustainable can new forms of relations
be explored.

Despite the hopeful progress already mentioned,
the report notes that only 49 per cent of the benchmarks
will be met or will remain on a positive trend. The others
show a static or negative trend. The report therefore
points to several areas where significant structural
weaknesses persist.

In spite of the increasing professionalization of
the police, it still lacks the tools to ensure consistent
performance, with adherence to human rights and a
proportional use of force. Its investigative capacity is
low, as well as the rate of cases that is referred to the
courts. According to the report, a significant portion
of the recent protests surpassed the Haitian National
Police's capacity to respond, in addition to the conditions
not being in place to secure the budgetary allocation
necessary to just maintain the pace of progress to date.

At the same time, we also see that the report
concludes that progress in judicial matters has been
very limited. While the number of officers, prisons and
their staff has increased, the rate of pre-trial detention,
which exceed two years, as well as the rate of deaths
in custody have increased. We also have not seen the
legislative advances needed to remove the obstacles to
access to justice that afflict citizens and to give due
attention to cases involving minors.

The Special Envoy concludes that the conditions
are not yet in place to ensure political stability. In fact,
she believes that the risk presented by violent armed
groups has increased, and that there is a very high
level of mistrust within the population regarding the
effectiveness of the judiciary.
Haiti also lacks system to respond to threats, such
as natural disasters, environmental degradation, cholera
transmission and food insecurity. In the meantime, the
report notes that, by its publication, only 13 per cent of
the funds pledged for the humanitarian response plan
had been mobilized, which would benefit 2.2 million
people - only 13 per cent.

From an economic point of View, the situation has
been seriously affected by a fiscal shortfall, inflation
and the devaluation of the Haitian gourde, with the
well-known impacts on governance. In addition, both
tariff and non-tariff barriers are causing artificially
high prices and stimulating the illegal trade in goods.

For all those points, in our opinion, there is reason
enough to prompt a rethinking of the time frame for
implementing the road map proposed in the Secretary-
General's report.

The situation facing the interim Government,
which was formed after the recent resignation of the
Prime Minister, Mr. Jean Henry Ceant, has highlighted
the fragility of the strides made to date on the way
towards entrenching democratic institutions. The truth
is that Haiti is in danger of getting caught in a vicious
cycle. To break it, the key is no other than resolving
the political instability in the country. Understanding
that will make it easier for us to have a clearer idea of
the next steps to take. It is absolutely crucial that the
legislative elections scheduled for October of this year
take place in a climate of peace, calm and transparency,
in accordance with Haitian law. The ability of the
Haitian Government to lead this process is key to the
legitimacy of the democratic system and, therefore, to
the current and future stability of the country.

In that connection, we must ensure the full
participation of women in this process as candidates,
as voters and as part of formal electoral mechanisms
to ensure equitable representation. The prudent thing
to therefore do at this time is to leave all doors open
with respect to the ways that the United Nations can
help. The Council could assess whether the conditions
are right for postponing the start of the dissolution of
MINUJUSTH. In addition, we call for the continued
preparation of a political mission to make substantive
contributions to the creation of solid and modern
institutions. We believe that such a mission should
be ambitious in scope and support the exploration of
all available mechanisms, including an exhaustive
study of how to include Haiti on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission and ensure its access to the
Peacebuilding Fund.
The Haitian people and the Government have
shown that they are willing to do the work to fix their
situation. As such, they deserve the unconditional
support of the Security Council. If we succeed in
consolidating political stability in Haiti, it will become
the cornerstone upon which to bolster the economic,
social and human rights progress that the Haitian
people deserve and demand.

