Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's debate. I would also like to express
my appreciation and thanks to Ms. Sandra Honore,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her very important briefing. I would like to thank the
personnel of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their commitment and their
work in very difficult circumstances.

(spoke in English)

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
MINUSTAH issued on 4 March (S/2015/157). Although
various challenges persist, we are very pleased to
see progress and positive signs in the stabilization
and recovery process in Haiti. We recognize that
developments in the political process, which include
the holding of long-overdue elections, the increase in
the capacity of the Haitian National Police, the 50 per
cent reduction in new cases of cholera last year and so
forth, are the result of efforts by the Haitian authorities,
its people and the international community, including,
of course, MINUSTAH. Japan is proud to see those
improvements in Haiti since it dispatched approximately
2,200 Self-Defense Forces personnel to the country.

With respect to political developments in Haiti,
Japan highly appreciates the concrete progress that has
been made so far. Examples include the establishment
of the new provisional Electoral Council in January, the
promulgation of the electoral decree by the President of
Haiti on 2 March and the announcement of election dates
on 11 March. Japan strongly hopes that the elections
will take place in a just and transparent manner.

Mr. Bertoax took the Chair.

From that point of View, the Government of Japan
signed a document with the United Nations Development
Programme on 11 March to provide approximately
$4.5 million to assist in the smooth holding of
elections. We also expect this effort to contribute to
nation-building, which includes supporting democracy,
respect for the rule of law and stable peace.

We welcome resolution 2180 (2014), adopted
last October, which provides for the drawdown
of MINUSTAH's forces and a reduction in police
component levels. The human and financial resources
that the United Nations can invest in peacekeeping
missions are limited. It is imperative that we reduce
the size of missions when concrete progress is being
made by them, as the need to create new missions and
reinforce others is real. The success of a peacekeeping
mission means that it has created an environment in
which it is no longer needed.

In conclusion, I would like to say that Japan counts
on the continuous and strong leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, so that MINUSTAH can achieve success in the
context Ijust mentioned, by accomplishing its mandate,
which includes assistance with the upcoming elections.

