Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Trade of Ireland, Mr. Gilmore.
The priorities of the Irish chairmanship presented to
the Security Council establish a solid base for
implementing well-designed plans, which it is our hope
will allow that organization to reach a qualitatively
new level. We all want to see an OSCE that is more
effective and meets the interests of all its member
States.

12-2284]
The Russian Federation advocates a
comprehensive development and improvement of
cooperation between the United Nations and its
Security Council, on the one hand, and regional and
subregional mechanisms on the other, among which the
OSCE occupies an important place. Such cooperation
should be based on the solid foundation of the United
Nations Charter, especially Chapter VIII, taking due
account of the relative advantages of these global
organizations and mechanisms. There is no doubt that
the Security Council holds the principal responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.

The OSCE enters the new year with a solid set of
tools for establishing a community of equal and
undivided security, stretching from Vancouver to
Vladivostok. First and foremost is the problem of
transnational threats and challenges, such as combating
drugs, the framework for police activity and the
counter-terrorism mandate of the OSCE. We look
forward to the completion of agreements on the
strategic instruments and the adoption of relevant
decisions.

An important challenge is to develop confidence-
building measures in the use by member States of
information and communication technology to bolster
the United Nations global efforts to improve
international information exchange and security. We
hope that the outcome of the annual security review
conference, as well as the conferences on combating
drugs and terrorism, will make major regional
contributions to these global efforts, including those
conducted under Security Council auspices.

The OSCE human dimension requires rethinking,
above all in rejecting selectivity on country and
thematic issues and to give due prominence to
important themes in human rights issues. Crisis
resolution remains one of the key functions of the
OSCE. We believe that the lasting settlement of
conflicts is possible only through substantive, creative
negotiations towards compromise, involving all
concerned parties. To that end, the OSCE chairmanship
should take into account that some of the so-called
frozen conflicts no longer need to be so. Our approach
must take account of new geopolitical realities.

We hope that the work of the OSCE in 2012 in
that area will be based on the agreed principles of
settlement: consensus, the rule of international law, the
peaceful settlement of conflicts through negotiations
within existing forums, the unacceptability of the use
of force, and consent by all parties to conflicts to the
measures proposed by the OSCE. We support efforts to
reform the OSCE to make its work more effective,
especially by reviewing its founding document. We
hope that Ireland will pursue efforts in that matter.

We hope that the philosophy of the Irish
chairmanship set out by Mr. Gilmore goals will allow
the organization to overcome the crises of recent years
and to adapt to the new global realities. We are ready to
work with the Irish chairmanship and all other
participating States on this issue. We wish Mr. Gilmore
every success in addressing the current urgent
challenges facing the OSCE.

