Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for their briefings. We
welcome the convening of this informative meeting,
which is particularly timely in View of the challenges
raised by what are called new threats to international
security, which are increasingly serious and
multidimensional in nature.
In the wake of the Security Council's thematic
debate on drug trafficking as a threat to international
security in Africa held last December (see S/PV.6233),
today's meeting contributes to a larger discussion of
the threats to international security, which extend
beyond borders, harm States and affect conflicts in
various parts of the world.

Experience has shown that organized crime has
become another factor that exacerbates conflicts in
situations where institutions are still fragile. This
scourge is also at the root of other threats to internal
State stability, such as military coups, insurgencies, the
financing of armed groups, human rights violations,
social tensions, the trade in drugs for arms, the
financing of terrorist activities, the creation of
ungovernabIe situations, humanitarian crises, ethnic
violence, the infiltration of crime into politics and
business, regional instability and child recruitment in
criminal activities, among others.

That is why it is crucial to restore State authority
in those countries that have overcome internal conflicts
and whose peacebuilding process is affected by the
problem of drug trafficking and organized crime.
Fortunately, the places where the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime has had the greatest impact
against transnational organized crime, in particular
drug trafficking, also have peace missions, whether
they are in Africa, Asia, Europe or Latin America and
the Caribbean.

As we have repeatedly observed, these new
challenges to international security are
multidimensional, as evidenced by the global problems
of drugs and organized crime in their most obvious
manifestations. Both problems warrant priority
treatment commensurate with their implications for
security, prosperity and development.

Organized crime is among the greatest threats,
due to its ability to damage the political, social and
economic stability of countries and to take on regional
and even global dimensions. For decades, the drug
problem was analysed from fragmented points of View,
in an approach where the main market forces - supply
and demand - were de-linked. Now, however, it has
been clearly demonstrated that such de-linking is not
valid, and that, on the contrary, every Government
must tackle - not only on the basis of its own reality
and circumstances but also by adopting a
comprehensive and balanced strategy - the whole
chain of criminal activity and the various links of this
global phenomenon, which is the responsibility of all
States without exception.

Given the growing and increasingly obvious links
between drug trafficking and other forms of organized

crime, such as illicit arms trafficking, money
laundering and terrorism, Governments and the
international community as a whole must design
strategies that address the specificities of particular
serious crimes while identifying the common and
convergent elements between them so that they can be
addressed comprehensively. In this way, the rule of law
can be strengthened, closing off more spheres to the
culture of illegality and impunity.

In recent years, transnational organized crime has
adopted increasingly sophisticated operational
mechanisms, and it is therefore urgent for the
international community to define and improve their
strategies to tackle these issues while also seeking to
adopt a cross-cutting approach.

Despite the resources that every Government has
devoted to the fight against drug trafficking and related
crimes, designing strategies to counter the innovative
and organizational capacity of criminal groups is
increasingly complex. We therefore need resolute
international cooperation in order to improve our
capacity to react, given the speed with which criminal
groups respond to measures implemented by
government authorities. Strengthening international
security means that all States must commit themselves
to establishing an effective and reliable system for
exchanging information to allow us to identify new
trends and links between organized criminal groups.
These cooperation and coordination efforts must be
based on a common and shared responsibility, as a
globally recognized principle, in order to generate
mutual trust while fully respecting State sovereignty.

The United Nations institutional response is
crucial, but it has been inadequate, since organized
criminal groups are an increasingly sophisticated
phenomenon that requires, as I said, a coordinated
response and steadfast commitment from the
international community.

Mexico believes that the United Nations must
play a more active role in the debate on the fight
against this scourge, not only through its technical
forums, but also by promoting a high-level
commitment to fight it. Just as we call for commitment
in the fight against climate change, we should require
the same level of commitment in the fight against
organized crime. Mexico believes that subsequent
debates that will take place in the Security Council, the
General Assembly and in the specialized agencies must

be approached from a multidisciplinary and balanced
perspective, taking advantage of the synergies that
improve the results of the work of each of these
forums.

A high-level segment of the General Assembly on
transnational organized crime will be held soon as part
of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime -
the Palermo Convention. This event will offer us the
ideal opportunity to breathe new life into international
cooperation on this subject and to renew our political
commitment against organized crime. Mexico
recognizes the fact that the current legal regime
provided for by the relevant conventions - the
Palermo Convention, the various conventions against
illicit narcotics trafficking and the 16 counter-terrorism
instruments - provide the necessary framework to
fight organized crime. We therefore need universal
ratification and, above all, full implementation of these
instruments by the international community.

The complexity of the problem highlights the
importance of international cooperation. It is very
important to bear in mind that the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime, besides having human
costs, also diverts major resources away from
economic and social development. We therefore
believe it fitting that the Security Council contribute to
reviewing effective measures in those areas that appear
on its agenda in order to fight drug trafficking and
organized crime. It is particularly important to think
about the ways in which the Security Council, within
the area of its competence, can contribute to the
important work carried out by the General Assembly
and other United Nations bodies, such as the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, with a View to
seeking out better defined and coordinated responses in
the global fight against drugs.

Investments in early warning and prevention
mechanisms on transnational organized crime must be
a priority for the Security Council. This organ must
therefore, in close cooperation with the General
Assembly, the Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Peacebuilding Commission, establish specific
mandates for peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions
on preventing organized crime, which should include
measures aimed at strengthening the rule of law,
security sector reform and promoting development.

In conclusion, Mexico believes it is important to
strengthen dialogue between the Council and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and, in this
context, we believe it would be valuable to hold
informative meetings with the Office, such as this one,
on a regular basis.

We express our thanks to you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of France for having organized this
meeting. We also express our support for the draft
presidential statement.

