Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Another year has passed,
another year has come to a close, yet the suffering of
the people of Afghanistan continues. Indeed, during
the past year, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/1056) observes, Afghanistan continues to face
multiple political, economic and security challenges in
an exceedingly uncertain and fraught environment.

Lest we forget, I recall that the war and the violence
and terrorism that afflict Afghanistan and threaten
the stability of the entire region are the consequence
of foreign military interventions, occupation and
imposed wars.

The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan are bound
by the unbreakable ties of history, faith, blood and
language, as well as mutual interdependence. When
the people of Afghanistan needed refuge, the Pakistani
people opened their homes and their hearts to them.
Close to 3 million Afghans still reside in my country as
refugees. The peace and stability of our two countries
are intertwined. My country has a vital interest in a
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan.
Pakistan stands ready to support the Government
of Afghanistan in its efforts to address the multiple
challenges it faces.

In order to strengthen relations with Afghanistan in
all spheres - political, economic, defence, education
and culture - Pakistan proposed a comprehensive
Afghanistan-Pakistan action plan for solidarity last
month. The action plan aims to promote constructive
and meaningful bilateral engagement through the
establishment ofworking groups on political, economic,
military, intelligence and refugee issues. It is evident
that securing the Pakistan-Afghanistan border and
preventing cross-border terrorism is essential for
both countries, the region and the world. That can be
achieved only through constant vigilance, effective
management and real-time communication. Nor should
terrorism be allowed to provoke clashes between our
border security forces.

We need regular contact between the armed forces
and intelligence agencies of the two countries so as to
prevent any violent incidents along our long and porous
border. It is to that end that the Armed Forces ofPakistan
and Afghanistan have agreed to place Liaison Officers
in each other's army headquarters and establish ground
coordination centres. The success of such initiatives
requires reciprocity, trust and good will. We hope the
Afghan Government will work constructively with us
to address the challenges that endanger our collective
security and stability.

Apart from the conflict between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban-led insurgency, a new and
toxic threat has emerged in Afghanistan: the presence
of a number of terrorists from various parts of the
world: the Taliban Movement of Pakistan, members of
which have fled my country, the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and
other groups, which have all now adopted the umbrella
of Da'esh.

Those terrorists are now located in the 40 per cent
of Afghan territory that, according to a recent United
States Department of Defense report, is either out of
Kabul's control or is contested. It appears that Da'esh's
core, under pressure in Iraq and Syria, may be relocating
to these ungoverned spaces in Afghanistan. According
to the Secretary-General's own report (S/2017/1056),
Da'esh remains resilient in Afghanistan, having claimed
responsibility for recent attacks in Kabul.

We are deeply concerned at the presence of Da'esh
in the Afghan provinces bordering Pakistan, Iran and
Central Asia. This poses a threat not only to Afghanistan
but also to all its neighbours. It is the responsibility of
the Afghan Government and the international coalition
to root out Da'esh and associated terrorists from Afghan
territory and prevent them from launching attacks
against Afghanistan's neighbours.

The growing nexus between illicit drugs and
terrorism is an additional dimension of the security
threat to the Afghans and to the country's neighbours.
There has been an unprecedented and alarming rise in
drug cultivation and production in Afghanistan. The
latest report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime refers to a record rise in poppy cultivation and
opium production. The Afghan Government and the
international coalition must endeavour energetically to
eradicate drug production and its links with terrorism.

But the central question in Afghanistan today is the
following: do we choose the path of war, or do we opt
for the path of peace? The international community is
unanimous in its view, and so is the Secretary-General,
that sustainable peace is achievable only through a
negotiated end to the long war.

Pakistan has long proposed this as the most viable
course to end decades of conflict and suffering in our
neighbouring country. Sixteen years of war, waged by
the world's most powerful forces against an insurgency
of irregulars, has not yielded a military solution.
This failure cannot be explained away by alleging the
existence of safe havens for the insurgency across the
border. There are no such safe havens. The only havens
that exist for the insurgents and for Da'esh and other
terrorists are within the 40 per cent of Afghan territory
that is outside the control of Kabul.

Peace will not be restored by the continuing resort
to military force. Indeed, it is evident, after years of
war, that neither Kabul and the coalition nor the Afghan
Taliban can impose a military solution on each other.
The promotion of a political settlement and the pursuit
of a military solution are mutually contradictory and
mutually incompatible. You cannot kill and talk at the
same time.

Another resort to the military option will not
produce a result different from the past. It will not break
the impasse, much less yield a political settlement.
Priority therefore must be given to efforts to achieve
peace through dialogue and through reconciliation.

We urge the Taliban to abandon violence and enter
into a dialogue to seek a negotiated settlement. But
the other side, too, must display a genuine desire for
dialogue and not expect to bludgeon the insurgency
into an enforced settlement. While the international
community, including Pakistan and Afghanistan's other
neighbours, can help in promoting a peace process,
obviously the principal responsibility to revive or initiate
a dialogue rests on the Afghan parties themselves. Peace
cannot be achieved until the Afghan parties themselves
conclude that there is no military solution to the conflict
and commit themselves to pursuing a genuine dialogue
for peace and reconciliation. This quest for peace
through negotiations must be the priority objective for
the Afghan Government, for the Afghan Taliban, for
Afghanistan's neighbours and for the United Nations.

