Mr. Ludin (Afghanistan): It has been a true
honour to be part of today's discussion and to listen to

the friends and partners of Afghanistan. I am grateful
to the Security Council for keeping Afghanistan on its
radar and for including it on the agenda for this very
substantive discussion. I hope that this will continue. I
am also grateful to the individual countries whose
representatives have spoken today, both members of
the Council and those from outside, for their support,
friendship and cooperation with Afghanistan. We
appreciate their partnership.

I am also very pleased that the Council issued a
statement regarding the Bonn conference, which, as I
said earlier, was an extremely important event on
Afghanistan's calendar this year. For it to have the
blessing and support of the Security Council is further
progress in that direction. I also welcome the reference
to the Istanbul Conference. Regional cooperation, as
we heard in some of the statements made earlier today,
is becoming central to the dialogue surrounding
Afghanistan, and the Istanbul process is very
promising. We in Afghanistan look forward to
furthering it in the next meeting in Kabul.

I would like to raise a few points with regard to
the interventions made today. First, I am very grateful
to those who expressed condolences and made
reference to the loss of life and civilian casualties in
connection with some of the terrorist attacks that have
taken place in the recent past, in particular the terrorist
attack on 6 December, on the day of Ashura. I very
much appreciate those sentiments.
Those attacks illustrate the type of challenge that
still remains. International terrorism is the most
important security obstacle facing Afghanistan today.
We have seen new forms of this in the recent past.
Today, suicide bombings are responsible for the
majority of killings among the Afghan people. That is
not something that is unique to Afghanistan, although it
is a recent phenomenon in many ways. The only way
by which we can tackle this challenge is through
intelligence and sincere results-oriented regional
cooperation. We cannot do it with armies and military
means. I think that the sanctuaries that some terrorist
networks enjoy outside Afghanistan represent an
extremely important problem that we have to address.

Secondly, concerns were expressed in some
statements about the human rights situation, in
particular with regard to detention facilities in
Afghanistan. I must say that, as soon as the report
(S/2011/772*) of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) was published, our
security institutions and other relevant institutions
began a very extensive inter-agency investigation. With
all due respect, I dispute the assertion that the problem
is systemic. The occurrence of such things is definitely
not systemic. We will investigate and determine the
true extent of the situation. We are genuinely
committed to improving our prison system. Just to put
it in context, those are institutions that we have
together in cooperation with most of the countries here.
We have established those institutions, and it will take
time for them to really improve. Nevertheless,
obviously, torture and abuse of the nature mentioned
are absolutely intolerable. They are as intolerable for
any Afghan as they are to any other person in the
international community.

On the UNAMA mandate review, we are really
pleased that the United Nations has taken that very
seriously and that there is an ongoing review. We
welcome that review. Consistent with the transition
process, we think that UNAMA's role should be more
responsive to Afghanistan's desire to take leadership
and responsibility. We are grateful for the positive
response and the way in which our desire has been
received here in the Security Council. But that is in
absolutely no way intended to diminish the role of the
United Nations. We Afghans take that role very
seriously. We are absolutely sure that this role will
evolve into something as important, except different.

Lastly, with regard to the concern raised by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran, we take
the concerns of our regional partners extremely
seriously. For a country like Afghanistan in the past
10 years, I think that the amount of attention and the
focus we have placed on the concerns of our friends,
brothers and partners in our neighbourhood, in
particular those of our close neighbours, have been
very extensive. We have often and always reassured our
partners that Afghans would never allow our territory to be
used against any country, including our neighbours.

With regard to Iran in particular, we have been
blessed by the understanding that Iran and the United
States have shown in the past 10 years with regard to
Afghanistan's need to maintain a balance in this
relationship. That understanding on both sides - the
United States and Iran - has been very helpful to us
and enabled us to bring together countries from across
the world to cooperate on our soil. We hope that this
understanding will continue, for the sake of
Afghanistan. Our commitment to our neighbours
remains unchanged and is as strong as ever. On this
particular issue, we are holding discussions with both
countries and following up.

In conclusion, the concept of the Transformation
Decade is a heartwarming development for the people
of Afghanistan. It illustrates the sort of commitment
that the Afghan people want for when the transition
period comes to an end. I am glad that significant
reference has been made to the Transformation Decade
in the various statements made here today. I think that
the conferences that will take place next year - the
Chicago conference on the security side and the Tokyo
conference on the economic development side - will
take this discussion forward and establish a framework
for the idea of the Transformation Decade.

It has been a true honour to be here today. I am
very grateful.

