Mr. De Mistura: I welcome you to the Security
Council, Mr. President. I am delighted to see you
here, in view of your new important role, which in my
opinion has already shown the further engagement of
your country in this complex environment. I thank you
for being here and for presiding over this meeting.

Let me start with yesterday's developments on
Idlib. They are important. As Council members know,
Idlid has been a major source of concern for all of
us in thic Chamber and beyond. Yesterday, Russian
President Putin and Turkish President Erdogan
reached an agreement to establish a demilitarized zone
within the Idlib de-escalation zone. The Government
of Syria has welcomed the agreement - as we saw
recently - and confirmed its full coordination with the
Russian Federation in that regard.

We in the Secretariat - and I believe the Secretary-
General has also been very clear on this - welcome the
fact that diplomacy has produced progress in the effort
to address the challenges posed by Security Council-
listed terrorist groups While protecting civilians - up
to 3 million of them, including 1 million children. This
represents the squaring of a very difficult circle. I
therefore thank President Putin and President Erdogan
for their personal engagement. We had hoped that they
would hold that meeting, and that meeting took place
and produced a very important outcome.

I also believe that the strong international
engagement on the dangers of a full-scale offensive
in Idlib has been important. I thank everyone here
because I know they have strongly raised that issue,
together with my colleagues and friend Mark Lowcock.
I commend members of Syrian civil society for raising
their voice. There are 3 million ofthem. They have been
raising their voices. In fact, just yesterday, for instance,
I received a letter signed by more than 13,000 women
from Idlib, calling for protection and security for their
families and reminding us that they are civilians. We
therefore hope that this agreement will be expeditiously
implemented in full respect for international
humanitarian law; with sustained humanitarian access;
with respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria; and with continued
preference for dialogue - such as yesterday's - over
escalation in addressing a complex situation.

In that context, let met also note that, just as we
are seeing crisis in Idlib averted, which is very good
news, we are seeing worrying military activities
elsewhere. Overnight, a Russian military aircraft was
downed, killing 15 servicemen. The Russian Ministry
of Defence has stated that the plane was accidentally
downed by Syrian Government anti-aircraft fire,
which was responding to Israeli fighter jets carrying
out attacks just off the coast. The Government of Syria
has stated that Israelli jets struck a Government facility
near Latakia. Russia has blamed Israel for this. Israel
has stated that Israeli jets were targeting weapons
shipments headed for Lebanon that threatened Israeli
security, and has blamed the Syrian Government for
the incident. We call upon all parties to refrain from
military actions that would only exacerbate an already
complex situation, especially now that we are receiving
such positive news regarding what could have been a
dramatic military escalation.

But for now, we are pleased that there is
de-escalation in one major area: Idlib. And now that we
have this deal, there is no reason not to move forward
expeditiously with the political process. Let me turn to
that process and take stock of where we stand.

Syrians look to the United Nations to facilitate a
political process that can help them exit this war and
enter into a better future 4 a future that they determine,
independently and democratically. That will require a
real dialogue and genuine negotiation - a process that
is credible and inclusive. My guide is and will always
be resolution 2254 (2015), which mandates the United
Nations to facilitate the political process. Together
with my team, I have always looked for creative ways
to advance resolution 2254 (2015) in light of the many
political and military developments taking place all
the time - a rollercoaster - but always with a view
to ensuring that the political process is credible and
addresses the real issues that divide Syrians. That
brings me to the constitutional committee.

The Secretary-General dispatched me to the Syrian
Congress ofNational Dialogue in Sochi seven and a half
months ago. It was a carefully considered decision, made
after special consultations in Vienna with the Syrian
parties and with the Russian Federation - and not just
by me, but involving the Secretary-General himself,
too. Based on those consultations, the United Nations
had reason to believe that Sochi would contribute to
accelerating the Geneva process. Its outcome was to
be brought back to Geneva as a core component of
the wider political process, and the final terms of a
constitutional committee were to be facilitated by the
United Nations in Geneva.

True to this spirit, since the Sochi Congress I have
worked carefully to facilitate the establishment of a
Syrian-owned, Syrian-led, United Nations-facilitated
constitutional committee. I have consulted particularly
closely with Iran, Russia and Turkey, given what is
logically their particular interest 4 given that they
were in Sochi - and responsibility to help make the
Sochi outcomes meaningful. Of course, I have also
consulted widely, including with the members of the
so-called small group and others, too. And I have been
continuously available and listening to Syrians - the
Government, all parts of the opposition and many
others too, inside and outside Syria.

In these consultations, a formula on participation
gained acceptance. One-third of delegates would be the
Government delegation; one-third would be a broadly
represented opposition delegation; and a middle third
would be, as the Sochi final statement clearly says:
"Syrian experts, civil society, independents, tribal
leaders and women". It became clear that each third
could comprise 50 members, and from each 50, 15
could be identified to play a particular role as regards
drafting a constitutional reform. This, when combined
with clear rules of procedure, would be a package to
launch a credible and inclusive process for drafting a
constitutional reform.

Based on this formula, three lists have emerged:
the list of the Government delegation, with Russia
and Iran's support; the list of a broadly represented
opposition delegation, with Turkey's support and that
of other States as well; and, crucially, a middle third
list that, consistent with resolution 2254 (2015) and
Sochi, is clearly my duty and responsibility to facilitate
and then to finalize. In our modest opinion, the middle
third list currently on the table meets the criteria
outlined in the Sochi statement. I also ensured that it
was something that the United Nations could support in
terms of credibility and international legitimacy.

This meant selecting experts with critical technical
expertise - we are talking about constitutions - and
experience in constitution-drafting. It meant including
Syrians from different ethnic, religious and geographical
backgrounds; those from both inside and outside of
Syria; and those who are known to be bridge-builders.
It also meant ensuring that a minimum of 30 per
cent across the entire 150 experts were women. One
overarching consideration is the need for a balance
in the middle third. No particular leaning should
totally dominate; this will be a core component of the
credibility of the committee.

In addition, after having consulted the Astana
guarantors, I offered suggestions and options on the
mandate, chairing, steering and decision-making - we
have a lot of training and experience in that at the United
Nations. These were designed to offer a minimum set
of procedural points that would allow the Syrians to
meet productively and progress in a Syrian-led, Syrian-
owned, United Nations-facilitated process.

At the start of this month, I said we were getting
closer to a moment of truth. All opportunities had been
offered to canvass all issues thoroughly, including via
teams from my Office who visited Moscow, Ankara,
Tehran and other capitals. I convened the Astana trio
on 10 and 11 September in Geneva in an effort to move
ahead. At that meeting, some issues became clear.
For instance, the Government list is not contested;
nor is the opposition list. This is important, but I
have to admit that my team and I were disappointed
that the middle third list - the list for which I have
a particular responsibility - was significantly
questioned. Approaches were suggested that I found
to be inconsistent with the credibility and legitimacy
needed for a United Nations-facilitated process.
Meanwhile, while issues such as chairing and voting
were canvassed, a lot was left unresolved regarding
rules of procedure.

The Astana guarantors proposed that we continue
technical talks on the middle third list before another
meeting in Geneva in October. While I really have no
problem with such technical meetings, let me be clear.
The middle third list needs be balanced and credible
to Syrians from all sides and to the international
community. As per resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Sochi final statement, it is the United Nations and the
Geneva process that facilitate and finalize the way
forward. Moreover, there is an urgency to move forward
and move ahead. We cannot afford to keep constantly
consulting each other.

This was - and is - my message to the Astana trio.
I gave the exact same message when I met the members
of the so-called small group, namely, Egypt, France,
Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America. On 14 September
in Geneva, I told them where we were in the process
and welcomed their support. I made it clear to them,
just I had to the Astana trio, that they should not seek
to intervene in issues that are basically for the United
Nations to facilitate - neither the lists, the rules of
procedure nor the substance of the process - beyond
what is in resolution 2254 (2015) and the 12 principles
developed in the Geneva process and endorsed in Sochi.

It is too easy to say, "we will keep consulting". If
we are not careful, this will become an end in itself.
What Syrians want to know is when a credible process
will start. As far as I am concerned, all the pieces
are in place for that to happen; we could start in one
week. If everyone supports the United Nations-led
process and recognizes the need for it to be balanced
and credible with sensible rules of procedure, we can
move ahead very fast. Indeed, I believe that the time is
approaching for me to indicate a fixed date by which
the Sochi final statement is given effect by launching
the constitutional committee.

This next month will therefore be critical. I
am ready to engage everyone. In addition to the
international players, I of course look forward to
engaging the Syrian parties, starting with the Syrian
Government. Their active involvement is obviously
crucial if a constitutional committee is to proceed.
I will also need to engage with the opposition and a
wide range of Syrian voices. Above all, I want to move
beyond the current preparations and see a genuinely
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned constitutional committee
up and running for the good of Syria and Syrians as a
core component of a credible political process. This is
what we have. The political process has been reduced
to one very important thing, which is the constitutional
committee, along with a safe and neutral environment
and elections. These are very important and sufficient
to make a difference.

Let us not underestimate the importance of this.
There is a need to see Syrians start to talk to each
other, which can take place within the constitutional
committee. There is a need to find steps that can build
confidence and that can, in time, create a safe, calm
and neutral environment. At a time when there is an
effort to focus on refugees and rehabilitation, let us
not forget that without a meaningful and irreversible
political process and without real steps on the ground,
the confidence required may not develop.

I cannot fail to remind the Council here of the
need for urgent, concrete actions on the release of
detainees and abductees, the hand-over of bodies and
the identification of missing persons, all of which are
crucial issues that affect thousands of Syrians. Let
us also remember that we must ultimately prepare
for United Nations-supervised presidential and
parliamentary elections, with all Syrians inside and
outside Syria participating, as called for in resolution
2254 (2015).

Last week, I was honoured - like many of my
colleagues - to attend Kofi Annan's funeral. As
the first United Nations Special Envoy on the Syrian
conflict, he emphasized some fundamental points: a
political, not military solution - this is what we see in
Idlib, as it moves in this direction - with one United
Nations-led process of mediation, based on inclusion
and consent and backed by a united Security Council.

He offered the first way out - the six-point plan and the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) - but could
not carry the effort forward when the Council was not
united. This was a bitter price that had to be paid; we
all know what happened. Sadly, it was a greatly missed
opportunity, as Kofi Annan reminded me.

Much has changed since then, but we all agree that
there is no military solution in Idlib or anywhere else.
We need an inclusive political process and the United
Nations is here to facilitate that process, starting with
a constitutional committee getting to work. However,
it must be credible, because only thus can the United
Nations invest it with the legitimacy it needs. I ask all
concerned to give the United Nations facilitation in the
coming weeks - by that I mean in October - their
full support.

