Mr. Dauth (Australia): I would like to thank you
very much, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting. I, like others, would like to begin by thanking
our friend and colleague, Heraldo Mufioz, for his very
comprehensive briefing this morning. As always, it
was a typically professional effort from him and his
colleagues. We continue to support their efforts very
strongly.

Three years after the attacks of 11 September
2001 and five years after the Security Council adopted
resolution 1267 (1999), the international community
regrettably confronts new terrorist atrocities with
shocking regularity. Most recently, of course, the
people of Russia have suffered grievously in
attacks targeting airliners, city streets and - most
appallingly - the school in Beslan. And, as members
are aware, in Indonesia last week, at least nine people
were killed and 180 injured in a bomb blast outside the
Australian Embassy in Jakarta. In that regard, I am
very grateful for the expressions of sympathy around
this table today.

The good news is that Indonesian and Australian
authorities are working hand in hand - as they did in
the wake of the Bali and J .W. Marriott Hotel attacks -
to track down the perpetrators and bring them to
justice. In Australia's region and further afield,
Governments are working more closely together than
ever before to combat terrorism, with some noteworthy
successes.
But, as the Monitoring Team's report
(S/2004/679) makes clear, the threat from Al Qaeda-
related terrorism remains as serious as ever and is
evolving. Terrorist groups rallying around the banner
of Al Qaeda's extremist cause increasingly have few
obvious links to Al Qaeda's leadership or to other
listed groups or individuals. They nevertheless operate
according to Al Qaeda's agenda and follow its
example. It is vital that States take all measures under
the resolution 1267 (1999) regime to constrain the
activities of such groups.

The pressing challenge - rightly identified by
the Monitoring Team - is to ensure that the
Consolidated List of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities remains responsive to those
developments. Member States must contribute to the
ongoing improvement and revision of the List.
Australia played a leading role in having Jemaah
Islamiyah and associated individuals listed in October
2002. We remain alert to any developments that might
require revised or additional listings, and we urge other
Member States to do likewise. Governments need to
ensure that, as Al Qaeda and affiliated terrorist groups
mutate, those Governments have the tools to cut off the
terrorists' finances and other support.

Improving the effectiveness of the 1267 regime
also requires improved implementation by Member
States. Many have limited capacity to meet their
obligations. Australia supports ongoing efforts to
facilitate better national implementation and reporting.
We see the Monitoring Team's closer coordination with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee - and with other
United Nations and regional bodies and Member States
engaged in related work - as crucial in that respect. In
particular, we welcome the programme of outreach by
Committee Chairman Munoz and look forward to his
proposed visit to Australia next month. Australia's
determination to combat terrorism, including through
building strong United Nations mechanisms, is
unwavering.

