Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Indonesian presidency of
the Security Council for holding this important open
debate, which focuses on an element that is key to
ensuring the success of peacekeeping operations.

I would also like to especially welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia,
whose participation in presiding over this open debate
illustrates Indonesia's determined commitment to the
topic that has brought us together today.

I also convey my sincere thanks to the Secretary-
General, the Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg for
their valuable contributions.

We can never stress enough how much we need Blue
Helmets who are well-trained, well-equipped and fully
aware of the mandate they have to deliver in order to
optimize the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.
In Mali, for example, adequate equipment would have
prevented the deaths of several Blue Helmets, and the
ongoing improvement of the quality of equipment is
therefore a top priority.

In many theatres of operation, better predeployment
training of staff officers is needed. More generally,
increased interoperability among those staff officers
would allow them to mount a more effective response
to threats against civilians and would strengthen the
security of the peacekeepers themselves.

In addition to military and police personnel, all
peacekeeping personnel must be trained, in particular
the mission leadership. Today's peacekeeping operations
are complex and multidimensional and require the
integration of the work carried out by civilian and
military components. In post-crisis countries in which
State authority must be restored, such close cooperation
should extend to the United Nations country teams and
bilateral and multilateral partners. It is therefore a new
ecosystem in which peacekeeping operations function,
and they must adapt to it. Training is a crucial element
in achieving that.

Significant progress has been made in recent
years. The Peacekeeping Ministerial held on 29 March,
attended by the French Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, demonstrated that
Member States are ready to make the necessary efforts
to strengthen future peacekeeping operations. Most
of us made robust commitments last September by
subscribing to the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. France will continue
to lend its full support to the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, which has already been a significant success
for the United Nations and the Secretary-General.

Training is above all the national responsibility of
all of us as troop-contributing countries, and we must
collectively make the necessary efforts in that regard.
France wishes to do its part and, in addition to training
its own troops, is making a significant effort to support
other troop-contributing countries in the training of
their contingents.

We must now work to implement the Declaration
of Commitments as quickly and completely as possible.
The failure of the negotiations of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations must not stop us. We must
continue the momentum of mobilization around the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We must make the
most of the meeting of the heads of general staff in
July and the conference on peacekeeping in a French-
speaking environment, to be held in the fall in Morocco,
to make steadfast progress in that regard. Moreover,
the launch and development of the light coordination
mechanism for the purpose of deconfliction deserves
our full attention. The mechanism should enable
the Secretariat to be fully informed of the various
training activities carried out by States for troop-
contributing countries.

In the Security Council, France is already
implementing its peacekeeping commitments. For
mandates in which we are penholders, we strive
to be exemplary with a View to setting in motion a
positive dynamic. We have already put many of those
commitments into practice. We systematically consult
troop-contributing countries throughout the year, and
not only at the time of mandate renewal; we organize
field evaluation Visits before each renewal; we consult
the host State; and we work to prioritize mandates,
where possible.
On the issue of training and capacity-building,
France is especially committed in the area of training
French-speaking troop-contributing countries. France
supports six peacekeeping operation training centres
in Africa, three in Latin America and one in Asia,
which contribute to building the capacity of future
contingents deployed in peacekeeping operations. We
are also strengthening the skills of those contingents
in specialized areas, such as mine clearance, health,
judicial police, logistics and civil protection, thanks to
our network of national and regional schools and our
network of 320 experts working as closely as possible
with the defence and security forces of many countries.

Through those different activities, we are
committed to training more than 30,000 African
military personnel next year to qualify them to serve in
peacekeeping operations. That is a considerable effort
with real operational significance. We also emphasize
so-called refresher courses during missions to ensure
follow-up to training provided previously. France has
just conducted a trial exercise with a mobile training
team for the Guinean battalion of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. Lastly, for the fifth consecutive year, and in
coordination with the Department of Peace Operations,
France will organize a training session for United
Nations trainers in Paris for approximately 40 French-
speaking staff officers.

I would also like to highlight the crucial importance
of multilingualism, which is not only in the United
Nations DNA but is also necessary for the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations. It is essential for Blue
Helmets to speak the language of the country in which
they are deployed, as it enables them to be in close
contact with local populations and authorities, which is
one of the conditions for successful peacekeeping. That
is why we provide special support for teaching French to
future contingents through the En Avant method, which
offers a method of learning French that is adapted to the
peacekeeping environment.

We also organize French language courses for 7,500
trainees per year and provide translations of reference
documents. In that context, France, in association with
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
published a practical guide in French in March, entitled
"Eire actear des operations de paix", which the French
Minister of the Armed Forces co-presented here in New
York. It is an important educational tool designed to
promote the presence of Francophone contingents in
peacekeeping operations.

I would like to conclude by underlining the extent
to which the protection, participation and empowerment
of women are at the heart of France's priorities in all
areas of peacekeeping operations. France today ranks
fourth in the world for women's participation in the
armed forces. The personnel of all our current military
operations, both nationally and in peacekeeping
operations, are at least 7 per cent female - and,
of course, we would like to take that commitment
further. That is why the Minister of the Armed Forces,
Ms. Florence Parly, launched a new gender parity plan
in March within the armed forces to encourage the
participation of women and fully value their role, and
in particular to double the number of women general
officers by 2025.

I again thank you, Madam President, for presiding
over this debate.

