Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): My Russian
colleague has asked some questions that I thought I
should answer.

He asked why we came to the Security Council.
Is the Security Council not where a country comes
when there has been a threat to international peace and
security or an unlawful attack on it?

He asked if we will work with Russia here. Of
course we will. We believe in the United Nations and its
Security Council. We believe in the international rules-
based system. We want the Council to work together to
uphold international peace and security and to resolve
conflict together. Of course we will work with Russia
to achieve those aims here in the Council.

I set out in detail how the Chemical Weapons
Convention works and its article IX in particular.
The Council members have heard from me and from
our Russian colleague, so I will not go into it in great
detail again. I will simply say that under article IX,
we have asked Russia for an explanation. Russia's
response was to say that it considered our request to
be null and void. We have also asked the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to support
us with an independent verification of our analysis.
Our Russian colleague talked about samples, but once
again, that is a misunderstanding of the Convention.
There are no provisions in the Convention that require
the United Kingdom to share samples collected as part
of a criminal investigation. The Chemical Weapons
Convention does provide inspected State parties with
a right to have duplicate copies of samples taken for
the purposes of an inspection, but Russia is not an
inspected State party in this case.

We are asked why we were so keen to request a
quick answer. That comes from our past experience. One
of the key tactics in the Russian playbook is to delay,
delay, delay - distract and mire in procedural delay.
We know that, of course, from the tragic Litvinenko
case in 2006. We waited for months in the hope that
Russia would cooperate with our requests to extradite
and investigate the known suspects. We waited in vain,
and we will not make the same mistake again.

Finally, my Russian colleague quotes fiction. Let
me quote the Russian President when we think about
who benefits. In 2010, he said,

"Traitors will kick the bucket, believe me.

Those other folks betrayed their friends, their

brothers-in-arms. Whatever they got in exchange

for it, those 30 pieces of silver they were given,

they will choke on them."

