Mr. Baja (Philippines): We join other members
of the Council in congratulating you, Mr. President,
and Germany on your assumption of the presidency
this month, and Ambassador De La Sabliere and France
on its highly successful presidency last month. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary Guehenno and you,
Mr. President, for briefing us on the results of the
Berlin conference and on the steps ahead for
Afghanistan's future.

In January, the Philippines supported the idea
proposed by you, Mr. President, to regenerate the
political and financial support necessary to further the
political and economic transition of Afghanistan as
envisaged by the Bonn process. We now welcome the
fruits of the Berlin conference, which generated
renewed commitment on the part of the international
community to assist in the recovery and the
development of Afghanistan. That conference was
indeed an opportune time to regenerate the process. In
that regard, we fully support the presidential statement
endorsing the Berlin declaration.

We are all aware not only of the significant
strides that the Government of President Karzai and the
Afghan people have made to achieve the goal of a
democratic, stable and functioning multi-ethnic society,
but also of the challenges that have to be overcome to
achieve that goal.

The political process in Afghanistan is well on its
way to significant development. The world commended
the political maturity exhibited by the Constitutional
Loya Jirga in adopting the Constitution, which lays the
foundation for a democratically elected Government
and parliament. The lynchpin for the establishment of a
democratically elected Government will be the
presidential and parliamentary elections to be held this
September, as announced by President Karzai.

A credible, fully participatory election process
will be critical to the full recognition of the
Government that will be installed. Thus it is crucial
that a robust security presence within both the
registration and the election processes is assured. The
necessary security could be provided by strengthening
the Afghan army and police forces. We note in that
regard the progress report that the United States
provided us this morning. That may not be sufficient,
however. The establishment of more provincial
reconstruction teams (PRTs) in critical areas controlled
by warlords and the expansion of the operations of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) outside
Kabul and other major cities will be important. The
practice of sending soldiers to stay in villages and
towns could give them a deeper understanding of the
local people, and eventually they might win the
cooperation of local warlords and villagers.

A sizeable part of the political challenge would
be overcome if security of the electoral process could
be assured. A fully representative Government installed
through a credible democratic process would go a long
way in the effective governance of the entire country in
the future.

My delegation believes that full implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) programme scheduled to be completed before
the elections in September would contribute
considerably to the security and credibility of the
elections. Given the factional power in Afghanistan,
greater effort to deal with local disputes must be
exerted, as those local disputes produce an
environment of insecurity that undermines the
Afghanistan Transitional Administration in Kabul and
weakens the central Government. Local dispute
resolution mechanisms must be developed and
community-based reconciliation must be promoted.

Another factor destabilizing the political process
is the serious problem of extensive poppy cultivation
and all its consequences in drug production and drug
trade. We welcome the steps being undertaken by
Afghanistan together with its neighbours, as
incorporated in the recent declaration to fight drugs,
and the assistance being extended by other countries to
develop viable economic alternatives to poppy
cultivation. The International Monetary Fund says that
at least 40 per cent of the economy of Afghanistan is
illicit. Without an economy to provide legal income,
eradicating the sole livelihood further undermines
Afghanistan's political and economic future. Thus we
share Pakistan's view on the need for Afghanistan to
integrate its economy into the economies of the
neighbouring subregions.

The international community, through the United
Nations, has been a consistent partner of the
Transitional Government of President Karzai in facing
challenges throughout the implementation of the Bonn
process. The Berlin conference furthers that
partnership. The readiness with which the international
community responded in Berlin is indeed an
encouraging sign that the international community is
not wavering in its support for Afghanistan. For its
part, the Philippines remains committed to assist
Afghanistan in its reconstruction efforts through
training the Afghan people in health care, securing
potable water and sanitation, agriculture and irrigation
and civil and transport engineering.

The journey of reconstruction and development of
Afghanistan is like a bicycle ride: you must pedal,
otherwise you fall. After the Berlin conference, with
the sustained help of the international community,
Afghans themselves must pedal through their own
political and economic recovery. National ownership of
the process remains a crucial element of any political
and economic reconstruction.

