Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
vehemently condemns the nuclear test that was
conducted by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea early yesterday, 3 September, and, through our
ongoing commitment to the importance of safeguarding
the credibility of the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
we stand by this position.

There is a need to uphold the credibility of the
Security Council itself. We reject any double standards
in this regard and we are committed to setting an
example in dealing conscientiously and strictly with
any threat posed to the nuclear non-proliferation
regime, regardless of any of the justifications that
may be put forward. Egypt fully grasps the nature
of the threats posed by North Korea in its violation
of Security Council resolutions; these threats are a
danger to international and regional peace and security,
particularly in North-East Asia.

Egypt calls on North Korea to immediately cease all
violations and activities that are in breach of Security
Council resolutions and urges it to refrain from any
action that might further escalate tensions orjeopardize
international and region stability and security. Egypt
reaffirms its condemnation of all such violations. We
also reaffirm our support for the Security Council
assuming its responsibility in this regard.

Egypt once again reiterates its call on all
stakeholders to seek to find a peaceful settlement to the
issues plaguing the Korean peninsula, craft a solution
that eliminates all nuclear weapons, establish a lasting
peace between the two Koreas and show restraint in
line with provisions of Security Council resolutions
aimed at safeguarding peace, stability and international
security, with a view to breaking this very dangerous
vicious cycle of ongoing violations of Security Council
resolutions by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. In this context, Egypt once again welcomes
any initiative or constructive idea that can lead to a
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and to a
lasting peace in the region.

I would like to conclude by once again voicing our
great interest in safeguarding Security Council unity
in dealing with a matter that is of concern to us all. In
ensuring international unity, it is a sine qua non that the
goals of the various measures adopted by the Council
be attained.

