Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation, thanks you, Mr. President, for
having convened today's meeting. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2010/169), and we thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing. We listened very closely to
the statements by Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni.

Although there are still many destabilizing
factors in Kosovo, it has been possible recently to avert
a deterioration of the situation, which remains
relatively stable. We welcome that. We trust that,
through its ongoing mediation, UNMIK will continue
to encourage all parties to enter into dialogue and to
promote reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among
the various communities in the region. In the future,
UNMIK must be particularly vigilant regarding the
impact of the strategy for northern Kosovo on the local
population once it is implemented, and it must be able
to react promptly.

The situation in Kosovo is both complex and
sensitive. It affects peace and stability throughout the
Balkans, and indeed throughout Europe. China respects
the territorial integrity of Serbia and recommends that
Kosovo's problems be resolved in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter
and on the basis of Security Council resolutions. We
still believe that a negotiated solution acceptable to
both stakeholders is the best way to resolve the
problems besetting Kosovo, which should also be the
objective of all concerned parties.

We note that UNMIK has carried out its
reconfiguration and reduction. In our View, UNMIK's
adjustment is not linked to the issue of Kosovo's status
and should not affect the neutral position of the United
Nations. UNMIK must continue to implement its
mandate pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
relevant documents. We trust that UNMIK will
continue to strengthen communication with Serbia and
Kosovo and to play its part by providing coordination
and good offices in seeking an appropriate solution to
Kosovo's problems, facilitating the return of minority
communities, protecting cultural and religious heritage,
and maintaining security and stability throughout the
Balkans.

We call on all parties concerned to support
UNMIK's efforts. We trust that the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo will continue to play
its role, under United Nations auspices, in the context
of neutrality pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999). We
trust that it will cooperate with UNMIK and thus play
an appropriate role in maintaining peace and stability
in the region.

