Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened very carefully to the briefing by
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. We also thoroughly reviewed his
report (S/2017/379, annex) and must say once again, as
was the case on other occasions, that the document does
not provide an objective narrative of the country. It is
a one-sided account with politicized assessments. We
call upon Mr. Inzko to change his credo and to stop
blaming the Bosnian Serbs - and recently Croats - for
all the difficulties. Instead, he must focus on moving
towards dialogue based on mutual respect that takes
into account the needs and concerns of all.

In the course of recent months, the internal political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina deteriorated and
culminated in a very deep constitutional crisis at the
end of February. That resulted from the attempts of
politicians in Sarajevo to carry out a review of the 2007
verdict of the International Court of Justice in the case
Bosnia and Herzegovina v. Serbia ana1 Montenegro.
We would like to underscore that these steps bypassed
the Presidency as well as other pan-Bosnian structures,
thereby undermining their efficiency and authority.
This represents a very alarming trend in the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

This is weakening the trend of having a mutually
respectful dialogue, compromise and consensus among
all constituent entities on all theimportant issues. Let
us not forget that this principle forms the letter and the
spirit of the Dayton Agreement. It is the basis and the
foundation ofnational reconciliation, as well as a gauge
and a guarantee of stability and security in the country
and in the region as a whole.

In the meantime, the Dayton Agreement and its key
basic principles are being attacked; this did not begin
just recently. Let us recall the situation that prevailed
in the summer of 2016, when the results of the census
were announced and the well-founded objections of
Bosnian Serbs were ignored. Let us also recall the
trials and tribulations surrounding the ruling of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina that
it was unlawful to celebrate Republika Srpska Day
on 9 January. This one-sided, politicized decision
compelled the Bosnian Serb authorities to resort to the
highest form of democracy: the free expression of the
will of citizens. The recommendational nature of the
results of the referendum was underscored in the recent
Republic Srpska report to the Secretary-General.

As a result, the decision was made to introduce
changes into the law on Republika Srpska's main
holiday. This decision was not questioned. We did not
agree with the statement that celebrating Republika
Srpska Day had caused the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina or the Republika Srpska to deteriorate.
This is not borne out by the facts, and there have been no
negative consequences. The conclusions reached about
the concerns of the Bosniaks who live in Republika
Srpska, including refugees, are simply made up and
have nothing to do with reality.

The situation in Republika Srpska can be
characterized as stable and sustainable, including in
Srebrenica, to which special attention is being paid by
the international community. There is no justification,
therefore, for the one-sided sanctions introduced last
year by the former United States Administration against
Republika Srpska. This decision needs to be rescinded.

Unfortunately, we cannot speak of stability and
sustainability in connection with Bosnian institutions
and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
addition to the provocative attempt to review the
decision of the International Court of Justice, it is
also dangerous that a number of leaders are not ready
to agree on key issues relating to equality for the
representatives of all ethnicities in the Federation of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Chronic issues are facing Mostar, where elections
have not been held since 2008, and the implementation
of the European Court of Human Rights ruling on
Seja'ic' and Finci. In addition, the issue of introducing
changes to the electoral law relating to legislative
elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina is problematic. We
are convinced, and let me underscore this point once
again, that the electoral law must reflect the interests of
all three constituent entities of the country, which is the
basic philosophy of Dayton. The key to contemporary
political issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina lies in the
fact that the level of inter-ethnic trust is low, a trend
to which we need to pay special attention, as does the
High Representative, because he represents the entire
international community, not just a part of it.

We need to stop appointing guilty parties. Once
again we need to work on promoting dialogue. We
must stop telling untruthful stories about separatist
tendencies in Banja Luka and inventing negative
trends with respect to Republika Srpska. The President
of Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, in his most
recent report to the Secretary-General, countered all
such accusations. It would be useful to cite excerpts
from this official document in the report of the
High Representative.

Given the current political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we see no danger to regional
stability. However, the evolution of some processes
following a negative scenario with the involvement
of external forces, including extremist andterrorist
forces, could make the situation into a source of
concern. Unfortunately, the High Representative has
paid minimal attention to the important topic of the
spread of extremist religious teachings in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. But this is something that exists, and the
international community must monitor the situation
very closely.

The quality and depth of the analysis contained
in the High Representative's report leaves a lot to be
desired. Once again, we see a biased attitude towards
Serbs, as well as unacceptable comparisons and
historic parallels, for which the High Representative
will have to apologize later. Mr. Inzko spent more than
a decade in the region, so he should not make those
kinds of allegations. It is not entirely clear from the
report how exactly the High Representative is helping
in the implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina of
the 5+2 agenda, on the drawdown of the Office of the
High Representative. There has been no progress in
that respect; the spectrum of preconditions and criteria
is so wide that we cannot count in its implementation
happening anytime soon. Instead, Mr. Inzko is very
fond of promoting the Euro-Atlantic agenda. This is
not his mandate. He is a representative of the entire
international community in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In the current conditions, we see no added value in
the remaining elements of the international presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We support the closing of the
Office of the High Representative drawing down his
the Bonn powers as quickly as possible, because they
have outlived their usefulness, as have the protectorate
methods. They do not help national reconciliation but
impede the harmonious development of the country as
a whole.

Russia, as one of the guarantors of the Dayton
Peace Agreement will continue firmly promoting
the stabilization process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
abiding very strictly by the Dayton Agreement. It
is unacceptable to try to review its principles, which
are enshrined in Security Council resolutions. We
are committed to transferring full responsibility for
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina to Bosnians
themselves. All changes must come about as a result of
a conscious choice by the Bosnian side and be carried
out strictly in line with the consensus provided for in
the Dayton agreement.

We are interested in the development of a mutually
beneficial cooperation in Bosnia and its entities
and ensuring that there is true equality for all three
constituent entities in the country.

