Ms. Aguiar (Dominican Republic) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to express the appreciation of
the delegation of the Dominican Republic for the
excellent initiative of holding this open meeting on the
Fourth Geneva Convention, whose objective is the
protection of civilian populations in armed conflicts, thus
offering non-members of the Council the opportunity to
participate in a matter that is so closely related to the
concern for collective security.

My delegation wishes in particular to acknowledge
the work being carried out by the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) on behalf of affected
populations and the clear and precise statement made by
Mr. Sommaruga before the Council at its meeting on 12
February 1999. We also welcome the determined and

 

energetic position of Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director
of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), who has
understood perfectly the magnitude of our responsibility to
future generations and the vital importance of protecting
children as one of the sectors whose vulnerability puts in
jeopardy the very existence of the human race on our blue
planet.

We also wish to recognize Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for his precise analysis of the
components of this complex problem.

The matter before us offers us a splendid platform for
philosophical reflection, on the eve of a new century and a
new millennium, on the role of our Organization in the
configuration of international relations within international
society, particularly through the action of its executive
organ, the Security Council.

In the preceding statements considerable concern has
been expressed for the difficult situation of children, the
future of any society, in armed conflicts. My delegation
invites the members of the Council to carefully study the
programme of peace and security for children advocated by
UNICEF. This would serve as a contribution to the problem
posed in the formulation of practical proposals for possible
solutions.

The effects of sanctions on children are also cause for
great concern. In proposing sanctions, we should consider
the effects that they can have on children and on other
vulnerable groups of society. It is unacceptable that, as a
result of poorly targeted sanctions, there has been a
dramatic increase in the infant mortality rate in some
countries.

There is a common thread running through the
preceding statements that makes unequivocally clear one of
the characteristics of the recent armed conflicts that have
led to political or military action by this Organization: the
fact that their first and principal target has been the civilian
population, in particular its most vulnerable sectors -
children, women, the elderly, the sick, refugees and
internally displaced persons. These categories of people are
often the victims of conflicts in which all means are used,
even the most reprehensible.

We are also witnessing a growing disregard for the
application of the principles of humanity, independence and
impartiality. Attacks against the personnel of organizations
that provide humanitarian assistance have become an
everyday occurrence. The deterioration of the conditions
in which humanitarian action can be provided, a result of
the excesses of politicization, have increased the
vulnerability of those who are supposed to be served by
that action.

Nonetheless, we note also that international
humanitarian law is a body of well-defined norms whose
application does not, however, meet all the expectations
of its immediate beneficiaries. We all agree that resolving
the problem we are considering today - protection of
civilian populations in armed conflict - requires a
mechanism to punish non-compliance with the norms of
international humanitarian law, together with action aimed
at preventing violence and abuses.

The search for an effective solution brings us back
to our initial idea of philosophical reflection on the future

of world society and of the role of individuals within it.

According to the information provided by some of
the speakers that have participated in this debate, most
armed conflicts of concern to us do not have the
characteristics of international conflicts in the strictest
sense, but rather of internal conflicts in which certain
warring parties are neither States nor armed forces
dependent on a State - although it is, of course,
impossible to generalize.

Hence we have seen that conflicts caused by "ethnic
cleansing" are part of a State policy. Others are caused by
the actions of so-called liberation forces that are no longer
operating against a colonial State. Both of these variables
make the application of the different legal categories of
humanitarian law even more complex.

But as was stated by the Permanent Representative
of Slovenia, the objective of United Nations humanitarian
activities should be human security, with the key being
physical, not just legal, protection. In order to make
headway in this direction, it is important that the political
and possibly the military action undertaken by the
Security Council complement and not compete with the
jurisdictional action of the system's judicial organs.

No rule of law can be fully effective if non-
compliance by States and by individuals does not result
in jurisdictional sanction.

 

The international community has done a great deal
recently to put an end to the related problem of impunity.
Examples are the establishment by the Security Council of
the International Tribunal for Rwanda and of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, as well as
the recent adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court. The adoption of that Statute on 17 July
1998, at the conclusion of the Rome Diplomatic
Conference, represents a concrete step towards the more
effective protection of civilian populations in armed
conflict.

Above and beyond preventive action - through
education and training, the prohibition of the use of certain
types of weapons with indiscriminate effects and the
prohibition of the recruitment of child soldiers - the fight
against impunity, which is the basis for the creation of this
independent jurisdictional organ that is nonetheless related
to the United Nations system, gives rise to fresh hope for
the defenceless, whose demands for justice can no longer
be ignored. It is vital that all States provide their assistance
so that the Statute can enter into force as soon as possible.

Likewise, we believe that humanitarian action must be
distinct and separate from purely political action, so that it
can meet its goal of helping populations at risk,
independently of the actions of Governments. Humanitarian
action must be provided unconditionally so that it can
recover its legitimacy.

We believe that this is also an opportunity for our
Organization to reflect on how, as we face the new
millennium, we can establish mechanisms to harmonize the
various elements of the human family - individuals and
ordinary citizens. That is because the mandate of the
Charter of the United Nations begins with the principle of
saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
which has proliferated in this century and whose principal
victims are civilian populations. The organizational
structures of our political societies must not betray the
aspirations of the individuals of whom they are composed.

From the eloquent statements made during this
meeting, we can see that there is no easy way to tackle the
roots of this evil. The delegation of the Dominican
Republic wishes, in conclusion, to point to poverty as one
of the fundamental root causes of conflict. It is increasingly
clear that poverty has the potential of becoming the most
important threat to international peace and security. For this
reason, the delegation of the Dominican Republic believes
that experience has shown that resolutions and agreements
do not suffice. International legislation must be
complemented by concrete measures to provide assistance
to the neediest.

It is important that ideas be accompanied by a
certain level of resolve, as a commendable way of finding
solutions to conflicts and disputes using all the peaceful
means at our disposal.

