Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the delegation of Malaysia for
organizing today's meeting on peacebuilding issues.
We are grateful to the former and current Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission for their informative
briefings and skilful leadership of the Commission.

Peacebuilding support is one of the key instruments
the United Nations has for settling conflict effectively,
stabilizing post-conflict situations and preventing
relapses into armed conflict. We believe the principal
responsibility for setting priorities and implementing
reconstruction strategy lies with national Governments,
and the relevant international efforts should focus on
enhancing the institutional capacity of the affected
countries, with their consent and while respecting their
national sovereignty and political independence.

However, we must not limit peacebuilding to
State-building and rebuilding Government institutions,
because it is a complex and multifaceted process
that includes, beyond its political aspects, assistance
with economic development and the resolution of
acute social problems. Furthermore, we consider it
counterproductive, in the post-conflict context, to
overemphasize gender and human rights issues that
have no direct bearing on the root causes of the crisis.

Russia supports the Peacebuilding Commission's
efforts to enhance the effectiveness and coordination of
international support to post-conflict countries by the
United Nations.

We take note of the Commission's report on its
eighth session (S/2015/l74). Last year was a busy one.
We note the new trend of holding information sessions
regularly, which, in our View, are open and informative
in nature. That confirms that the Commission's unique
dialogue platform has great potential for enabling
intergovernmental discussion of urgent themes and
cross-cutting peacebuilding issues. However, we
believe that such discussion should not exceed the
Commission's mandate by taking on issues that are
already being considered by specialized bodies within
the General Assembly structure.

We note the completion of the comprehensive
review of the peacebuilding architecture, based on the
modalities agreed on by Member States. We assume
that the expert group has conducted an objective
investigation and will submit, as soon as possible, a
balanced recommendation for inter-State consideration
that will help increase the effectiveness of the
Commission as an intergovernmental consultative body
playing a central role in the peacebuilding architecture
of the United Nations, while strictly respecting the
Charter-based prerogatives of the Organization.

The Commission has continued to work hard to
support the countries on its agenda, including through
its country-specific configurations. However, it would
appear that despite producing individual examples
of successful results, the Commission has not fully
realized its potential. The continued fragmentation
of peacebuilding support, including the financing of
efforts in post-conflict reconstruction, has had negative
effects in Burundi, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan. In particular, the early positive trend
in Burundi in addressing post-conflict issues of
peacebuilding to ensure peace, security and stability has
been threatened, including by the use of the financial
support for electoral processes as a lever for putting
pressure on the national Government. Other examples
of crises include the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, where there has been an unjustified and
often externally imposed re-alignment ofpeacebuilding
priorities, characterized by an irrational and excessive
disbursement of already limited resources.

The outbreak of the Ebola virus was a test of the
soundness of the foundation that the Peacebuilding
Fund had laid for peace and security in countries such
as Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia. In a very short
period of time it made use of its expert capacity, and
the Commission was able to adapt to the needs of those
States and contribute to international efforts to address
that crisis. We also note the coordinated financial
support by the Peacebuilding Fund to countries affected
by the Ebola virus.

