Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting to discuss this most important
issue.

This is the second day that the Council has been
seized of the issue of threats to international peace and
security emanating from transnational organized crime.
Yesterday we spoke of West Africa and neighbouring
countries. Today, we are talking about East Africa and
the issue of piracy. This underscores once again the
need for the Council to devote increasing attention to
those growing threats.

We thank Ms. O'Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
briefings on key components of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/50), distributed to the
Council in accordance with resolution 2015 (2011).
The report makes clear that many issues remain in
connection with the process of establishing effective
legal mechanisms, with international participation,
specialized primarily in the prosecution of pirates
operating off the Somali coast. The report underscores
the fact that in spite of the scaled-up efforts made by
the international community, the business of piracy is
flourishing and expanding. The most recent data
provided by the International Maritime Organization
indicates that the ransoms paid to pirates and aggregate
economic losses from piracy total $12 billion per year.
Those figures speak for themselves.

These developments result first and foremost
from the prevailing political and economic situation in
Somalia. However, it is clear that in the absence of the
appropriate capacities for tackling the issue of pirate
impunity in the general context of counter-piracy, the
situation is unlikely to improve.

Signs of major improvements in the prosecution
of pirates are not yet evident. Indeed, the report
reiterates that the overwhelming majority of suspected
pirates are released. In 2011, there were only four cases
in which detainees were transferred to States of the
region for prosecution by national courts.

The recent experiences of our colleagues from the
Danish naval forces are just another example of that
trend. The situation is such that in Somaliland, almost
100 convicted pirates were released. It is easy to
understand why naval personnel in most cases prefer to
avoid detaining alleged pirates. They understand the
difficulties they would face in attempting to transfer
them to regional courts. Moreover, there is no
guarantee that convicted pirates, once released, will not
once again join the ranks of pirate armies.

We are interested in studying the root causes of
the situation. This is not just an issue involving a lack
of prisons or the limited capacities of local justice
systems. Ambiguity remains in important aspects of the
relevant legal proceedings - detention, transfer,
evidence collection - and thus in terms of prospects
for the prosecution of pirates.

Russia attaches great importance to continuing
efforts to strengthen the judicial and law-enforcement
capacities of the countries of the region. We note the
important contributions made by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). If the
international community continues to support current
mechanisms for prosecution over the next two years,
the situation will turn around. At present, however, we
unfortunately do not see a basis for such optimism. The
resources of national legal systems of coastal States are
obviously limited, and, even with the most intensive
assistance to capacity-building, those States alone
cannot deal with the large number of pirates. The
information contained in the report makes this clearly
evident.

It is encouraging that the Council is essentially of
the view that additional measures are necessary for the
prosecution of pirates, mindful as it is that the
foundation of an effective anti-piracy justice
mechanism consists of the national justice systems of
the States of the region.

In that respect, we thank the Governments of
Seychelles, Tanzania, Kenya and Mauritius for their
demonstrated interest in cooperation with the
international community on this matter. As the report
of the Secretary-General makes clear, these countries
satisfy the necessary conditions for successful joint
work in this field. Following the publication of the
report, the Government of Qatar expressed its readiness
to establish an anti-piracy judicial mechanism on its
territory, for which we are also very grateful.

We continue to attach great importance to the
international component of efforts to bring pirates to
justice. In our view, international participation, which
is already partially under way in the region, is key to
resolving many issues. That would include increasing
the effectiveness of legal proceedings and compliance
with recognized standards of justice. Russia is prepared
to consider different formats of international

cooperation. However, most promising in our view is
the direct participation of highly qualified foreign
specialists and anti-piracy proceedings.

We were also intrigued by the report's idea of
improving anti-piracy laws, building and equipping
new legal institutions, and selecting international
personnel. Given the limited financial capacities, we
think it would be advisable at this stage to concentrate
efforts on establishing anti-piracy legal mechanisms
with international participation in those countries of
the region that have demonstrated absolute readiness to
implement such measures.

In conclusion, Mr. President, we should like to
assure you that the Russian Federation shall continue
to do its utmost to resolve the issue of piracy off the
Somali coast.

