Mrs. Chassoul (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to start by congratulating you, Sir, on your
well-deserved presidency of the Council for the month
of May. Costa Rica admires the work carried out by
Singapore over the past 18 months as a non-permanent
member of this organ. We have noted Ambassador
Mahbubani's leadership and the constructive and
critical role played by his delegation. We believe that
his work clearly demonstrates the importance of the
presence within this organ of smaller countries in
guaranteeing its effectiveness and legitimacy.

We welcome the convening of this interactive
meeting on the work of the ad hoc Working Group on
Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa as an
opportunity to have a candid exchange of views with
its Chairman, Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul, and the
other members of the Security Council. We are also
grateful for the 13 May letter of Ambassadors
Mahbubani and Koonjul, setting out clear guidelines
for this debate. That useful document, which has
helped us to focus our statements and to define the
contents of the debate, is a sound precedent that should
be maintained.

Costa Rica fully supports United Nations
monitoring of electoral processes in Africa. We
recognize that this activity has facilitated the peaceful
settlement of various conflicts, not only in Africa, but
also on all the continents. Suffice it to recall the
examples of El Salvador, Cambodia, Kosovo and the
Central African Republic, where the United Nations
played an indispensable role in preparing and
coordinating elections held following the end of the
respective armed conflicts.

We must, however, be realistic about this task.
Democracy cannot be built in a day. The existence of
electoral mechanisms does not guarantee the existence
of genuine democracy, which is a long-term and
continuous process, requiring ongoing efforts of
coordination and concertation, respect for the will of
the majority and for the rights of minorities,
understanding and negotiation. Genuine democracy
exists only within a flourishing culture of mutual
respect and when there is general acceptance of both
the existence of common principles and objectives and
of legitimate differences of opinion and legal avenues
for dissent.

The United Nations can cooperate in holding
clean and fair elections in post-conflict situation in
three different ways. First, the Organization can
cooperate directly in the preparation and holding of
elections. Its experience in this field is considerable,
ranging from the provision of security for electoral
centres to the preparation of electoral roles. Secondly,
the United Nations can cooperate in demilitarizing the
electoral process in order to avert fraud, voter
intimidation and violence during the voting process. To
that end, it is necessary to demobilize and disarm ex-
combatants. Thirdly, the Organization can help
political leaders to respect the outcome of the electoral
process. To that end, it is essential to create
institutional mechanisms to guarantee the legitimacy of
elections and to provide peaceful resolutions of
ideological, political and economic differences. These
tasks require careful preparation and implementation.
United Nations involvement during the transitional
period is crucial in this respect.

Moreover, assistance in and monitoring of
electoral processes should not be confined solely to the
first series of elections in a post-conflict period, but
should extend throughout the period of democratic
consolidation. Holding one election does not indicate a
return to normalcy; on the contrary, it is only the first
step towards a democratic existence. Unfortunately, the
international community often considers that its work
is done once the first elections are over. Experience has
shown that this conclusion is wrong.

We believe that the United Nations should
provide assistance to consolidate democracy on an
ongoing basis. Our Organization should promote both
the strengthening of social and political mechanisms
that promote free competition through periodic
elections, as well as transparent, responsible and open
governance. It should promote the dissemination and
deepening of democracy in all spheres of society. It is
necessary in parallel to ensure that the democratic
process is not distorted or corrupted by leaders who
foment discord in order to promote their private
ambitions at the expense of the well-being of the
community.

As regards coordination between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, we feel
that it is essential to improve the activities of each
organ in conflict prevention and resolution on the
African continent. Their respective mandates press
them to adopt specific measures and recommendations
to improve the political, economic, social and military
situations of the continent. Nonetheless, we must not
forget that those two bodies have clearly distinct
attributions and competencies.

The Security Council has a mandate to maintain
international peace and security in the face of political
and legal disputes and armed threats to peace. The
Economic and Social Council, however, is mandated to
promote economic and social development and
universal respect for human rights. To the extent that
each organ carries out its respective tasks in full, their
efforts will reinforce each other and bear optimal fruit.
If economic and social development and full respect
for human rights are not achieved, however, a lasting
peace will not be achieved in Africa. At the same time,
while armed conflict persists, it will be impossible to
achieve true economic and social development on the
continent. That is why it would be desirable to increase
the level of cooperation and coordination between the
two organs, thereby effectively implementing Article
65 of the Charter.

The question is, therefore, how to enhance that
interrelationship. In recent years, various initiatives
have been undertaken to allow some members of the
Economic and Social Council to attend meetings of the
Security Council and vice versa. Last year, a plenary
meeting of the two organs on an equal footing was
unsuccessfully mooted. Were those proposals to be
implemented, they would improve communication
between the two organs, although they would not, per
se, guarantee better coordination of their operational
activities. Regrettably, the mere exchange of
information or coordination of independently
developed activities is insufficient.
In order to develop true synergy between the
efforts of the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council, their activities must be coordinated
from the very moment when they are first developed
and proposed. A common and detailed strategy must be
crafted within which the activities of the two organs
will coincide and complement each other. Decisions
cannot continue to be adopted in isolation. We must
create a framework within which members of the two
organs can jointly assess the situation in Africa in all
its aspects and can together design a common strategy
in response. Further, the members of the Security
Council and of the Economic and Social Council
should jointly, with representatives of the Secretariat,
evaluate the activities that the two organs are already
carrying out in Africa. They should then decide what
improvements to the existing instruments and
mechanisms are required. In essence, what is required
is a period of serious reflection, long-term vision,
constructive criticism and genuine joint efforts. We
believe that a series of periodic seminars or retreats,
bringing together representatives of the States members
of both organs and the Secretariat would be a first step
in that direction.

We should not delude ourselves by thinking that
greater coordination between the two organs will
automatically improve the effectiveness of the United
Nations in promoting peace and development in Africa.
The real problem is not a lack of coordination but a
lack of resources and a lack of clear goals and concrete
mandates.

If economic, technical and human resources are
not allocated and if the indispensable political support
is not forthcoming, peacekeeping in Africa cannot be
effective. One cannot build peace if one does not tackle
the underlying causes of conflicts. The development of
democracy requires not only the establishment of
electoral mechanisms but also a long process of
cultivating a democratic culture.

Sustainable development is impossible if the
necessary resources are not provided for economic
development, poverty alleviation and unemployment
and without access to international markets. Social
development requires the inclusion of human rights as
a guiding principle of national policy. The task is
enormous and requires the firm and resolute support of
the entire international community.

The problem of the lack of coordination is not
limited to the relations between the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, but can be found
in all endeavours of the international community in
which various actors are attempting to prevent or
resolve conflicts. We have sometimes seen how
countries with influence on the parties, various
international organizations, diverse groups of
mediators, the United Nations and non-governmental
organizations promote contradictory or redundant
initiatives. In the area of emergency humanitarian
assistance, one can find some projects with an excess
of resources while others, equally important, are
neglected. Those difficulties are aggravated by the
duplication of mandates, competition for resources and
influence and a multiplicity of political goals.

A possible solution to the coordination issue is
the creation of groups of friendly countries. But that is
an instrument that can be used only if the number of
actors is small, if those actors possess a high degree of
political commitment and if their interests generally
converge. If those conditions do not exist, such a
mechanism will not work. Furthermore, groups of
friends should never replace the Security Council as
the main centre for decision-making on behalf of the
international community.

Alternatively, increasing the authority of the
Secretary-General's Special Representatives might
solve some of the coordination problems. The most
successful Special Representatives have been those
who served as go-betweens among the countless
international actors and who, in that fashion, were able
to channel various efforts in the field. We believe that
this function of the Special Representative should be
institutionalized. However, we are aware that the task
is hindered by a lack of coordination among the
capitals and by the competition and rivalry among the
various actors and organs. Special Representatives will
be able to effectively coordinate international actions
only when all the actors effectively recognize the
primacy of the United Nations on the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution and when those actors
subordinate their narrow interests to the goals and
strategies adopted by the Security Council.

Considering the terrible consequences of armed
conflicts for the peoples of Africa, we believe that
those conflicts must be prevented before they break
out. That requires an ongoing and sustained effort by
the African peoples themselves and by their leaders in
order to create an atmosphere of mutual respect and of
the rejection of violence. It is indispensable to ensure
decent living conditions for all the continent's
inhabitants to satisfy their basic needs, ensure respect
for fundamental rights and enable them to resolve their
differences democratically. What is needed is a firm
policy of strengthening civil authorities and reducing
spending on arms, redirecting military spending
towards education, health, housing and social
investment.

Today we see positive signs of a better future for
the people of Africa. We have witnessed the end of
some armed conflicts, the strengthening of democratic
institutions and growing respect for human rights and
democratic legitimacy. African leaders are increasingly
active in the prevention and resolution of the conflicts
afflicting their continent at the same time as they are
promoting the economic and social development of
their peoples. The international community and the
Security Council have the obligation to fully support
them.

