Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is grateful
to Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
comprehensive and extremely useful briefing. The
situation in Kosovo continues to require the close
attention of the Security Council, hence the importance
of regular briefings given to Council members and the
larger membership of the Organization.

My delegation would like to focus on a limited
number of issues of particular importance to us.

First, the still-unsettled, and indeed precarious,
security situation in Kosovo, as described by Mr.
Annabi, remains a matter of very serious concern to my
delegation. We continue to give our full support to the
ongoing efforts of both the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to address this serious problem.
We have also emphasized on previous occasions the
need for the leaders of all the communities in Kosovo
to play their constructive role to contribute to these
efforts. We note some positive responses and actions
taken in this regard.

We welcome the signing of last month of joint
declarations at both Pristina and anilane, in which the
leaders of the Albanian, Serb and Turkish communities
condemned all acts of violence and terrorism directed
against any inhabitants of the two municipalities. At
the same time, they committed themselves to work
together for common peace and prosperity. This is
indeed a very heartening development that represents a
concrete contribution towards lessening inter-ethnic
tension and that should be emulated by the other
municipalities throughout Kosovo, especially in
Mitrovica.

Speaking of Mitrovica, the current de facto
division of the city is unacceptable and must be
reversed as soon as possible. Furthermore, the outbreak
of a series of violence and rioting in the northern part
of the town late last month - where UNMIK
personnel and the staff of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
other international personnel, as well as their offices
and transport and other facilities were subjected to
attacks by the Serbs - should be strongly condemned.
Those responsible for these acts should be held
accountable. On this point we have read about possible
involvement by outside elements in those attacks and
acts of intimidation. We wonder whether Mr. Annabi is
in a position to confirm those reports and to tell us
what actions have been taken to prevent such
occurrences.

We note the signing on 29 June of the Joint
UNMIK-Serb National Council (SNC) Understanding,
which lays down additional steps to improve the
situation of the Serb community in Kosovo. We
certainly consider the initiative a very important part of
UNMIK's efforts to improve the level of freedom,
security and fundamental rights of the Serb community.
However, we feel that the agreement by the Serb
National Council of Gracanica to participate in the
Joint Administrative Structures as observers for
another three months, as its response to the
Understanding, fell short of expectations. We, like
others in the Security Council, have called for their
full, active and unqualified participation in the Joint
Administrative Structures.

Secondly, the signing of the Joint UNMIK-SNC
Understanding has drawn a negative reaction from
some quarters of the Kosovo Albanian community. At
least, the leadership of one of Kosovo's largest political
parties, the Kosovo Democratic Party (PDK), has
decided to withdraw from the Interim Administrative
Council (IAC). This is a serious setback. We would
also appreciate it Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
could enlighten us on any efforts being made to
encourage the PDK to reconsider its position and return
to the IAC. Their return and full participation is
important. In this regard, we wish to underscore the
importance for UNMIK to continue with the ongoing
efforts at close and all-inclusive consultations with
leaders of all Kosovo communities so as to further
strengthen the IAC. We believe the efforts to engage
local leaders and populations in the administration of
Kosovo should be even more vigorously pursued at this
critical stage so as to fully prepare the Kosovars to
handle their own affairs.

My third point relates to the civil registration
process and the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo this fall, for which, as Mr. Annabi has
indicated in his briefing, preparations are well
underway. We welcome Mr. Kouchner's issuance of
UNMIK Regulation 2000/39 last Saturday, which
outlines the necessary law governing the proposed
municipal elections. We have urged all communities to
participate in the registration process. We look forward
to the successful conduct of the elections, which will
lay a viable foundation for the future of Kosovo. We
would be grateful for additional details as to the status
of the registration and whether UNMIK expects to
attain the target number of 1.3 million people
registered by the closing date, on 15 July.

Finally, my delegation, along with many other
members of the Council, had earlier expressed our
strong support for the appointment of a special envoy
of the Secretary-General to look into the issue of
detainees and missing persons for reasons we had
already explained - not the least of which is the need
to resolve this sensitive and emotive issue in the larger
interest of reconciliation among the Kosovars. We
would be grateful if Mr. Annabi could update us on this
important matter.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
once again its full support and appreciation to UNMIK
and Mr. Kouchner for the efforts they have made in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) in Kosovo.
Important achievements have indeed been made, but
many challenges still lie ahead before self-sustaining
peace and stability can be established in Kosovo.
Hence the need for the sustained and strong support of
the Council and members of the international
community for the efforts currently underway in
Kosovo.

