Ms. Kuburovie (Serbia): I would like to express my
gratitude to Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his engagement in
the implementation of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) mandate
under Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), and
the members of the Council for their attention to this
issue. I wish to underline the importance of continued
Council meetings on this topic every three months - in
the context of contributing to the creation of conditions
for the unimpeded implementation of the UNMIK
mandate and supporting the dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina with the facilitation of the European Union
(EU).

Serbia attaches particular importance to the work
of UNMIK and believes that the Mission requires
adequate personnel and an increase in staff and
financing if it is to meet all the needs related to the
implementation of its mandate. At the same time, we
are aware that the Mission is operating in an unfriendly
environment, often characterized by the animosity
of the Albanian community. It is in those terms that
we understand UNMIK's endeavours to portray the
situation on the ground in more moderate tones,
refraining from assessments that would inevitably have
to be very critical of Pristina, which in turn could lead
to erroneous and simplified conclusions.

Despite numerous challenges, Serbia continues to
participate in the dialogue in a constructive, responsible
and dedicated way, with the aim of addressing
outstanding issues within a status-neutral framework,
contributing to the stabilization of the situation and
creating the ideal conditions to facilitate EU membership
for the Western Balkans. Pristina's treatment of the
dialogue and the process of normalization of relations
as a means of blackmailing Serbian and its European
partners is unacceptable. Such an attitude culminated
at the beginning of March, when its Assembly adopted
a resolution on suspending the dialogue tying it,
de facto, to the destiny of one person, who has been
charged with committing the most heinous crimes. That
was followed by the overt threats of regional Albanian
political leaders of redrawing borders and creating the
so-called "greater Albania", unless their ambitions
regarding European integration are met expeditiously.

Despite the fact that the agreement on the
establishment of an association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo constitutes the most important
part of the First Agreement of Principles Governing the
Normalization of Relations and is the key question for the
survival of the Serbian people in Kosovo and Metohija,
no significant progress was made on that matter during
the reporting period. The problem will not be resolved
by sporadic public criticisms of Pristina made in the
West. It is necessary to hear the unified voice of our
European partners and the voices of the members of the
Security Council demanding that Pristina expeditiously
fulfil its commitments association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Similarly, the Republic of
Serbia stresses the importance of holding quarterly
Council meetings to send a message to both sides,
especially Pristina, that agreements are not and cannot
be dead letters. Empty words no longer suffice; specific
acts must follow.

Serbia is genuinely committed to the preservation
of peace. Its primary interest is to save the lives and
protect the property of all residents of the province, and
to enable the sustainable return of internally displaced
persons. Regrettably, we must note that the current
situation in Kosovo and Metohija is quite ill-suited in
that regard - a fact that is also borne out by Secretary-
General reports. The absence of a proper systematic
response by the Pristina institutions to the multiple
problems facing non-Albanian communities, as well
as an intensive anti-Serbian campaign, has contributed
to continuing ethnically motivated attacks against the
Serbs. A case in point is the recent horrifying threat by
Daut Haradinaj, a member of the Assembly of Kosovo
from the opposition party Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo, that not a single living Serb will remain in
Kosovo and Metohija if the results of the proceedings
against his brother, Ramush Haradinaj, are contrary
to the wishes of the Albanians. Mr. Tanin's reaction to
that statement was commendable. Moreover, the justice
system in Kosovo and Metohija must not remain silent
in the face of hate speech and new threats regarding the
ethnic cleansing of the remaining Serbs.

There can be no genuine reconciliation without
the prosecution of all crimes, without exception, nor if
there is unwillingness to hold perpetrators within one's
own ranks accountable. The fact that not a single killer
of any of about 1,000 Serbs killed since the end of the
conflict has been convicted with a legally enforceable
sentence speaks for itself. That cannot be the path to
genuine reconciliation; it leads only to the simulacrum
of reconciliation, as directed by the promoters of the
Kosovo project.

Impunity for crimes must not be allowed or
tolerated. The entire United Nations membership is
being challenged; it must show that law and justice are
above politics and that all victims are equal. It is exactly
for that reason that we consider the decision of the
French court of Colmar to refuse to extradite Ramush
Haradinaj - a man suspected of the most serious war
crimes - shameful, illegal and scandalous. The court
did not present any fact to prove that the requirements of
the 1957 European Convention on Extradition, ratified
both by France and Serbia, have not been fulfilled. The
court decision is a violation of the universal principles
of international law on preventing impunity for war
crimes, while its contention that the extradition of
Ramush Haradinaj to Serbia would have very serious
consequences for him is unacceptable and unfounded.

Outrageous crimes and atrocities committed
against Serbian civilians, as well as against unloyal
Albanians, committed by the terrorist organization
Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), one of whose leaders
was Ramush Haradinaj, are frightening, to say the
least. The testimony of brutal and repeated rapes,
torture, beating and ruthless killings by KLA members
are shocking. All those who believe that the decision
of the French court is a victory for the Albanians of
Kosovo and Metohija are wrong. It is not they who are
the victors, but crime, and it is not our defeat, but the
defeat of law and justice. For the sake of the Victims, it
is our moral obligation to continue our fight for justice
and truth. We shall not give up; our victims are no
less valuable.

Yet the message of that politically motivated
decision and of those who welcomed the criminal
Ramush Haradinaj to Pristina with fireworks is that the
killing of Serbs is not and should not be punishable.
Albanian political leaders in Pristina must finally
understand that punishing war criminals is part of
the process of normalizing relations, and that backing
a man who is suspected of crimes against the Serbs
and the Roma, as well as against his own compatriots,
only serves to widen the inter-ethnic gap in Kosovo
and Metohija and to undermine the rule of law and
democracy for residents of the province.
As if the crimes committed in 1998 and 1999 had
not sufficed, Ramush Haradinaj continues to make new
threats - to seize the territory of Serbia and rewrite
its constitution by force. Moreover, he promises that if
the United States will not help, then the Albanians will
finish thejob themselves. I would recall that everything
in Kosovo and Metohija began with the lies told by
people such as William Walker; today he does not
even bother to conceal his affinity for greater Albania
ambitions and projects. He is also known to oppose
the Specialist Chambers, established to try the crimes
committed by the so-called Kosovo Liberation Army.

In this context, I wish to recall that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia agreed, under the agreement of
16 October 1998, that 2,000 members ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Kosovo Verification Mission would be deployed on
part of its territory, Kosovo and Metohija. The validity
of the agreement was confirmed by resolution 1203
(1998), of 24 October 1998, and the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia fulfilled all its obligations under the
resolution and the agreement. However, William
Walker, who headed the OSCE Kosovo Verification
Mission and was, as an official of the organization,
obliged to act objectively and impartially, abused his
mandate and the OSCE mission in order to promote the
goals that have been unveiled lately and consisted of the
creation of an independent Kosovo and greater Albania.

The Verification Mission headed by William
Walker never acted in its full capacity, and all its
verifiers were withdrawn on the basis of his decision of
20 March 1999, immediately before the aggression on
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

The failure to realize the OSCE Mission under
the agreement of 16 October 1998, the pressure put on
Helena Ranta to tailor her forensic findings to William
Walker's wishes and the dispatch ofa false report on the
alleged massacre of civilians committed in the village
of Racak speak volumes, especially in the context of
the recent statements by William Walker regarding the
project of creating a greater Albania. They indicate in
clear terms that he acted in a way that was abusive of
the OSCE mandate and, by the same token, violated
resolution 1203 (1998).

In this context, the role played by William Walker
can be characterized only as an abuse of his position
in a respectable international organization such as the
OSCE to create the political conditions for the adoption
of a decision on the aggression against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. This is also corroborated by
the recent statement of Victoria Nuland to the effect
that the United States has invested in the independence
of Kosovo for 20 years.

The actions of William Walker and the use of armed
force against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
nothing other than a flagrant violation of the principles
on which the United Nations is based, in particular the
principle on refraining from the threat of force against
the territorial integrity and political independence of
any State, and a violation of the imperative clause of
Article 53 of the United Nations Charter to the effect
that no enforcement action shall be taken under regional
arrangements or by regional agencies, which includes
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, without the
authorization of the Security Council.

The decision to use force against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia was taken and carried out
without the authorization of the Security Council
by those same countries that continue to this day to
advocate recognition of the independence of Kosovo.
The sovereign rights of Serbia are thus being violated,
and the authority of the Council in the performance of
its main duty of the maintenance of peace and security
is being undermined.

The illegal decision on the aggression against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia resulted primarily
from the report of William Walker, although there was
neither a humanitarian disaster nor any persecution
of Kosovo and Metohija Albanians in the province
in 1998-1999. For instance, at the time when William
Walker was heading the Verification Mission, a
communication from the German Ministry of Foreign
Affairs dated 12 January 1999 to a court in Trier stated
that the operations of the Yugoslav and Serbian security
forces were not directed against Kosovo Albanians as
an ethnic group but against the militant opponents and
their alleged followers.

The position on the alleged humanitarian
intervention in Kosovo and Metohija was not that of the
Security Council or any other credible body. The facts
underlying the assessment that a military intervention
was required at the time were contradictory and tailored
to suit the needs of NATO, with the goal of launching
an armed aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. Invoking a humanitarian intervention as the
basis for the use of armed force is in sharp contrast with
the practice of the International Court of Justice - for
example, the case of Military and Paramilitary Activities
in and against Nicaragua - and other documents
developed under United Nations auspices. That the so-
called humanitarian intervention has never become part
of international law was made clear by, inter alia, the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), which
confirmed in its paragraph 79 that

"the relevant provisions of the [United Nations]
Charter are sufficient to address the full range of
threats to international peace and security",

and further reaffirmed

"the authority of the Security Council to mandate
coercive action to maintain and restore international
peace and security",

emphasizing

"the importance of acting in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter".

The aggression against the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia resulted in large-scale destruction and loss
of life and the expulsion of a huge number of Serbs
and other non-Albanians from the territory of Kosovo
and Metohija. The facts provide ample evidence
today that the action against Serbia was planned and
that it was calculated and not aimed at satisfying
international justice.

Resolution 1244 (1999) does not constitute, nor can
it constitute, a post factum approval of the use of armed
force against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, nor
can it change the legal qualification of the NATO
intervention as an aggression. That resolution, as stated
by the International Court of Justice in its advisory
opinion on the accordance with international law of
the unilateral declaration of independence in respect of

Kosovo (see A/64/88l), forms part of international law,
as does UNMIK regulation No. 2009/1, which defines
Kosovo and Metohija as a territory within the Republic
of Serbia under international administration.

It is evident that the human rights of non-Albanians
continue to be systematically threatened all across
Kosovo and Metohija. Numerous incidents provide
ample evidence of the fact that security in Kosovo and
Metohija remains unstable and subject to an escalation
of violence. As a rule, returnees in ethnically mixed
communities are the most vulnerable. This issue
should be accorded greater attention in the reports of
the Secretary-General. On average, 10 to 15 ethnically
motivated attacks are recorded every month, followed
by an ever-present intimidation campaign against Serbs.
None of the perpetrators has yet been punished. Let me
mention only the protest by a group of Albanians in
the village of Ljubozda, near Istok, to which 13 Serbian
families returned recently, as proof that Kosovo and
Metohija still has a long way to go before it becomes a
multi-ethnic society in which all its residents are treated
equally. The lack of proper institutional response
represents tacit approval of, and even support for, the
continuation of such practices.

There can be no harmonious coexistence where
the rate of IDP returns, only 1.9 per cent, is lower
than in the most traumatized post-conflict areas.
Let me remind the Council that there are still more
than 200,000 IDPs living in central Serbia. The key
obstacles to their return include continuous attacks
on Serbian and other non-Albanian returnees, looting,
the desecration of cultural and religious heritage, and
politically motivated criminal proceedings against
IDPs, as well as their inability to exercise the right to
property restitution.

In this context, it is necessary that all actors
involved in the resolution of the question of IDPs work
together to create conditions conducive to unimpeded
and long-term sustainable returns, a key element of the
UNMIK mandate. In a memorandum issued following
his mission to Kosovo and Metohija, the Council of
Europe Commissioner for Human Rights

"notes with concern the existence in Kosovo
of many obstacles to the voluntary return of
displaced persons."

He goes on to say that "[a]lthough the Stabilization
Association Agreement", signed by the European Union
and Pristina in October 2015,

"reaffirms refugees' and displaced persons' right
to return and the protection of their human rights,
[...] progress in this field has been very modest."

The Commissioner expresses his particular concern

"about the reported negative impact on voluntary
returns of acts of hostility or flagrantly ethnically
motivated violence"

and the lack of classification by the police of

"ethnically motivated crimes as such and [...]
systematic monitoring of the situation in this field".

A special threat to the security of the southern
Serbian province recently has been the trend of the
continuation of the process of the return of foreign
terrorist fighters from Middle East battlefields and the
escalation of political and religious extremism.

Serbia is strongly opposed to the establishment of
the so-called Kosovo Army, contrary to resolution 1244
(1999) and the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia.
Efforts to establish the so-called Kosovo Army are
but an attempt to create new tensions at an extremely
sensitive moment, marked by dangerous statements
on redrawing internationally recognized borders and
creating a greater Albania, an idea that we had believed
belonged to the dark past of this part of the Western
Balkans during the Second World War.

Guided by the interests of regional stability, Serbia
is firmly committed to the continuation of the dialogue,
aimed primarily at resolving the everyday problems
of the people living in Kosovo and Metohija without
prejudice to the future status of the province and with
full respect for resolution 1244 (1999). This resolution
continues to be the basis and framework for the solution
to the question of Kosovo and Metohija with guarantees
for the territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia.
We consider that the dialogue, with the facilitation of
the European Union, is the most appropriate vehicle to
build confidence between the Serbs and Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija, and an important mechanism for
supporting the efforts of the European Union to solidify
peace and stability and further the process of European
integration in our region.

Yet it is hard to push aside the impression that
the dialogue is not yielding results at the moment,
which could be due to the non-constructive position of
Pristina to implement the agreements. For the dialogue
to be genuinely meaningful, it must not be abused as a
platform for the imposition of the interests of one side,
based on unrealistic expectations that normalization
should amount to nothing other than the recognition
of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence
by Serbia. The positive results achieved thus far in
areas such as telecommunications and the freedom of
movement are eloquent proof that there is no alternative
to the dialogue and that it should be continued with
more responsibility and a genuine commitment
to compromise.

We hope that Pristina will realize that it should and
must find mutually acceptable solutions with Belgrade
for all outstanding issues, which cannot be based on
diktat and fait accompli. In the quest for such solutions,
it is necessary to avoid unilateral acts - which are,
in many ways, harmful - such as attempts to admit
Pristina to various international organizations and
the unlawful decisions, which are null and void for
the Republic of Serbia, such as that of 1 March to
appropriate the property of the Republic of Serbia.
Such decisions needlessly pollute the atmosphere of the
dialogue. To give the dialogue a chance, it will certainly
be necessary that the facilitator demonstrate stronger
leadership, primarily in the area of the implementation
of reached agreements.

I will conclude my statement with a call to those
countries that have not recognized the unilaterally
declared independence of Kosovo to remain consistent
in their principled respect of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. At the same time,
I call on those countries that have recognized Kosovo
to reconsider their decision and contribute accordingly
to efforts to finding a mutually acceptable solution to
this question, proceeding from the unacceptability of
unilateralism as a way of solving any issue.

