Mr. Kobler: It is a great pleasure to introduce the
second report (S/2012/185) of the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 2001 (2011) on
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI), as well as the situation in the
country.

Since my last briefing of the Security Council
(see S/PV.6675), there have been several important
developments in Iraq. The United States completed the
withdrawal of its armed forces from the country on
31 December. The withdrawal has provided the
democratically elected Government of Iraq with the
opportunity to turn a new page in its history and assert
its country's full sovereignty. On 29 March, Iraq hosted
the League of Arab States summit. That historic event
marked Iraq's re-emergence as a major actor in the
region.

It is true that domestic political issues and the
potential fallout from regional crises, such as the one
ongoing in Syria, continue to pose obstacles for Iraq as
it marches on the road to full recovery. The continued
delays in convening the national conference underscore
the urgent need for Iraqi leaders to summon the
political will and courage to work together to solve the
2

country's problems through an inclusive dialogue. In
that regard, UNAMI will continue to remain steadfast
in its commitment to assisting the Government and
people of Iraq with addressing the major challenges
facing their nation.

In many ways, the holding of the twenty-third
League of Arab States summit in Baghdad on 29 March
was a measure of how far Iraq has come after decades
of war, dictatorship and economic hardship. The
historic presence at the summit of the Emir of Kuwait,
His Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber
Al-Sabah, also highlighted the significant improvement
in relations between Iraq and Kuwait. Iraq now stands
to play a positive role in the region as it assumes the
chairmanship of the Arab League as a fully
independent and sovereign State. This represents an
important opportunity to play a leading role in
addressing some of the pressing issues of concern to
Arab States and improving cooperation among them.

The recent steps taken by Iraq and Kuwait to
normalize their relations and resolve all the issues
remaining between them is encouraging. I am hopeful
that this willingness to work together, and the practical
steps already taken by the Government of Iraq to fulfil
its outstanding obligations under Chapter VII of the
Charter, will help bring closure to this long-standing
problem.

On 14 March, the Iraqi Prime Minister
Mr. Al-Maliki undertook an important two-day visit to
Kuwait. As a result, Iraq agreed to proceed with the
pending Iraq-Kuwait boundary maintenance project,
pursuant to resolution 833 (1993), and to transfer its
share of funds allocated for the project's completion to
the United Nations immediately after Prime Minister
Al-Maliki's visit. Most significantly, during the visit the
two Governments agreed to resume their high-level
bilateral talks and to hold the second Iraq-Kuwait high-
level cooperation committee meeting this month. The
meeting should provide both sides with an invaluable
opportunity to review all pending bilateral issues, as
well as Iraq's outstanding obligations under Chapter VII.

I commend the Kuwaiti and Iraqi Governments
for their efforts to improve bilateral relations. Officials
in both countries relayed their positions to the
Secretary-General during his visit to Kuwait and Iraq
at the end of March. In their meetings with the
Secretary-General, both countries welcomed
Mr. Al-Maliki's visit to Kuwait as a historic and
12-28745
important step towards normalizing relations between
them. During his visit, the Secretary-General urged the
Iraqi Government to continue to work to fulfil all its
obligations pursuant to all relevant outstanding United
Nations resolutions under Chapter VII. I will continue
to assist in expediting the normalization of relations
between the two countries, including by further visits
to Kuwait.

The continuing violence in Syria is fraught with
risks that could have dangerous spillover effects on
Iraq, affecting its fragile balance of power and
increasing communal tensions. In addition, it has
already begun to have an impact on Iraqi refugees in
Syria. The United Nations country team has therefore
undertaken extensive contingency planning to mitigate
possible problems.

I took up my functions as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Iraq some six months ago.
Since then, I have expanded my consultations with
political leaders of all elements of Iraqi society and
with representatives of the political parties, including
several visits to the Kurdistan region and other
governorates.

Such political facilitation and outreach have
become all the more important in the light of the
tensions that have arisen between the main
parliamentary blocs in Iraq, and which have developed
into a political impasse. I have therefore encouraged
Iraqi political parties and leaders to work together in a
spirit of partnership towards finding the common
ground that will help them resolve their differences. In
that regard, Al-Iraqiya's decision to end its boycott of
the Council of Ministers and the Council of
Representatives was the right step.

It was President Taiabani's suggestion to hold a
national conference as a way to help put an end to the
stalemate. So far, unfortunately, there has been no
agreement on an agenda. An inclusive forum. however,
is needed as a first step towards ending the political
impasse. I call on all Iraqi leaders to sit down together
to address all their differences in a meaningful way.
UNAMI stands ready to continue to support such
efforts.

Arab-Kurdish relations in general, and issues
pertaining to the disputed internal boundaries in
particular, remain at the heart of UNAMI's mandate. In
that regard, the Standing Consultation Mechanism
launched by UNAMI was an important forum for
12-28745

addressing the issue of disputed internal boundaries.
Regrettably, the series of political crises has made it
difficult for the Mechanism to convene. Redoubling
our efforts to facilitate progress on the issue of Kirkuk,
my Deputy and I have made it a priority to pay regular
visits to the area to promote political dialogue between
the parties. During my most recent visit to Kirkuk, all
the interlocutors, including the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Provincial Council Chairman,
emphasized the importance of holding provincial
elections in Kirkuk as soon as possible and of the need
for the United Nations to play a facilitation role in
those and other outstanding issues.

It goes without saying that there can be no true
democracy without free, fair and competitive elections.
This makes UNAMI's work of providing electoral
support all the more important for consolidating
democracy in Iraq. At the request of the Council of
Representatives, UNAMI has been serving as adviser
and observer in the selection process of the Board of
Commissioners of the Independent High Electoral
Commission before the expiration this month of the
current Board's term. The participation of UNAMI and
non-governmental organizations in the selection
process is a clear signal that the process's transparency
can be assured.

The final vote and selection of the nine new
Commissioners, which was expected by the end of this
month, is now unlikely to take place. In order,
however, to avoid delays in the upcoming elections in
the Kurdistan region in September and in the
provincial elections in early 2013, the Council of
Representatives has been encouraged to extend the
mandate of the current Board of Commissioners so as
to enable it to initiate preparations for holding those
contests.

I would like to highlight specific concerns I have
about the human rights situation in Iraq, particularly in
terms of, first, civilian casualties; secondly, gender-
based violence and women; thirdly, the situation
minorities; and fourthly, internally displaced persons
(IDPs).

I am concerned that Iraq's political situation is
heightening communal tensions in the country and
leading to an increase in the numbers of attacks on
civilians. Since my most recent briefing to the Council,
terrorist attacks have continued to target pilgrims and
resulted in the killing and wounding of scores of
3
defenceless people practicing their religion. Other
attacks across the country have indiscriminately
targeted civilians, resulting in large numbers of deaths
and injuries, including of children. In the first three
months of 2012, a total of 613 civilians were killed and
1,800 injured. This is slightly less than civilians
casualties last year; however every man, woman and
child dying in terrorist attacks in the streets, markets or
mosques of Iraq is one casualty too many. Such
horrendous crimes against the Iraqi people need to stop
and the violence must end if Iraq is to achieve the
prosperous and secure future its people deserve.

Women's History Month was celebrated last
month, but statistics indicate that Iraqi women continue
to face widespread instances of gender-based violence,
including domestic violence and so-called honour
killings. Many of the issues related to the violation of
the rights of women and girls arise from entrenched
cultural traditions and social practices. It is the duty of
Iraqi leaders to act responsibly and in unity to end the
ongoing violence against women and girls.

In recent months, I have expanded my regular
consultations with representatives of all minority
communities around the country, including Christians,
Shabaks, Sabean Mandeans and Yazidis. I would like to
emphasize that violence against minorities is
unacceptable and should have no place in Iraq as it
moves forward on the path of consolidating democratic
governance. UNAMI is able to provide support to the
Iraqi authorities in protecting Iraq's ethnic and
religious communities, and in promoting their rights in
accordance with the Constitution, including fair
representation in the political system in Iraq.

Despite the return of some 1 million internally
displaced Iraqis since 2003, large numbers of
individuals continue to be unable or unwilling to return
to their places of origin. According to Government
figures, there are still more than 1.3 million post-2006
displaced persons, representing more than 220,000
families. Baghdad hosts the largest number, with over
300,000 persons in almost 60,000 families. We can best
help restore the rights of those who fled violence in
recent years by ensuring their safe return to their
homes. All Iraqis, including those displaced, are
entitled to live in dignity. The United Nations is
working to ensure that the displaced are adequately
cared for as long as they are displaced, followed by
their voluntary return, resettlement and local
integration.
On the positive side, I am pleased to report that
yesterday, 9 April, the Council of Representatives
voted to endorse the commissioners to serve on Iraq's
first independent High Commission for Human Rights.
The importance of this institution cannot be
underestimated, as it will serve as the first Iraqi-owned
and led human rights institution and will form the
cornerstone for promoting and protecting human rights
in Iraq. The Government has taken steps to address
human rights challenges by appointing a committee to
oversee implementation of the National Action Plan on
Human Rights, which was adopted by the Government
in December 2011. The Government must build on
these positive steps to do all that it can to ensure that
its human rights obligations are met.

As I mentioned to the Council during my
previous briefing, in moving forward with our
integrated approach the United Nations country team
will focus on three priority issues during the coming
year. These are youth, water resource management and
the environment. Making progress on these issues has
the potential to improve the political, security and
governance situations. We have embarked on efforts
aimed at sensitizing the Government and people of Iraq
to the role of youth in the socio-economic recovery of
Iraq. Water and environment remain critical issues for
the development in Iraq. I call on Iraq and its
neighbouring countries to work together on finding a
durable solution to managing their shared water
resources.

A year ago, on 8 April 2011, the tragic incidents
in Camp Ashraf led to the deaths of dozens of the
camp's residents and to hundreds being injured. In an
effort to reach a peaceful and durable solution, UNAMI
and the Government of Iraq signed a memorandum of
understanding on 25 December 2011. The Government
of Iraq agreed to extend the deadline for the closure of
the camp. From mid-February until now, almost 1,200
residents of Camp New Iraq have been safely relocated
to the temporary transit location in Camp Hurriya, near
Baghdad. United Nations monitors are deployed to
monitor both the relocation and the situation in Camp
Hurriya around the clock. The Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
has a team at Camp Hurriya to carry out the
verification and adjudication of claims for refugee
status.

I wish to make it clear that the memorandum of
understanding concerns voluntary relocation, and that
12-28745
its implementation is based firmly on all sides acting
peacefully and in good faith. It should be noted that, on
8 April, an incident took place at Camp New Iraq
during the preparation for the fourth transfer of
residents. A confrontation developed; United Nations
monitors now report that the situation has returned to
calm. Both sides have now resumed cooperation in
preparation for the next transfer.

I would have loved to have reported that another
group of 400 residents had moved to Camp Hurriya.
This incident, however, momentarily disrupted the
relocation. But, as we speak, United Nations monitors
are at Camp Hurriya and Camp New Iraq, and I am
pleased to report that the next 400 residents will move
immediately once the loading of the person's
belongings is completed. This is a sign of the good will
of the residents. I will continue to be actively engaged
in ensuring that an understanding is reached on the
remaining issues. With this move, half of the residents
of Camp New Iraq will have been relocated to Camp
Hurriya.

I would like to take this opportunity to make the
following four further remarks. First, I would like to
commend the Iraqi authorities, in particular Prime
Minister Al-Maliki and his advisors, as well as the
commanding General, the many Iraqi policemen and
the Iraqi army, for their patience and cooperation in
ensuring the safe and secure relocation of the first three
groups of residents. I encourage them to pursue the
relocation of the remaining residents in a manner that
guarantees the residents' human rights, safety and
security, and to avoid anything that could be seen as a
provocation. We will do everything possible to assist
the Government of Iraq in relocating the remaining
residents. There are, however, still major obstacles
ahead that might require flexibility on the deadline.

Secondly, I would like also to highlight that the
camp residents, despite initial difficulties, have
recently shown good will and cooperation in the
relocation process. The residents have indeed come a
long way. It is difficult to abandon a place where one
has lived for more than two decades. I encourage the
residents to continue to show good will and to work in
a cooperative spirit.

Thirdly and most importantly, I reiterate my call
on Member States to accept the residents of the camp
in their countries. Now that UNHCR has begun its
work, it is high time for the international community to
12-28745

accept eligible candidates and fund the relocation
process. The support of the international community is
urgently needed. I welcomed the joint
UNHCR/UNAMI resettlement conference, which took
place in Geneva on 23 March. More than 30 Member
States participated. However, no country has
committed to accepting residents. A donors appeal
meeting also took place the same day, seeking to raise
$39 million for the Ashraf project. Only one Member
State made a concrete pledge. That falls far below what
we had hoped. Without international support, the
process cannot succeed.

Last but not least, I would like to thank my
colleagues in UNAMI, UNHCR and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights for their hard
work and support. The Ashraf file placed a heavy
burden on the Mission. I could count on the support of
most of my colleagues. My admiration goes to the
monitoring staff in Camp Hurriya and the UNHCR
staff, in particular those who accompanied the convoys
under truly dangerous conditions. As stated by the
Secretary-General in his report, the process is still
fragile and instances of violence cannot be excluded.
We must therefore remain vigilant.

Coming to the end, I should like to highlight that,
following the withdrawal of United States troops, there
are now greater expectations for UNAMI to assist the
Government and people of Iraq in addressing the major
challenges facing their nation. Unfortunately, this
comes at a time when resources made available to
UNAMI have been shrinking.

I wish to take this opportunity to stress my
personal commitment and that of my team in Baghdad
to continuing to do our utmost to implement our
comprehensive mandate from the Security Council in
the areas of political facilitation, electoral support,
human rights, reconstruction and development. I firmly
believe that United Nations assistance at this critical
juncture in Iraq's history remains essential.

I should like to conclude by thanking the
members of the Council for their continued support, as
well as the Government of Iraq and the wider
membership of the United Nations. 1 should also like to
express my gratitude and appreciation to my colleagues
at UNAMI and in the United Nations family for their
efforts, dedication and perseverance under very
difficult working conditions in Iraq.
5
