Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French):
Allow me to congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. The delegation of Burundi does
not have the slightest doubt that you will lead the work
of the Council with your usual flair. I also wish to
welcome to the Council the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

This public meeting of the Security Council on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo gives me an
opportunity to pay tribute to the Council for its
persistent efforts to restore peace to the Great Lakes
region of Africa, as reflected, inter alia, in the
Council's most recent visit to the region.

In regard to the eighth report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the report of the Security Council
mission to the Great Lakes region, Burundi would like
to recall the current threats to the security of our
country and to the inter-Burundian peace process.

First of all, the good prospects for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are, paradoxically
but intentionally, at the root of the unfortunate
evolution of the security situation in Burundi. The
Secretary-General and the Security Council have
understood this, and we are grateful to them for
affirming that there will be no lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo if it must come at
the expense of peace in Burundi.

Secondly, the countries of the region that
sponsored the peace agreements signed at Arusha on 28
August 2000 must work as a united front to bring about
an end to the war in Burundi. This is the most fervent
wish of the Government and the people of Burundi.
Peace will be regional or there will be no peace, as
those who know the socio-political realities of this part
of Africa are aware.

Every passing day points to a certain duplicity on
the part of some countries of the region - an agenda
that is no longer concealed, since some have said to the
Security Council mission that the negative forces are
negative here but not negative there, and that, in fact,
they are not negative at all. This is troubling, given the
fact that the Lusaka and Arusha agreements were
signed under the moral umbrella of the representatives
of all of the countries concerned from that same region.

The delegation of Burundi wishes to recall here
that as long as the Forces pour la defense de la
de'mocratie (FDD) and the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) ~ Burundi armed groups - do not
put an end to the hostilities, as long as they are not
disarmed in accordance with the Lusaka Agreement
and repatriated to Burundi to be reintegrated
socially- in the case of those who are not found
guilty of crimes under the Arusha Agreement - those
groups will be considered negative forces, to be
combated and brought to justice in Burundi, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in any other
country. Indeed, they constitute a regional danger, just
like their allies, the Interahamwe and the former
Rwandan armed forces (ex-FAR), who became
mercenaries of genocide in Africa.

What must be done? First of all, the Government
of Burundi asks the Security Council not to allow the
Lusaka and Arusha processes to destroy each other.
The Council must find a formula that can ensure a
deterrent presence at the borders of Burundi with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, and
avert the failure of current efforts to restore peace to
the region. It is a fact that the transfer of war from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo towards Burundi or
Rwanda will perpetuate the regional conflict and make
it even crueler.

Secondly, strong pressure must be brought to bear
by those countries that have a real influence on the
Burundian armed groups - in this case Tanzania more
than any other country - to induce those groups to put
an end to the violence and rejoin the peace process. We
are convinced that if the FDD and the FNL had no rear
bases or multifaceted external support, they would long
ago have agreed to the conclusions of the Arusha Peace
Agreement, as they had pledged to do.

We are gratified that today many members of the
Security Council appealed to all those who have
influence on those groups to induce them to take a
more positive stance. But those groups want to
continue the war, even though a political agreement
was signed nine months ago. Unfortunately, the signals
that they are sending out are not encouraging.

We read in the report of the Security Council
mission, we read that the leader of the FDD had put
forward a series of conditions before agreeing to sign
or to negotiate a ceasefire agreement. In fact, it was
political questions that were at issue, questions that are
already answered in the Arusha Agreement.

Today I can inform the Security Council that I
have seen a statement by the FDD in which it says that
it will never sign a ceasefire agreement until political
negotiations with it come to an end. It also states that it
is shocked by the double language of the Security
Council, because, according to the groups, when the
Council met with Mr. Jean Bosco there was some
degree of mutual understanding, and now they do not
understand why the Council is still asking them to put
an end to the hostilities.

The international community must also exert
some pressure. We are pleased to note that the Security
Council is doing so, in particular since its meeting with
the two armed groups, in Kinshasa and in Dar es-
Salaam. We urge the Council to provide for
enforcement measures, as have been used elsewhere in
similar cases, if the rebellion definitively turns its back
on a negotiated solution.

The violence in Burundi is standing in the way of
the implementation of the Peace Agreement. The
various supporters of the armed groups do not give the
impression of being interested in the implementation of
the peace agreement; they too seem to follow the logic
of military victory. Peace in Burundi must be saved,
and the Arusha Agreement must be saved, before it is
too late.

In conclusion, I should like to reiterate the will of
the Government of Burundi to continue bilateral
consultations, in particular with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Tanzania, in the hope that
this will yield positive results before it is too late.

I should also like once again to commend the
Security Council's commitment to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Burundi and
to express the hope that the United Nations will join
the efforts of Nelson Mandela, Ketumile Masire and
the heads of State of the region to give renewed hope
to those peoples of the Great Lakes region of Africa, in
particular women, children, the elderly and even
humanitarian workers, who are dying day by day or are
wandering within and outside the borders.

The Government of Burundi would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council to the fact that
delays are dangerous and action is therefore urgent.

