Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Please allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council. I am indeed very honoured
to be here when you are presiding over the Council,
especially since you mentioned that this is the first
time that your country is presiding over the Council.
By association we are very honoured. I also wish to
express our deep gratitude to your delegation for
having been our partner in the Council and for our
very close cooperation with your Ambassador and the
entire delegation. We wish to thank them for organizing
today's debate.

I would like to join others in expressing our
sincere thanks to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Mariano Fernandez Amunategui for
presenting the Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2012/678) and for his briefing on the recent
developments in Haiti.

We are encouraged by developments in Haiti over
the past few months, including the appointment of
Prime Minister Laurent Lamothe and its ratification by
the Parliament in May. Those developments have ended
the political uncertainty and underscored the collective
resolve of Haiti's leadership to work in a constructive
manner to address various issues related to governance,
the economy, elections and reconstruction.

We commend the steps taken by the new Government
for improving the situation with regard to law and
order, attracting foreign investment, promoting new
industrial projects and combating smuggling. We also
commend the steps to resolve differences between the
executive and legislative branches of the Government
and hope that the newly established Constitutional
Court, the Electoral Council and the Superior Council
ofthe Judicary will satisfactorily settle the outstanding
1ssues.

For those steps to succeed, Haiti requires the
continued support of the international community.
In that connection, we commend MINUSTAH for
assisting the Haitian National Police in ensuring
a stable security situation across the country. We
think international support needs to be enhanced,
particularly in the implementation of the 2012-2016
Haitian national police development plan. We hope that
the local elections due since last year will be held soon
and will help in rebuilding democratic institutions at
the grass roots level.

While there has been substantial progress in
resettling the internally displaced persons and
addressing their humanitarian needs, recovery and
reconstruction efforts continue to face a number of
challenges. Nearly 400,000 persons remain dependent
on humanitarian assistance for their basic survival.
Assistance is also required to fight the cholera
epidemic. For long-term improvement in the situation,
the international community needs to align its efforts
with Haiti's national development priorities. In that
regard, we welcome the creation of the Housing and
Public Buildings Construction Unit in the office
of the Prime Minister, which will contribute to the
improved coordination and effective implementation of
humanitarian programmes. We also welcome the new
integrated strategic framework for 2013-2016, drafted
by MINUSTAH in consultation with the authorities in
Haiti.

MINUSTAH and its leadership played an
important role in the positive developments in Haiti.
MINUSTAH has not only helped Haitian stakeholders
in resolving their differences; it has also lent its hand
in capacity-building and in the recovery efforts of
national institutions and in ensuring overall security
and stability in the country.
With Haitian national institutions assuming a
greater role, MINUSTAH should gradually hand over
its core functions to the Haitian National Police and
focus on long-term stabilization and development goals.
In that context, we support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General to narrow MINUSTAH's activities
to a core set of mandated tasks that are achievable within
a reasonable time frame. MINUSTAH's drawdown
should, however, be based on the evolving situation in
the country rather than as a fixed timeline.

India has remained a major contributor to
MINUSTAH with three contingents of formed police
units (FPUs).

Our FPUs are playing an important role in
maintaining peace and stability in Haiti, including
the guarding of the Presidential Palace. In addition,
the Indian FPUs have arranged blood donation camps
for the benefit of the Haitian people and earned their
goodwill.

India remains committed to supporting Haiti in its
reconstruction activities. In September, India donated
$5 million for the construction of 500 low-cost housing
units for the victims of the January 2010 earthquake.
Earlier, India donated $5 million in cash as disaster
relief assistance. India has also been contributing
$500,000 annually since 2009 to the Central Emergency
Response Fund, which continues to play an important
role in recovery work in Haiti. India is also cooperating
with Haiti in capacity-building and human resource
development by offering scholarships under the Indian
Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme.

In conclusion, let me state that, while Haiti has
come a long way since the devastating earthquake,
the international community should continue its
engagement so that Haiti is able to achieve sustainable
peace, security, stability and development. As Haiti
assumes the chairmanship of the Caribbean Community
next year, we convey our best wishes to the Government
and people of Haiti and we assure them of our continued
partnership.

