Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank Special Representative David Shearer
for his briefing and for his exceptional work under
particularly difficult conditions.

Last week's meeting in Juba between President
Kiir and Riek Machar is an important step in the
right direction, a step that was long overdue. Trust
between political leaders is essential for a successful
peace process. We also note as a positive development
that political violence has decreased even though
intercommunity violence, sexual violence and
crime persist.

We must now build on that positive momentum.
There are only two months left before the end of the
extended pre-transition period. All stakeholders must
therefore make rapid progress on a number of key
issues. I would mention in particular the establishment
of security arrangements, the status of Juba, including
the issue of the VIP protection force, the finalization of
internal boundaries, the development of a road map for
the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and the full release of implementation funds
announced by the Government. Finally, the signatory
parties must form a transitional Government by
12 November, as agreed in the agreement and publicly
reconfirmed by President Kiir and Mr. Machar last
week. As for the non-signatory parties, we urge them
to join the Revitalized Agreement. The commitment,
monitoring and support of the States of the region
are essential to ensure the implementation of the
Revitalized Agreement.

The protection of civilians remains a daunting
challenge. Human rights abuses continue and sexual
violence continues, unfortunately affecting entire
communities. The protection of civilians and the
provision of services to the population are primarily the
responsibility of the authorities. We call on all parties
in South Sudan to address key protection risks, extend
the rule of law and invest essential funds in the setting
up of services throughout the country.

Humanitarian access remains essential for the
South Sudanese people. As suggested by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2019/741), we encourage the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to continue
to adopt a more mobile and robust approach and
to strengthen its early-warning and monitoring
capabilities, while continuing to ensure security in
and around civilian-protection sites. Any return of
displaced persons must be voluntary, safe, dignified
and well informed.

No lasting solution to the conflict in South Sudan
can be found without urgently and effectively addressing
the many abuses. We call on the Government to end the
culture of impunity, thoroughly investigate all cases
of sexual violence and other abuses and bring those
responsible for those crimes to justice. We call for
the establishment of transitional justice mechanisms,
including the Hybrid Court.

This conflict is the main factor behind the
humanitarian crisis and violence in South Sudan, a
crisis that is completely human-caused. The Revitalized
Agreement represents the window of opportunity
for lasting peace in South Sudan. Let us not lose
this opportunity.

