The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2000/865, which contains the text of
identical letters dated 7 September 2000 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
General Assembly and the President of the Security
Council.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2000/1131, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

As agreed among Council members, I will make a
brief statement before the adoption of this draft
resolution.

During the consultations on this draft resolution it
became apparent that four urgent issues remain to be
addressed by the informal working group of the
Security Council on the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda,
namely, the issue of equitable geographical
distribution; the issue of compensation of victims, as
contained in document S/2000/1063; the issue of
compensation of Victims of miscarriages ofjustice and
of persons unlawfully arrested or detained, as
contained in documents 8/2000/904 and S/2000/925;
and the issue of gender balance.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution
contained in document S/2000/1 13 l.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1329 (2000).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 12.30p.m.

