Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, Mr. Simonovie, Mr. Ging and
Mr. Apakan for their briefings.
Angola supports the peaceful resolution of
conflicts through dialogue, negotiations and strict
respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law. On this occasion, we
want to reiterate our attachment to Ukraine's unity,
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
as well as our support for the implementation of the
package of measures adopted in Minsk on 12 February
and for a permanent ceasefire a the prerequisite to the
expeditious implementation of the Minsk agreements
and, ultimately, to the establishment of peace in
Ukraine.

We took note of the relative optimism expressed by
the briefers regarding the prevailing peaceful situation
in eastern Ukraine, which we hope will strengthen and
allow for the recovery of the region, thus enabling the
population in those areas to enjoy a better life in peace
and security. In that regard, we hope that the separatists
in eastern Ukraine will soon give up the territories they

control in order to restore normalcy to the lives of the
people under their yoke and permit the restoration of
the unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine.

We regret the constraints on humanitarian access
and the freedom of movement faced by United
Nations agencies across the line of contact between
Government- and non-Government-controlled areas
because of security reasons. We strongly condemn
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. We call upon the parties to the conflict to
allow and facilitate safe, rapid and unhindered access
by humanitarian organizations to all areas and people
in need.

The situation of internally displaced persons is a
matter of concern. Owing to inconsistent solutions for
housing internally displaced persons, delays in winter
protection, the significant number of landmines and
unexploded ordnance remain the main causes of high
casualty rates.

The conflict in Ukraine is a senseless one. It must
stop as soon as possible, with the Ukrainian people able
to live in peace with one another. The Deputy Secretary-
General referred to the Minsk agreements as the only
viable strategy for the achievement of peace. We join
our voice to his appeal for political will and flexibility,
and we call on the parties to the conflict to respect
the ceasefire, fully implement the Minsk package of
measures and allow the Organization of Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
freedom of movement to verify the ceasefire and the
withdrawal ofheavy weapons from the designated areas.
The Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
2202 (2015), endorsing the Minsk agreements and
conveying the international community's commitment
to peace in Ukraine.

