Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We express our solidarity
with the people and the Government of Tanzania and
condemn in the strongest terms the attack that caused
the deaths of so many Tanzanian peacekeepers of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
wounding of even more. Our thoughts are with the
families of those who lost loved ones. We wish a speedy
recovery to the 53 who were injured.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2391 (2017) in support ofthe Joint Force ofthe Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We thank France, as the
penholder, for facilitating the negotiation on the draft
resolution, as well as for its unwavering commitment
in support of the Force. No doubt, the support of the
Council, and indeed the rest of the international
community, is vital to the ongoing fight being waged
by G-5 Sahel countries against terrorism and other
transnational organized crimes. The deployment of
the 5,000-strong force will be highly instrumental
in neutralizing armed terrorist groups and criminal
networks operating in the region. It will also support
the operational objectives of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, which is the epicentre of the peace and security
challenge in the region.

Even though the resolution does not necessarily
live up to the expectations we had, we nonetheless
appreciate the spirit of compromise demonstrated by
Member States, particularly the United States, with
a view to achieving the necessary consensus, but we
sincerely hope that upon appropriate evaluation of the
performance of the Force, the Security Council will be
able to provide enhanced support in due course.

The adoption of the resolution also could not be
more timely and relevant in the light of the upcoming
international pledging conference in support of the G-5
States to be held in Brussels next week. We hope that
the conference will enable international and regional
partners to make commitments in support of the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.

