I thank the Foreign Minister, His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, and the delegation of Germany for organizing this important debate. Our appreciation also goes to all the briefers for sharing their perspectives on this very important subject. The term "conflict-related sexual violence", as reflected in the Secretary General's report for 2019 (S/2020/487), refers to rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization, forced marriage and any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or indirectly linked to a conflict. That link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator, who is often affiliated with a State or a non-State armed group, which includes terrorist entities; the profile of the victim, who is frequently an actual or perceived member of a political, ethnic or religious minority group or targeted on the basis of actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity; and the climate of impunity, which is generally associated with State collapse, cross-border consequences, such as displacement or trafficking, and/or violations of a ceasefire agreement. The term also encompasses trafficking in persons for the purpose of sexual violence or exploitation when committed in situations of conflict. Conflict-related sexual violence is a pervasive human rights violation that prevents women and girls from reaching their full potential. It is an obstacle to women's ability to live dignified lives, free from fear. During times of conflict and instability, it can also pose significant security challenges, as violence is normalized, while sexual violence is often used to punish and terrorize populations, fuel displacement and destroy the fabric of communities. The impact of such acts, if unchecked, further fuels extremism, instability and collapse of the rule of law. The coronavirus disease pandemic has further compounded the problem, as the imposition of quarantines, curfews, lockdowns and other restrictions on movement have hampered the possibility for survivors of sexual-related violence to report new cases. This further heightens the existing structural, institutional and sociocultural barriers to seeking redress for such crimes. The pandemic has also had a negative impact on the availability of immediate life-saving assistance and accessibility to other multisectoral aid for survivors of sexual violence in many settings. The majority of the shelters for gender-based violence survivors have been closed and mobile clinics and counselling services cancelled, as the already scarce resources are diverted to other areas impacted by the pandemic. The Secretary-General's report highlights areas of strength and weakness in the implementation of the conflict-related sexual violence mandate. His recommendations, if embraced, can enhance coordination and effectiveness. One gap identified was the significant lack of compliance with prevailing commitments. The problem of fragmentation and overlap in the United Nations system demands a framework for implementation and accountability, which, he argues, would increase the perceived or actual cost for perpetrators and serve as a deterrent. Nigeria has had its fair share of conflict-related sexual violence, especially in the north-east, largely perpetrated by Boko Haram terrorists. As has been the case since 2014, the Secretary-General's annual report on conflict-related sexual violence contains an annex that rightly lists Boko Haram terrorists among the "parties credibly suspected of committing or being responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual violence in situations of armed conflict in countries on the agenda of the Security Council" (S/2020/487, para. 74). In its efforts to stem the tide and to prevent other potential human rights violations, the Nigerian Government has put in place a number of measures to address the situation in north-eastern Nigeria in a holistic manner. These measures centre on the issues of accountability for the crime of conflict-related sexual violence, the well-being of the survivor and prevention. The measures also emphasize respect for human rights and the rule of law, humanitarian assistance and the protection of civilians, crisis prevention and stabilization, and resilience-building for sustainable development, as well as regional cross-border cooperation. Some of the specific steps taken in that regard include, but are not limited to, the following: the diligent prosecution of those found to have perpetrated the crime of conflict-related sexual violence; the provision of psychosocial support where survivors are provided with protection, reparations and holistic health and psychosocial services; the use of leaders at the national and local levels, including community, religious and traditional leaders, to play a more active role in advocating within communities against sexual violence in conflict; the creation of a human rights desk, working in a synergistic fashion between the National Human Rights Commission and the Ministry of Defence to investigate and prosecute, where applicable, human rights abuses by the Nigerian military; and the establishment of a civil-military relations department in the Nigerian Defence Headquarters to enhance the civil-military relationship and information-sharing. Among other things, this is a trust-building mechanism so as to win the hearts and minds of civilians in the fight against Boko Haram. The specific steps also include the provision of social and medical outreach for civilians by the military; the provision of ongoing workshops and training sessions for military personnel by the Office of the National Security Adviser on various human rights topics, including civilian protection, children in conflict, tracking civilian harm, sexual exploitation and abuse; the revision of the rules of engagement and the code of conduct of the Nigerian military to reflect international humanitarian and human rights standards; and comprehensive security sector reform. As part of this, the Nigerian Government, through its Institute of Peace and Conflict Resolution, helped to facilitate the adoption and operationalization of the handover protocol on children and armed conflict, including the handing over of children in armed conflict encountered during operations to civilian child protection actors. It should be pointed out that Nigeria does not see children in armed conflict as being in conflict with the law but as victims who must be protected. Also, with regard to the high number of unaccompanied, separated and orphaned children, the Government, through the National Emergency Management Agency and other humanitarian actors, is working towards the rehabilitation, reintegration and family reunification of children affected by Boko Haram. Nigeria also established of the Protection Sector Working Group (PSWG), which is made up of all the protection response agencies, such as the National Human Rights Commission, the Institute for Peace and Conflict Resolution, the National Emergency Management Agency and the Federal Ministry of Women and Youth Development. Through the PSWG, Nigeria drafted a standard operating procedure (SOP) for the protection of vulnerable groups in emergency settings. The SOP serves as a tool for case management and referrals of survivors of human right abuses in the internally displaced person (IDP) camps. Another specific measure is the launch and the ongoing implementation of the road map on preventing gender-based violence in the Lake Chad region. This road map was unveiled domestically in Nigeria in July 2018 and launched internationally in Berlin in September 2018. The road map is proactive in nature, aiming, first and foremost, to prevent possible cases of gender-based violence, especially in emergencies and humanitarian situations. A further measure is the launch and the ongoing implementation of the Buhari Plan. This is a presidential initiative of the current Administration that seeks to provide immediate relief to the people of the north-east, offer psychosocial support to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and rehabilitate and resettle IDPs. It also seeks to support the restoration of livelihoods, generate jobs, secure communities, drive infrastructure development, facilitate peacebuilding, revamp agriculture, which is the lifeblood of the north-eastern region, and resuscitate health-care services. Indeed, the Buhari Plan is the blueprint for the comprehensive humanitarian relief and socioeconomic stabilization of the north-east, as well as the return and resettlement of displaced persons. It is designed to achieve the peace, stability, socioeconomic rehabilitation, reconstruction and long-term sustainable economic development of the region. Let me conclude by noting that sexual violence, whenever and wherever it occurs, is a crime and cannot be justified. Sexual violence in armed conflicts must be subject to absolute prohibition, as impunity for the crime has no place in the twenty-first century.
