Mr. Yamamoto: Before I begin my remarks on
Afghanistan, may I be allowed to express my sincere
condolences and sympathy in connection with the
loss of so many lives, including our United Nations
colleagues, in the Ethiopian Airlines accident.

I turn now to the issue of Afghanistan. The last
three months have seen significant developments in the
areas of both peace and elections.

First, on peace, further efforts have been made
to bring an end to the decades-long conflict in
Afghanistan, yielding tangible progress. The United
States and the Taliban have continued to engage in
intensive direct talks; a number of countries have
extended support to facilitate those talks. At the meeting
of the International Contact Group, held in London in
late January, participants welcomed the ongoing United
States-Taliban talks and expressed hope that they
would enable direct talks to take place between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. In early
February, there was a meeting between some Afghan
representatives and the Taliban in Moscow that provided
an opportunity for them to have a better understanding
of each other's views and thinking on peace. Despite
such engagements, the Taliban has not yet accepted to
engage in direct talks with the Government. I stress the
imperative need for the Taliban to talk directly with
the Government.

Amid these efforts for peace, we must recognize
that all international efforts, including regional
efforts, need to come together to support an Afghan-
led and Afghan-owned peace process. In order for
such a process of peace and the implementation of
an agreement to be sustainable, the support and
cooperation of the international community, particularly
regional countries, are essential. The United Nations
welcomes various efforts and initiatives undertaken by
countries concerned, but stresses the need for all those
constructive efforts to be in concert and aligned in
support of Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts,
as agreed in Geneva last November. In this context, we
understand that the Government of Afghanistan has
proposed to hold the third meeting of the Kabul process
on peace.

In working towards peace, we must acknowledge
the profound and legitimate concerns of many citizens
regarding possible compromises on the gains made
over the past 18 years in the name of peace. The United
Nations shares many of these concerns, particularly
regarding the fate of women's rights, freedom of
expression, including media rights, and space for civil
society to function effectively, all of which must be
protected under a peace agreement. To address these
effectively, the peace process must be inclusive of the
meaningful participation of groups representing all
segments of Afghanistan's diverse society including
women, youth, ulemas and community and political
leaders. We need to think also of the rights of the
victims and the issues of transitional justice.

In particular, we must strongly support and
advocate for the perspectives of Afghan women, who
are expressing a clear determination to safeguard their
hard-won civil, political and economic rights under
any peace agreement. I commend the Government
of Afghanistan for its commitment to women's
participation. Building on these steps, we must
ensure that women's representation is strengthened
and diversified. Equally, there is a need to engage
Afghanistan's younger generation. Afghan youth stand
to gain the most from the tangible benefits of peace:
enhanced security, freedom of movement and increased
education and employment opportunities.

Afghanistan is set to hold a presidential election
this year. We expect this to be a critical step forward in
further consolidating its representative political system.
The holding of the presidential election on schedule,
however, will be very challenging. The widespread
irregularities during last October's parliamentary
elections undermined confidence in the electoral
management bodies. These problems continued
throughout the counting process, and the complete
finalization of election results remains delayed for
several months. As these problems mounted, political
stakeholders expressed increasing scepticism about the
ability of the Independent Election Commission and the
Electoral Complaints Commission to deliver a credible
and timely presidential election.

In response to these concerns, the Election Law was
amended by a presidential decree, in consultation with
stakeholders, and a selection process of new members
and heads of secretariats for the two commissions was
held in early March, involving civil society, political
parties and the presidential candidates. The two
commissions must now work to rebuild public trust
in the country's electoral processes. The integrity and
collegiality of the two bodies are critical, as is the
support of all Government institutions, most notably
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces.
All candidates and political actors need to commit to
respecting the independence of the two commissions
so as to enable them to work without any interference.
The United Nations is prepared to work closely with the
newly composed commissions.

With less than five months remaining until
election day, the technical and political challenges are
daunting. The new commissioners will need to take
urgent decisions on the implementation of the amended
Election Law, which provides for reforms, including the
use of biometric technology and change in the electoral
system. In addition to the presidential election, the law
provides for the conduct of three additional elections:
provincial council elections, district council elections,
and parliamentary elections for the province of Ghazni.
The commissioners will need to assess whether the
current electoral calendar will permit the holding of
four simultaneous elections in July. It will likely be a
stark choice - either to hold the presidential election
on schedule or to implement all that are stipulated in
the amended Election Law, knowing that this may
entail a significant postponement of the presidential
election. The United Nations will continue to work
with Afghan stakeholders to help them ensure that the
electoral process is conducted in a credible, transparent
and inclusive manner. It is important, however, that
Afghan institutions and stakeholders fully realize that
the ultimate responsibility and ownership for elections
rests with the people of Afghanistan.

All this is taking place in the context of a war
that continues to inflict a devastating toll on civilians.
According to statistics provided by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, 2018 was the
deadliest year on record for the Afghan conflict, with
a total of 10,993 civilian casualties, including 3,804
civilians killed. In particular, the deliberate targeting of
civilians is a war crime. The casualties caused by such
attacks of Da'esh or the Islamic State-Khorasan Province
more than doubled from 2017 to 2018, accounting for
over 50 per cent of attributed attacks targeting civilians
in 2018. Also alarming is the impact of the conflict
on Afghan children. Last year, the number of children
killed in the conflict reached a record high, with over
900 child deaths verified and thousands more injured,

including by explosive remnants of war. They also
remain vulnerable to recruitment and use by parties to
the conflict.

But even these figures do not capture the full
human cost of the war. We must not forget the harsh
realities of life for too many Afghan citizens. Today,
over half the population in the country lives under the
poverty line; the proportion increased from 37 per cent
in 2014 to 54 per cent in 2018. Over the past year, severe
drought has worsened living conditions still further;
13.5 million people in the country are severely food
insecure. This means that they survive on less than
one meal a day. The Government of Afghanistan, in
partnership with the United Nations family, is doing
what it can to address these urgent needs. Last year, the
United Nations issued its humanitarian response plan
which was 78 per cent funded, and this year we require
$612 million. While I wish to reiterate my gratitude
to all donors that contributed generously last year,
the response this year started very slowly; it currently
stands at 4 per cent funded. I hope that the Security
Council will also call on the international community
to boost funding to address this critical situation
without delay.

The issue of narcotics is another major
socioeconomic challenge. Despite a decrease in opium
production in 2018, the significant levels of opium
poppy cultivation and illicit trafficking in opiates
remain a threat to stability in the country. While a
drug-use survey has not been undertaken in the country
for a number of years, indications are that an estimated
10 per cent of the adult population uses narcotics
regularly. In order to tackle that complex issue, the
whole demand and supply chain needs to be addressed
as a responsibility shared among Afghanistan, its
neighbours and the international community.

Looking forward, Afghanistan and its international
partners have begun exploring potential opportunities
to expand development assistance in a post-settlement
context. In order to contribute to sustainable peace,
such assistance must build on existing achievements
and deliver tangible benefits to those most in need.
As the political situation evolves, the United Nations
family remains committed to supporting the country's
humanitarian and development. goals.

Now is the moment for the international community

to look at Afghanistan with renewed focus and reassess
how we could contribute to the efforts towards peace
and work with the people and the Government of
Afghanistan to improve socioeconomic conditions
and promote further development. This year is likely
to bring both numerous challenges and unprecedented
opportunities. Addressing the challenges and taking
advantage of the opportunities will require the
concerted efforts of the international community, with
Afghanistan in the lead.
