The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Costa Rica.

I wish to begin by thanking Mr. Alan Doss,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and by taking advantage of his presence
here to pay tribute to the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) for its efforts over the past months. My
thanks go also to Mr. Karel De Gucht, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium, for his presence at today's
meeting.

Yesterday's Arria Formula meeting gave Council
members an opportunity to ponder the tragedy taking
place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
international community, and in particular the Security
Council, has the responsibility to protect those who are
suffering the consequences of violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Council has
the responsibility to protect women and girls who are
victims of the cruellest forms of violence resulting
from the climate of impunity that prevails in the Kivus.
We also have the responsibility to protect boys and
girls who are being forcibly recruited by militias.
Finally, we have the responsibility to protect the more
than 1.35 million people who have now been displaced.

The Council, thus, has clear responsibilities, and
we must now discuss the steps that must be taken to
meet those responsibilities. The Council has taken the
initial step of authorizing the deployment of additional
personnel, in response to a request by Mr. Doss -
which Costa Rica has supported from the outset. My
delegation believes that, in addition to this military
reinforcement, the Council must carefully analyse the
Mission's mandate and how it is being implemented on
the ground, especially in the light of the collapse of the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in the Kivus.

We welcome the Secretary-General's statement in
paragraph 60 of his report (S/2008/728) that MONUC
will act to protect civilians. That has been reaffirmed
by Special Representative Doss on several occasions.
MONUC's priority must continue to be the protection
of civilians, and my delegation will support efforts to
strengthen its mandate in that regard.

We believe too that the illegal exploitation of and
trade in minerals is among the main factors sustaining
the illegal militias in the area. The Council needs to
consider how MONUC can help combat that problem.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must shoulder its responsibilities in that respect
and take the measures necessary to prevent elements of
its armed forces from colluding with illegal militias in
the illegal exploitation of and trade in minerals. Here,
the bordering countries also have a responsibility, and
they must prevent their territories from being used for
illegal trade in resources from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

My delegation was pleased to see in the report the
Secretary-General's comments about MONUC's
support for the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the north-east, in Orientale
province, where the objective is to contain the threat
posed by the Lord's Resistance Army. My country has
repeatedly expressed its concern for the civilian
population in that area and its view that it is important
for MONUC to be deployed there in order to protect
them.

We take note of the statements made by Lord's
Resistance Army leaders about their intention to sign
the final Juba peace agreement by the end of this
month. We hope that, this time, that will prove to be
true, and we urge Mr. Kony to sign the agreement as
soon as possible.

I wish in conclusion to state our concern about
reports of political repression and human rights
violations by the State security forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge the
Congolese authorities to take appropriate measures in
that regard, in particular to combat impunity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.

