The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

"One year after the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan (R-ARCSS), the
Security Council underlines that the R-ARCSS
is an important step forward in the peace process
that provides a window of opportunity to achieve
sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan, and
recognizes the reduction in political violence in
South Sudan and the return of some representatives
of opposition parties to Juba.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
meetings between President Salva Kiir Mayardit
and Mr. Riek Machar as a positive development,
and calls for the senior leadership of the parties to
the R-ARCSS to continue to hold regular face-to-
face meetings to resolve outstanding issues in order
to enable the peaceful formation of a Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity, in
accordance with the timeline agreed to by the
parties on 3 May and reflected in a communique by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD).

"The Security Council welcomes the initial
progress in implementing the R-ARCSS, including
the formation of certain R-ARCSS institutions and
mechanisms, joint peacebuilding activities at the
local level and an improved environment in many
areas for delivery of humanitarian assistance.

"The Security Council calls on parties to the
R-ARCSS to expedite the process of implementing
transitional security arrangements and to continue
consultations on the issues of the number and
boundaries of states with a view towards finding a
common solution.

"The Security Council urges the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan to disburse the
balance of its pledged funds for the implementation
of the R-ARCSS in a transparent and accountable
manner and to continue to make funds available for
the ongoing implementation of the peace agreement.

"The Security Council expresses concern at
the dire humanitarian, human rights and economic
situation in South Sudan and condemns all
violations of the R-ARCSS and the 21 December
2017 Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities,
Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian Access,
including the ongoing conflict in the Equatorias
region, and the continued use of sexual violence as
a tactic by the parties to the conflict against the
civilian population.

"The Security Council appreciates IGAD's
role in facilitating progress on the peace process in
South Sudan and takes note of its recommendation
to hold an Ordinary Summit of IGAD to address
outstanding issues, including the status of Mr. Riek
Machar. The Security Council encourages IGAD
to appoint a permanent chairperson for the
Reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (RJMEC).

"The Security Council expresses appreciation
for the critical role that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism (CTSAMVM) and
RJMEC play in supporting the implementation of
the R-ARCSS and demands that the Government
of the Republic of South Sudan and opposition
groups cease their obstruction of UNMISS and
CTSAMVM. activities.

"The Security Council calls for parties that are
not signatories to the R-ARCSS to renounce violence,
adhere to the cessation of hostilities agreements
and seek a political resolution to their concerns
about the R-ARCSS, and further calls for parties to
the R-ARCSS to engage with non-signatories in a
non-violent and constructive manner.

"The Security Council further calls on all
parties to the R-ARCSS, as well as non-signatory
armed groups in South Sudan, to protect medical
facilities and medical personnel, as well as
civilians and civilian objects, including schools;
to allow people to move freely; and to allow

the rapid, safe, and unhindered access of relief
personnel, equipment and supplies, in accordance
with principles of humanitarian assistance,
including humanity, impartiality, neutrality and
independence, to help ensure the timely delivery of
humanitarian assistance to all those in need.

"The Security Council looks forward to seeing
substantive progress on those activities during its
October 2019 visit to Juba.

"The Security Council urges parties to
the R-ARCSS to continue taking steps, in line
with the provisions of the peace agreement, to
promote the meaningful participation of women
in the formation of a Revitalized Transitional
Government of National Unity, and calls on all
parties to the R-ARCSS and armed groups in South
Sudan to cease all acts of sexual and gender-based
violence; to end the recruitment and use of child
soldiers; to end the killing and maiming of children
and sexual violence against children; and to release
all children that have been recruited to date.

"The Security Council takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General on UNMISS protection
of civilians sites and encourages all stakeholders
to continue substantive conversations to devise
a substantial path forward for the protection of
civilians sites.

"The Security Council underscores the
pressing need to ensure accountability and end
impunity for any violations and abuses of human
rights and violations of international humanitarian
law in South Sudan. The Security Council takes
note in that regard of chapter V of the R-ARCSS
and calls for its implementation.

"The Security Council stresses that actions
that threaten the peace, security or stability of
South Sudan may be subject to sanctions under
resolutions 2206 (2015), 2290 (2016), 2353 (2017),
2428 (2018) and 2471 (2019), and affirms that it shall
be prepared to adjust measures contained in those
resolutions in the light of the implementation of the
parties' commitments, including the ceasefire.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the people of South Sudan and reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of the
Republic of South Sudan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2019/11.

The meeting rose at10,10 a.m.
