Mr. Morejon Pazmifio (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to convey to you, Mr. President,
how extremely satisfied we are to see Venezuela
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.
We would also like to express a special welcome to
Ms. Delcy Rodriguez Gomez, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, on behalf of President Rafael Correa and
Minister for Foreign Affairs Ricardo Patifio Aroca.
We also wish to draw attention to the excellent work
being undertaken by the presidency of Venezuela of the
Council during the month of February, proof of which
is the issue that we debating at today's meeting, which
undoubtedly constitutes the fundamental support of the
international community. We welcome the proposal
made by Venezuela that a document containing the
statements made by representatives be circulated as an
official document of both the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

For all of those reasons, it could not be more timely
nor more appropriate that we debate, as you, Sir, have
proposed, the need to comply with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations in order
to ensure the maintenance of international peace and
security, given that the various statements delivered here
today ought to be taken as a contribution to efforts to
ensure that the United Nations and the Security Council
in particular be more transparent and democratic. My
country believes that the correct application of the
Charter of the United Nations is clearly the only way of
ensuring international peace and security. The Charter
proclaims them and the Member States must ensure
the implementation of fundamental concepts such as
respect for sovereignty, the equality of States, avoiding
the use or threat of use of force, non-interference
and the ongoing seach for the peaceful settlement of
disputes. There can therefore be no pretext for the
Security Council or any of its members being remiss
and acting against the other purposes and principles set
out in the Charter, such as the need to take collective
and effective measures to prevent and eliminate threats
to peace, non-aggression, the use of peaceful means
in line with the principles of international law, self-
determination and the need to promote international
cooperation, among other things.

Some Member States of the Security Council tend
to securitize issues of global importance. Bearing
responsibility for issues in a body of the United
Nations that is the only body that issues binding
resolutions, apart from being inappropriate, is entirely
undemocratic, given that it favours inequality. A
group of 15 cannot overrule a group of 193. It is very
important that the Security Council, when it make use
of, and does not abuse, prerogatives under Chapter VII
of the Charter also attach as much importance to what
is set out in Chapters VI and VIII, in keeping with
international law. Furthermore, the democratic deficit
in international organizations that arose in the post-war
period, and which make up the current international
system in general, and the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular, must be corrected in a
definitive way, if we want the Organization to be able
to respond appropriately to the purposes and principles
that constitute its very foundation. We Member States
are responsible for offering to the United Nations the
type of leadership it needs and deserves in order to
carry out its work in an effective way to make our world
a better place, in particular for our future generations,
as is set out in the preamble of the Charter of the United
Nations.

