Mr. Rivas (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): It is
clear that the international community is increasingly
concerned at the continuation of the violence in the
Middle East. That is the reason for this new debate,
despite the fact that the Security Council took a stance
on the matter just a few days ago.

Yesterday the members of the Security Council
held a very intensive dialogue with the representatives
of Israel and of the Palestinian Authority. In that
dialogue, we reiterated our concern in the face of the
ongoing Violence. If we do not succeed in stopping that
violence, we run the risk of its spreading to the entire
region.

President Arafat's security is also a source of
great concern to the Colombian delegation. Although
the Government of Israel has said that its intention is
not to harm him, it is clear that the situation is
extremely risky.

Furthermore, we deem incomprehensible and
unacceptable the proposal made by the Prime Minister
of Israel that President Arafat should leave Palestine to
go into exile. It should not be forgotten that Mr. Arafat
is the elected President of the Palestinian Authority and
that as such he is the internationally recognized leader
of the Palestinian people. We add our voice to the call
for Israel to end immediately its siege of President
Arafat.

The Security Council has adopted two important
resolutions in less than a month, 1397 (2002) and 1402
(2002), without achieving the desired results so far. It
is urgent that the parties comply with the two
resolutions immediately, since they are the only way
out of the current impasse.

We wish to reiterate the appeal to both parties for
an immediate ceasefire, for Israel's withdrawal from
the Palestinian cities and for an end to the suicide
attacks in the Israeli cities. The military occupation
will not provide the security guarantees that Israel is
seeking, nor will the suicide attacks achieve the
political results desired by the Palestinians. We also
wish to reiterate our support for the Tenet plan and the
Mitchell recommendations.

The Security Council's efforts complement the
efforts being made on the ground by the various special
envoys. We reiterate our support for their work, which
requires the cooperation and full compliance of both
parties. There is no reason for limiting the special
envoys' access to dialogue with President Arafat.

The Arab Summit in Beirut finished a few days
ago. It offered a ray of hope for finding a solution to
this conflict. These new proposals must be studied. As
the Secretary-General mentioned, the security concerns
of Israel and the political aspirations of the Palestinians
must be taken into account simultaneously. Security
and peace are two sides of the same coin.

