President Museveni: I will not read out my
statement, for I would then repeat what other leaders
have said. Instead, I will make four points.

First, I thank President Obama for convening this
special meeting of the Security Council to discuss this
very important topic.

Secondly, it is clear that the possession of nuclear
weapons is the main cause of other countries wanting
to acquire them. It is not logical to say that a few of us
should possess nuclear weapons and others should not.
I am therefore very pleased to hear some countries that

have nuclear weapons say that they are aiming to get
rid of all of them.

Action leads to reaction; reaction leads to
counter-reaction. We therefore need to look at history
to see how all of this began. Germany wanted nuclear
weapons in order to dominate the world with them. The
United States beat Germany and acquired those
weapons first. It then used them. After that, the Soviet
Union had to acquire nuclear weapons in order to
counterbalance the United States; then China had to
acquire them, and so on. Thus, we can see that the
main cause of nuclear proliferation is actually the
possession of those weapons.

Thirdly, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons is based on three principles that I
think are very good: non-proliferation, disarmament
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.

Finally, I would like to inform the Security
Council that Africa is interested not in nuclear
weapons, but in nuclear energy. The reason for our
interest in nuclear energy is that all the rivers in Africa
have a potential total hydropower capacity of
approximately 300,000 megawatts. In Africa, we
expect to have a population of 1.3 billion by 2020. The
United States, with its population of only 300 million
people, currently uses 1 million megawatts, but all the
rivers in Africa have the potential of only 300,000
megawatts. Even if all the sites on African rivers were
developed, we would not have enough electricity to
sustain our population, unless, of course, it were
scientifically proved that Africans do not need
electricity. However, if one does not come to this
absurd conclusion, it is clear that Africa will have to
use all energy sources available, including nuclear
energy.

Some people speak of solar energy, but a kilowatt
hour of solar energy currently costs about 40 United
States cents, whereas a kilowatt hour of nuclear or
hydropower energy costs about five to six cents.
Therefore, nuclear energy is of great interest to Africa.

