Mr. Linkevieius (Lithuania): I thank Deputy
Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovie, John Ging
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and Ambassador Apakan, Chief Monitor of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, for
their briefings.

It has been 22 months since the Russian Federation
began to take aggressive action against Ukraine. For
nearly two years now, Ukraine has been suffering from
a conflict initiated under false pretexts and supported
by an aggressive campaign of propaganda and hate.
The redrawing of Ukraine's borders by force early in
2014 and the continued violation of its sovereignty and
territorial integrity remain a major challenge to the
rules-based international system.

Russia's unprovoked aggression against Ukraine
has already left over 9,000 dead, more than 20,000
injured, over 1.5 million uprooted from their homes
within Ukraine and another 1 million forced to
flee abroad. Five million people need humanitarian
assistance. The approaching winter makes the lives
of those in need even more difficult, yet by now this
conflict barely makes it into the headlines. After a
short lull earlier this autumn, the situation worsened
again in November. It is evident that peace agreements
will not be fully implemented in 2015. The OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission continues to register
daily breaches of the ceasefire. Impunity, lawlessness
and abuse continue to reign in the areas held by the
illegal militants. Again last week, OSCE monitors were
threatened with automatic rifles. Crimea - an integral
part of Ukraine - remains occupied, in breach of the
fundamental principles of international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, the Budapest Memorandum and
bilateral treaties. All this despite the fact that General
Assembly resolution 68/262, on the territorial integrity
of Ukraine, is very clear on the illegality of Crimea's
annexation and the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its
internationally recognized borders.

As the end of the year approaches, there is a
dangerously high probability that this crisis will
become yet another of Europe's so-called frozen
conflicts. There are already too many of those. Five of
the European Union's six Eastern Partnership countries
bordering on Russia are suffering from protracted
conflicts. Russia continues to instigate separatism in
Moldova. Violations of Georgia's territorial integrity
also continue unabated. The pattern could not be more
obvious.

The Minsk agreements may not be perfect, but they
are all we have. Today there is simply no alternative.
We support the diplomatic efforts undertaken in
the Normandy format and in the Trilateral Contact
Group under the auspices of the OSCE. At the same
time, we remain critical of the recent trend towards
the resequencing of commitments under the Minsk
agreements and towards increasing the pressure on
the political commitments of Ukraine, rather than on
the security commitments of Russia and its militant
proxies.

Tangible peace can be achieved only through the
full implementation of the Minsk agreements. That
means full implementation by Russia, which is a party
to the conflict and bears direct responsibility for its
de-escalation. Russia must, inter alia, withdraw its
arms, weapons, soldiers and mercenaries from the
territory of Ukraine, cease its support for the illegal
armed groups and allow Ukraine to restore full control
over its international border. All hostages and illegally
detained persons, including Ukrainian pilot Nadiya
Savchenko, Oleg Sentsov and others, must be released.

With regard to local elections, we remain concerned
that, even ifthey are postponed to 2016, elections in the
territories occupied by Russia's militant proxies, with
foreign soldiers present on the ground, will be neither
free nor fair. It is up to the OSCE observers to ascertain
whether conditions are ripe for holding elections and
to assess their legitimacy. We have seen the results
of Crimea's gunpoint referendum. We do not want to
see more of the same. All foreign weapons and foreign
fighters must be withdrawn, preferably before the
elections, to ensure that the voting is free and fair.

The lack of effective protection for human rights
in the areas under the control of Russia's proxies has
left people vulnerable to serious human rights abuses
and violations, including, as was said in the briefings,
killings, torture, degrading treatment, illegal detentions
and forced labour. We need to continue to shine a light
on the lawlessness and impunity in those areas, and we
must work to ensure that the perpetrators will one day be
brought to account. Therefore, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the United Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine should continue their much appreciated
work and reporting. In addition, monitors from the
United Nations, the OSCE, the Council of Europe and
other organizations should be allowed into Crimea to
investigate the increasingly restrictive environment and
the curtailment of the rights of its residents, especially
those of the indigenous Tatar community.

Sanctions against the Russian Federation in
response to its illegal annexation of Crimea and its
deliberate destabilization of Ukraine should remain
in force pending the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements.

The Council, too, has its responsibilities. It has
unanimously backed the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements adopted in
February, and must deliver on its promise to demand
their full implementation. Importantly, the ongoing
conflict in Ukraine cannot be allowed to fester or be
forgotten just because we are facing other pressing
needs - the need to address other urgent conflicts. We
cannot close our eyes to the ongoing breach of the ideals,
principles and rules of behaviour that have governed
the Organization and governed the whole process and
the entire international system for decades. Our failure
to stand firmly for those values and principles will only
embolden those willing to challenge the international
order, thereby bringing about even more conflict, more
instability, more human suffering.

The international community needs to continue to
support Ukraine on its path towards reforms, where
significant progress has already been made. Ukraine
and the Ukrainians have the right to create the future
they want, free from coercion and gun-point pressure
by their big neighbour.

Lithuania reaffirms its support for Ukraine's
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, with Crimea as an integral part of that
country. In supporting Ukraine, we support our own
freedom, independence and the right to live free from
fear and in peace.

