It gives me great pleasure to thank the Security Council, presided over by the Dominican Republic, for holding this open meeting under the exceptional circumstances in which our world currently finds itself and to thank the Secretary- General and his Envoy on Youth for their important briefings. I would also like to thank Olla Al-Sakkaf, Project Coordinator for the Youth Without Borders Organization for Development, Yemen, and Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, founder of the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative in South Sudan and Uganda, for sharing their perspectives and experiences on the ground. The unprecedented crisis we are going through because of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is definitely having a catastrophic effect on societies all over the world, and young people are no exception. We therefore welcome the report of the Secretary-General entitled Shared responsibility, global solidarity: Responding to the socio-economic impacts of COVID-19, in which he addresses the disease's impact on young people and the important role they can play in responding to it. According to the report, 1.5 billion young people, or 87 per cent of the world student population, are currently out of schools or university. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused a significant spike in youth unemployment. In the face of these major challenges, Qatar continues to do all it can to provide education services to children and young people. It was one of the first countries in the region to put precautionary social distancing measures in place to stem the spread of the virus and to respond to the situation by taking steps to ensure a smooth transition to online remote learning. As Council members are aware, protecting and promoting the right to education is a priority for Qatar, whether or not in times of emergency. For some years now, it has been harnessing technology to develop education, guarantee its continuity and ensure that it keeps pace with the demands and challenges of the times. The transition to remote learning in Qatar has thus been rapid and smooth, given that the necessary infrastructure, plans and resources were already in place. The Ministry of Education and Higher Education has activated a remote learning mechanism and dedicated electronic platforms, working to ensure that the remote learning experience encompasses all students, including those with any type of disability. The authorities have also made sure that students without access to laptop computers or tablets are provided with them, thereby ensuring that no one is left behind in the distance education process. At the international level, Qatar has intensified its efforts to provide development and relief aid, with a focus on education and access to technology for learning. Aid provided by the Qatar Fund for Development, the Government's executive arm in various parts of the world, is in step with the challenges arising from the difficult circumstances brought about by social distancing, lockdowns and school closures. The country's institutions, including the Education Above All Foundation, have also developed cutting-edge programmes to facilitate remote learning in the home. The Foundation has acted swiftly to assemble remote learning resources in different languages in order to assist parents and guardians and ease the process of adapting to remote learning. In addition, Qatar is pursuing its work to empower young people and encourage them to participate actively in sustainable development. At the Second Doha Forum Youth Edition, which was held in November 2019 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development, in-depth discussions on issues of concern to young people took place. The Forum provided them with an open platform from which to express their views on current affairs, including peace and security issues, in the run-up to the Doha Forum, which was held the following month. We all know that combating COVID-19 requires not only international cooperation but also a safe environment and the removal of any obstacles or conditions that might stand in the way of a strong and effective response, as well as active support for young people in the central role they have to play in that response. We therefore affirm our support for the calls of the United Nations for a ceasefire in regions affected by conflict so that we can focus on dealing with the pandemic. In addition to the key role that they can play in peace processes, as the international community agreed five years ago with the adoption of Security Council resolution 2250 (2015), young people have an equally important role to play in putting United Nations calls for a ceasefire into practice. Qatar looks forward to hosting, with the Office of the Secretary-General's Envoy for Youth, a high-level world conference on comprehensive youth peace pathways. The conference will be a part of ongoing efforts and build on the achievements of the first International Symposium on Youth Participation in Peace Processes, which was held in Helsinki in 2019. We take this opportunity to express appreciation to our partners, Finland and Colombia, and the Office of the Secretary- General's Envoy for Youth, for their efforts and cooperation in preparing the way for the coming conference, which will coincide with the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. The focus of the conference will be on, among other matters, the participation of young women in peace processes, through discussion circles and the mainstreaming of gender equality considerations throughout the preparatory stages of the event, during the event itself and in the follow-up to its outcome. In conclusion, Qatar remains committed to pursuing its efforts to create an environment conducive to the participation of young people in the development process and to providing support at the national, regional and international levels in order to enable them to contribute effectively to peacebuilding and to work actively to address the challenges facing our world today.
