Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank Ms. Mogherini for her very
comprehensive briefing.

The partnership between the United Nations and
the European Union is among the most important
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations. The effective strategic partnership covers
a number of conflicts and crises that go beyond the
immediate geographic neighbourhood of the European
Union. I would like to touch on various problems.

First, the escalation of certain crises has led the
international community to put aside the Palestinian
question to a certain degree. That of course heightens
tensions in the region. Today more than ever, the
international community needs to exert greater efforts
to revive the peace process, based on a two-State
solution, the Arab Peace Initiative and international
resolutions. That cannot be done if the Israeli and
Palestinian sides refuse to respond to calls for
negotiation and the Israelis continue to illegally annex
Palestinian territory. The European Union has made
many efforts in that direction. It has many tools at its
disposal to encourage Israel to return to the negotiating
table. We hope that the international conference on the
Middle East peace process to be hosted by France and
the upcoming report of the Middle East Quartet will be
major factors in influencing the status and a return to
the negotiating table.

Secondly, Libya is going through a critical political
phase, which calls for coordinating international
efforts, represented by the Security Council, Special
Representative Martin Kobler and regional efforts,
to strengthen and bolster the establishment of the
Government of National Accord. However, that will not
be the end of the road. A major challenge is to build
State infrastructure such that the Government will be
able to respond to the major political and economic
challenges it faces. International and regional assistance
is needed to re-establish a unified Libyan army that
is able to protect Libya's territory and citizens and
counter the danger brought by terrorism. We hope that
the European Union will be able to play an effective
role in this regard. Any delay in this area could increase
the possibility of failure of the Libyan political process
and strengthen the hand of terrorist groups, thereby
worsening the problems stemming from flows of
refugees and illegal migration.

Thirdly, the collapse of State structures in some
areas of the Middle East region have led to the growth
of terrorist groups as a non-traditional danger that
undermines the stability ofStates and internationalpeace
and security. International and regional cooperation is
needed in this context to counter terrorist financing,
the scourge of foreign terrorist fighters and the use
of modern technology. International efforts should
not simply be confined to the security and political
dimensions of the fight against terrorism, but must also
send a message that counters the narrative of terrorist
organizations that operate under the guise of religion to
attract funds and attention. We applaud the European
Union's steps to establish a public outreach centre to
counter extremism, and we hope that collaboration
with institutions of higher learning such as Al-Azhar
University in Egypt will be undertaken in support of
coexistence, tolerance and dialogue.

Fourthly, various crises have led to the worsening
of illegal immigration towards Europe. The European
Union is undertaking major operational efforts to
counter this phenomenon, in particular Operation
Sophia, but the human dimension must also be dealt
with. Focus must given to the security-related, political
and economic root causes of the illegal migration crisis
in order to find lasting solutions and put an end to a
human tragedy that is unfolding in the Mediterranean.

Fifthly, in recent years there has been effective
cooperation among the European Union, the African
Union and the United Nations in dealing with the
series of crises that have arisen in Africa. In Somalia,
a strong, clear message must be directed to all Somali
stakeholders so that they will continue to build on
the achievements of 2012. The Somalian presidency
recently adopted an electoral model that opens the way
to the holding of elections in accordance with the agreed
timeline. We must make the most of this opportunity. A
political message should be addressed to the European
Union requesting assistance for rebuilding State
structures, in particular the Somali army, as well as
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia and
for ongoing efforts to respond to piracy.

In the Sahel region, complex challenges include
a security vacuum, the expansion of terrorist groups,
obstacles to development, including economic
development, and the spread of organized crime.
We hope that European support for the Mali Peace
Agreement of June 2015 will be maintained in order
that the Agreement's timeline can be implemented. A
lasting solution to the crisis continues to depend on
the rebuilding of State structures and institutions, the
extension of State authority throughout the territory of
the country, and the fight against terrorism.

