Mr. Mlynar (Slovakia): I thank you, Madam,
for organizing this important debate on preventing
and combatting the financing of terrorism. I also
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Voronkov,
Mr. Marshall Billingslea and Ms. Mercy Buku for their
inciteful briefings.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. Allow
me to make a few additional observations.

It is crucial that the Security Council, as the primary
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, continue to attach the highest
attention to the issue of counter-terrorism, including
by responding to the changing nature of the terrorist
threat and the ways in which terrorists finance their
activities. In this respect, we welcome the adoption of
resolution 2462 (2019) today. Expressing its support,
Slovakia co-sponsored the resolution and is committed
to ensuring its full implementation.

The Slovak Republic condemns all forms and
manifestations of terrorism and is engaged in counter-
terrorism, both individually and as a part of the
international community.

All States have obligations to respond to the
global threat of terrorism, including by preventing
and eliminating funding for the travel and activities of
terrorist entities, groups and individuals. We reaffirm
our commitment to tackling all sources, techniques and
channels of terrorist financing and call for the effective
worldwide implementation of legal instruments,
including the 1999 International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Financial Action
Task Force standards. Slovakia has also participated
in the Counter-Da'esh Finance Group of the Global
Coalition against Da'esh. We use that particular
platform to exchange information in order to improve
our national terrorist assets freezing system as well.

The Security Council has affirmed the importance
of international, regional, and subregional counter-
terrorism cooperation in a number of its resolutions.
Earlier this week, Slovakia as the country currently
exercising the chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), organized
the OSCE-wide Counter-Terrorism Conference. More
than 300 high-level participants - including political
representatives, national counter-terrorism coordinators
and experts from the 57 participating countries and
partners for cooperation, as well as representatives
from the United Nations and other international,
regional and subregional organizations, academia and
civil society - met in Bratislava.

Under our leadership of the OSCE
chairmanship-in-office, the Counter-Terrorism
Conference highlighted advances made in identifying
impactful and human rights-compliant programs, as
well as platforms and mechanisms for governmental
and non-governmental cooperation. The presentation of
best practices in preventing the violent extremism and
radicalization that can lead to terrorism focused most
specifically on multi-stakeholder efforts to disengage
individuals from violent extremism and terrorism.

To conclude, we believe that a robust framework,
its rigorous implementation and effective international
cooperation can significantly contribute to preventing
and countering the financing of terrorism. In that
context, I should like once again to thank the French
presidency's efforts at this particularjuncture.
