I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings. Let me begin by reiterating South Africa's position against the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances. No cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass destruction. South Africa remains committed to its international obligations as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and a member of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The use of chemical weapons undermines those obligations as well as the international norms against the production, use and stockpiling of such weapons, as established under the Chemical Weapons Convention. The alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to the Convention is a very serious matter that would constitute a material breach of obligations under the Convention. South Africa strongly supports multilateralism and the international rule of law, which includes the non-discriminatory and consistent application of the provisions of relevant multilateral instruments and the preservation of international norms against weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. The OPCW is the only technically competent international authority in the field of chemical weapons. We therefore appreciate the work that Director-General Arias and the OPCW continue to undertake in that regard. In order to ensure that States parties adhere to their obligations, it is imperative that they have full faith and confidence in the work and processes of the OPCW, without external interference or manipulation of its work. The States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention should therefore unite in preserving the international norm against chemical weapons and the provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent and non-discriminatory implementation. South Africa will continue to work for the depoliticization of the relevant management and decision-making structures established under the Chemical Weapons Convention, and also towards ensuring that States parties are held accountable for any violations of their obligations, based on credible, impartial and incontrovertible evidence. We encourage the Government of Syria to cooperate with the OPCW in resolving all outstanding issues in order for the international community to have confidence in the peaceful nature of Syria's chemical activities. We welcome the progress made by the Declaration Assessment Team in closing three outstanding issues related to Syria's initial declaration during its recent visit to Syria. South Africa looks forward to additional progress being made in addressing the remaining outstanding issues. South Africa reiterates that the only sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that is reflective of the will of the Syrian people, with guaranteed protection for all groups in Syrian society.
