Mr. Kazykhanov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate on the agenda item under consideration, which
provides an additional opportunity to review the
progress made in the fight against terrorism and to
determine priorities for the subsequent work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee.

My delegation commends Ambassador Arias for
the effective and inspiring leadership he has displayed
in steering the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I would also like to thank the
Chairman for his informative briefings and his
excellent presentation of the report of the CTC,
contained in document S/2004/ 124.

Kazakhstan, like other States, recognizes the
leading role of the United Nations in erecting effective
and secure anti-terrorism barriers. We strongly believe
that the issue of combating terrorism should remain a
top priority on the agenda of the international
community.

Kazakhstan expresses its appreciation to the
Security Council and its Counter-Terrorism Committee
for their actions to ensure the full and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The
Committee's efforts to improve the counter-terrorism
legislative framework and the national arrangements of
Member States are quite commendable and should be
recognized.

It is encouraging to note that an overwhelming
majority of Member States have acceded, or are about
to complete their accession, to 12 international
conventions against terrorism. At the same time, we
believe that it is time to elevate to a qualitatively new
level our joint action to develop and enhance
international norms and universal arrangements in that
area.

Along with our efforts to establish effective
international counter-terrorism mechanisms, we should
continue to conduct an in-depth study of the root
causes of this evil. Here, we cannot afford a mistake.

We strongly support the efforts of the CTC to
pursue an open dialogue with Member States in the
spirit of transparency and its assistance to countries in
order to enhance their capacity to combat terrorism.

Yet we would like to underscore that our overall
effectiveness in the combat against international
terrorism, coordinated by the United Nations and its
Security Council, will depend to a great extent on the
further revitalization of the CTC. In that context, our
delegation supports changes in the operation of the
Committee and its dialogue with Member States in
evaluating the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001), as introduced in the CTC
report. Indeed, this is a priority task.

In our View, it is essential to step up the CTC's
activities aimed at providing technical and expert
assistance to Member States in order to strengthen their
counter-terrorism capacity. Since modern-day terrorism
is so closely associated with illegal trafficking in drugs,
arms and persons, the strengthening of the border
guard, customs and law enforcement agencies of those
States located on drug-trafficking routes from
Afghanistan has thus become a top priority for the
Central Asian region.

My delegation encourages the CTC in its efforts
to intensify its cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations. Closer interaction
between the Committee and regional organizations will
go a long way towards building on its accomplishments
and revitalizing its work. A number of regional
organizations, including in Eurasia, already have in
place effectively operating counter-terrorism
structures.

As indicated in the aforementioned report, the
main provisions related to the revitalization of the CTC
are to be reflected in a Security Council draft
resolution on the issue. We believe that this proposal
should enjoy the support of the members of the CTC.

Kazakhstan has been fully cooperating with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee since its establishment
and will continue to provide all necessary support to
this important body by making every effort to oppose
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

