Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland is fully associated
with the statement that will be made later in the debate
by the Permanent Representative of Denmark on behalf
of the European Union.

At a time when prospects for political progress in
the Middle East appeared on the increase and when the
international community has been actively engaged in
nurturing these tentative hopes, the events of recent
days - suicide bombings that have again taken Israeli
lives, a terrorist attack on Palestinian schoolchildren
and the attack on President Arafat's compound in
Ramallah - have come as a bitter disappointment.

The Secretary-General recalled earlier that only
last Tuesday, the Quartet, here in New York, committed
itself to the early completion of a road map that would
guide the parties to a settlement that would secure the
legitimate rights of both parties. Israel would gain full
recognition by its neighbours and guarantees of its
national security, and the Palestinian people would see
an end to occupation and the realization of their right
to sovereignty.

Such a road map would be the beginning of a
process, not its conclusion, but it offers a real hope for
progress towards the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and
towards realizing the vision enshrined in the
declaration of the Beirut Arab Summit, in statements
by world leaders, including President Bush, and in
Security Council resolution 1397 (2002).

We have seen in recent months a strong and
encouraging movement towards reform in Palestinian
political life. This movement holds great promise for
the establishment of a democratic and accountable
Government in a future Palestine. The demand for this
movement arose from within Palestinian society itself,
and it has attracted the deserved support of the
international community.

We have seen a gathering consensus in large parts
of Palestinian society and political life against
terrorism, not only as a self-defeating tactic but as
wrong in itself and as a danger to prospects for the
early achievement of a Palestinian State and a region
truly at peace.

We have seen over recent weeks a clear lull in
terrorist actions and tentative moves towards a broad
ceasefire. If such a ceasefire had been allowed to take
root, it would have done more for the security of Israel
and Israelis and for the security of Palestinians than
any number of security measures, closures, curfews,
security structures or withdrawals. Further suicide
bombings, attempted suicide bombings and the reaction
by Israeli forces against President Arafat's
headquarters have dealt those hopes a severe blow.

The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ireland
deplored the despicable attacks against Israeli civilians,
saying that they were clearly intended to wreck
progress towards restoring the peace process.
Mr. Cowen pointed out that those attacks had been
carried out against the express wishes of the Palestinian
Authority and despite its efforts to prevent such
attacks. They came after a period of six weeks during
which there were no Israeli civilian casualties inside
Israel, while, as we heard from Special Coordinator
Roed-Larsen last Friday, more than 50 Palestinians,
mostly innocent people - men, women and
children- died in Israeli military operations,
including extrajudicial killings.

The actions of the Israeli armed forces in
Ramallah in the past three days have also dealt hopes
for peace a severe blow. The almost complete
destruction of the centre and symbol of Palestinian
national life can only convey the message that the
Israeli Government is not interested in any renewal of
Palestinian political life that comes from within
Palestinian society but is intent on imposing its own
terms on any such renewal.

My Foreign Minister has called on Israel to
withdraw its forces from President Arafat's
headquarters and to exercise the greatest restraint. He
said that terrorist attacks on innocent Israeli civilians,
for which there can be no justification, must not be
allowed to provoke a reaction that in turn causes
civilian casualties and is totally counterproductive and
damages the prospects for resolving the conflict.
Ireland considers that these actions by the Israeli
security forces are completely unacceptable. They must
end immediately.

Ms. Catherine Bertini's recent report on the
humanitarian situation in the occupied territories and
the latest socio-economic report by the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied
Terroritories paint a truly grim picture. The Palestinian
economy has, according to Ms. Bertini, by and large
collapsed. Most of the Palestinian population is now
living at levels of severe poverty, with increasing
malnutrition and serious interruptions in children's
education.

The international community also has a
responsibility to act to redress the situation, and Ireland
looks forward to the detailed plan that United Nations
agencies will submit to the ministerial-level meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in December. Above
all, however, Israel itself has a clear responsibility to
address immediately, in a manner consistent with its
security, the effects of its closures and curfews. The
impact of Israeli measures has had severe
consequences for the daily lives of Palestinians. And
this is no small point. Hope abandoned is no basis for a
lasting peace. And the presence of hope is surely an
indispensable basis for building the peace that both
peoples want and deserve.

Israel also has a responsibility to halt the process
of settlement expansion and consolidation, which
undermines hope among Palestinians that Israel will
ever agree to a sovereign Palestine.

Grievance, bitterness, insecurity, victimhood,
manifest injustice: these are the great enemies of
achieving peace in the Middle East. Israel wants and
deserves the security and peace its people need.
Palestinians want and deserve a sense of hope, a sense
of belonging and a home that is fully theirs and that
will allow Palestine and its people an honourable place
in the world.

And we here in the Security Council must meet
our responsibility in helping to achieve these goals.

