The President: I thank Ms. Zerrougui for her
briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my national capacity
as Secretary of State for International Development of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.

Let me thank Mr. Stephen O'Brien, Ms. Zainab
Bangura and Ms. Leila Zerrougui for their sobering
briefings.

The United Kingdom expresses its condolences in
relation to the terrorist attacks of recent days in Paris,
Beirut and elsewhere. They are a vivid reminder of the
horrific human toll taken by the Syrian and regional
cr1s1s.

Like others in the Council today, I have met Syrian
refugees who have fled the bloodshed and violence
consuming their country for over four years now; their
tales are of experiences that no one should have to go
through. We must accept that these people have been
let down. The generosity of the countries bearing the
brunt of the refugees, such as Jordan, Lebanon and
Turkey, have not been matched by similar generosity on
the part of the whole international community. United
Nations appeals are 45 per cent funded. Overwhelming
suffering and loss have been matched by political
deadlocks and an inadequate financial response.

My message to the Council today is that for Syria,
for its people and for us all, time is now running out.
Time is running out for us to meet the most basic needs
of the Syrian people, whether they are inside Syria or
have fled the country. Time is running out for the whole
generation of Syria's children who have been robbed
of a childhood, an education and a future. Time is
running out for the international community as we try
to cope with the overwhelming number of refugees who
have themselves run out of hope and are now looking
elsewhere to build a new life for themselves and their
families.

Since day one, Britain has worked hard to help
people on the ground and has been at the forefront
of the humanitarian response to the crisis, pledging
$1.7 billion to date. But the need is immense and
growing. Greater efforts are needed, not only to
meet people's basic needs but to provide jobs and an
education for Syria's children. That is why our Prime
Minister has just announced that the United Kingdom
will co-host a global conference on the Syrian crisis
in February 2016. The conference must be a turning
point. It must raise the resources and deliver the policy
changes that are needed.

Let us not forget that our response to this crisis,
the actions we take or do not take on Syria, will define
how we respond to other protracted emergencies: the
challenge of educating whole generations of children
at risk of being left to conflict and, with forced
displacement likely to remain a major feature of the
global landscape, the challenge of supporting refugees
and the countries that host them.

But we recognize that humanitarian action alone
is not sufficient. Syria is not a natural disaster; it is a
man-made one. We all know what is causing the deaths
and suffering. The Al-Assad regime bears the primary
responsibilty. It is Al-Assad's barrel bombs, but the
brutality of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is a
major factor as well. It is the targeting and killing of aid
workers. It is the deliberate disregard for international
humanitarian law, all too often dressed up in a false and
perverse argument of sovereignty.

A negotiated political transition is the sole way to
end the conflict in Syria and is key to alleviating the
humanitarian crisis. I am encouraged by the constructive
discussions in Vienna and the new momentum behind
the process working towards peace for the people of
Syria. But until that political settlement is reached, we
must recommit to ending the targeted and indiscriminate
attacks on civilians, particularly aerial attacks and
shelling; to protecting health facilities, schools and
essential infrastructure; to ensuring unimpeded access
for humanitarian organizations; to ending the use
of siege tactics and to preventing and responding to
gender-based violence. As is the case in all conflicts,
girls and women have been left the most vulnerable to
violence, abuse and exploitation.

As we meet today, there is a long list of things
that we will fail to agree on in relation to the Syrian
crisis, but help for those caught up in the crisis and
the ability of humanitarian aid to reach those in need
should not be on that list. Those are things that we
should be able to agree on. There can be no excuse
for flouting humanitarian law. There can be no excuse
for preventing humanitarian agencies from reaching
those in need. The Council must make that clear. We
agreed on resolution 2191 (2014) on allowing the United
Nations to use cross-border routes. That resolution
has been critical to helping us get aid to people who
otherwise would have none. It is essential that we renew
that resolution.

Syria is perhaps the defining conflict of our age,
not just for those in the region, but for all of us. It has
shown all too clearly where there are failures in our
humanitarian and political responses. And the World
Humanitarian Summit next year will be a vital moment
for us to commit to a new twenty-first century response
to protracted crises that brings together our development
and humanitarian work and human rights. In this age of
crisis, that Summit will be a vital moment to recommit
ourselves to our humanitarian values and law.

As Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and the
International Committee of the Red Cross President
Peter Maurer have said, now is the moment to rally for
humankind. We must respond to that call for the sake
of Syria and for the wider world and future generations.
That is our shared responsibility and challenge. We
must meet it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

