Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): Today the
Security Council has reaffirmed its support for the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF). However, the resolution that was adopted
today - resolution 1994 (2011) - is profoundly
different from its predecessors in its response to the
very disturbing developments in the situation in the
Golan Heights. Since the 1974 Agreement on
Disengagement, the ceasefire line between Israel and
Syria had been the most stable borderline in the region;
then, in rapid succession, on 15 May and 5 June, major
incidents occurred that threatened the ceasefire
observed since 1973, jeopardizing stability and security
in the region.

Today, therefore, the Council reminds the parties
of their obligation to fully respect the 1974 Agreement
and the Council's resolutions. Those obligations
involve preventing violations of the ceasefire line and
the area of separation. The violations of 15 May and
5 June on the Syrian side show that the Syrian
authorities did not respect those obligations. The
Council also reminds the parties that they must show
the utmost restraint, and France deeply regrets the
many casualties of those incidents.

UNDOF's movements have been restricted and
the Force attacked by the Syrian side. That is
unacceptable. Freedom of movement for peacekeepers
is, I should recall, a fundamental element in the
deployment of peacekeeping operations, as a corollary
of the State's consent in accepting such a deployment
on its territory. The parties must therefore fully
guarantee UNDOF's implementation of its mandate by

ensuring its security and complete freedom of
movement.

That is the message that today's resolution sends,
reflecting the Council's deep concern about the
potential destabilizing influence in the region of the
events in the Golan. The origin of those events is clear:
the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/359) shows that
the Palestinian demonstrators in the area of separation
benefited from being ignored by the Syrian authorities,
even if they were not actually helped by them. The
Syrian authorities were under the obligation to
guarantee respect for the ceasefire by preventing
violations of the line of disengagement and the area of
separation. Those violations took place under the nose
of the Syrian security forces, such that the report
indicates that they controlled the demonstration.

No one is seeking to deny the legitimacy of the
Palestinians' aspirations to achieve an independent,
sovereign State, living side by side in peace with
Israel, and France has always supported a resumption
of negotiations along those lines. What the Council
cannot accept is the hypocritical use by the Syrian
regime of the aspirations of the Palestinian people and
the resulting threat to regional stability. The incidents
of 15 May and 5 June are a tragic manifestation of this
attempt by the Syrian regime to distract international
attention from the aspirations of its own people, which
it is now crushing amid bloodshed.

Let me be clear: no attempt at regional
destabilization will distract our attention from the
brutal and systematic repression of peaceful
demonstrators in Syria. Quite the contrary: these
actions, which threaten international peace and
security, strengthen our determination to see the
Council express its views on the Syrian situation. The
stability of Syria is crucial for the Middle East, a
region whose fragility the Council knows only too
well. Such stability can only come about through an
end to the violence against the demonstrators and the
effective implementation of reforms that meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to control
their own destiny.

Last week the Secretary-General invited the
members of the Security Council to overcome their
differences and to send this clear message to the Syrian
authorities. The resolution that the Council has just
adopted unanimously is evidence of the fact that it has
maintained its capacity to react when international
peace and security are at stake. We must draw lessons
from this and respond to the call of the Secretary-
General by working to adopt a resolution that would
send to the Syrian authorities the only message that can
preserve peace and stability, for which the Council has
primary responsibility.

