Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Mr. President,
let me start by thanking you for having come to the
Security Council. It is a true honour to have you
personally presiding over our meeting today. Allow
me also to take this opportunity to thank you and your
great team here in New York for a very effective and
efficient presidency of the Council.

Turning to today's discussion, I would like to
thank Mr. Voronkov, Ms. Coninsx and Ms. Cook for
their briefings.

In my intervention, I will focus on three issues:
first, the threat ofthe Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) and our response; secondly, the role of women
and children; and, thirdly, accountability.

First, on the threat and our response, we just heard
that the threat posed by ISIS has changed but certainly
not diminished. This calls for a coherent international
response. As ISIS changes into a covert network, we
have to invest in financial intelligence and in public-
private partnerships to counter its financing.

As ISIS strengthens its affiliates around the world,
we have to focus on prevention and on the resilience
of local communities. And as ISIS fighters return
and relocate, we have to detect and counter the travel
movements of terrorists through passenger name record
systems. We must strengthen international cooperation
in this field.

Terrorism continues to warrant our utmost attention.
We cannot give in to counter-terrorism fatigue. We have
to invest in international cooperation.

My second point focuses on the role of women and
children. The briefing by Ms. Cook today served to
underscore the importance of civil society involvement
for preventing and countering violent extremism. We
need a whole-of-society approach, and women and
youngsters are key in that regard. At the same time,
as Ms. Cook pointed out, we must acknowledge that
women with ISIS may also be perpetrators of terrorist
acts, while minors with ISIS are first and foremost
victims, but may also pose a threat. Dealing with women
and minors with ISIS therefore requires a case-by-case
approach that integrates prevention, prosecution and
rehabilitation.

With that in mind, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
and the United States work very closely together in
the framework of the Global Counterterrorism Forum
(GCTF). Together we have collected good practices
to address the challenges of returning families of
foreign terrorist fighters. Those good practices have
led to practical guidelines, which will be endorsed at
the GCTF ministerial meeting on 26 September here
in New York. As Council members may be aware, the
GCTF is co-chaired by Morocco and the Kingdom ofthe
Netherlands. We will make sure that those guidelines
are made available to all Member States.

That brings me to my third point: accountability.
We need to ensure that impunity for terrorism will
not prevail. One of our key priorities in the Council is
accountability. The Kingdom of the Netherlands favours
the establishment of a specialized court for international
crimes, as proposed by the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq. We also continue to support efforts
by the Investigative Team in Iraq and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism (IIIM) for Syria
to collect evidence against ISIS fighters. We look
forward to the Council's first briefing, in December, by
the Special Adviser of the Investigative Team, and call
on all Member States to cooperate with and support the
Independent Mechanism. We must unite in holding ISIS
fighters accountable for their heinous acts, in particular
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

In conclusion, last Friday here at the United
Nations we remembered and paid tribute to the victims
of terrorism. We heard impactful statements from the
Secretary-General and Mr. Voronkov. But we also
heard the personal stories of the families of victims
of terrorism and of survivors of attacks. We felt the
real-life sorrow behind our discussion today. If we
need any further motivation to transform our words
into deeds, let it be the brave voices of the victims and
survivors of terrorist acts who spoke here at the United
Nations: they are counting on us, and we owe it to them.

