Mr. Kasanda (Zambia): My delegation is pleased to
address the Security Council on this important subject: the
role of the Security Council in the prevention of armed
conflicts. Under Article 24 of the Charter, the Security
Council is mandated with primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. This
debate serves to enhance collective commitment to the
pursuit of peace, stability and cooperation among nations.

The African continent has continued to provide one
of the greatest challenges for the Security Council insofar
as the prevalence of armed conflicts is concerned.
Regrettably, this will continue to be so in the foreseeable
future if the international community fails effectively to
assist Africa to address the causes of armed conflict on
the continent.

As many speakers indicated yesterday, in order to
address conflict prevention more effectively the Security
Council needs to include in its strategy early warning
mechanisms, preventive diplomacy and, where possible,
preventive deployment and appropriate preventive
disarmament. However, as with any other exercise, the
timing of those measures is critical to the success of the
whole process. The experience in our part of the world,

 

however, is that, despite effective regional efforts with
respect to early warning mechanisms and preventive
diplomacy, Security Council action either has come too late
or has been inadequate. The example of the events prior to
the genocide in Rwanda in 1994 is testimony to this.

I wish now to turn to the matter of conflict situations
on the African continent. The proliferation of small arms
and light weapons has contributed to and prolonged many
of the conflicts in Africa. My Government is concerned
about the current high level of proliferation of and
trafficking in small arms and light weapons in Africa.
According to recent statistics released by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, conflicts
in Africa have generated more than 8 million of the roughly
22 million refugees in the world. The situation is worse
when one takes into account the additional millions who are
internally displaced. This stark reality indicates that armed
conflicts on the African continent deserve the urgent
attention of the international community.
There are clear roles for the Security Council in
stopping the flow of the small arms that fuel armed conflict
not only in Africa but in many other parts of the world.
First, the Security Council, through the creation of
appropriate mechanisms, should publicly identify private
arms merchants and the zones of conflict that form the
markets for their illicit arms. Exposure would constitute
international condemnation and censure of these merchants
of death and thereby help to stop the trade in this category
of weapons. In his report on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in
Africa (S/l998/318), the Secretary-General was unequivocal
in urging the Security Council to address this issue of the
identification of international arms merchants as a matter of
urgent priority. The Security Council would do well to heed
the Secretary-General's advice.

The second role is that of strengthening sanctions
regimes. In this respect my delegation would like once
again to congratulate Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of
the Security Council sanctions Committee relative to
UNITA, for breathing new life into the international
sanctions against that illegal organization, which has caused
so much suffering to the Angolan people and which has
contributed to the destabilization of that region of Africa.

Another area that holds a distinct role for the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflict is that of
peacekeeping. In this area, the Security Council should as
a matter of principle give equal treatment to all conflict
situations regardless of the geographical location of the
conflict. The Council should be seen to be fair and even-
handed as it executes its responsibilities in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Last
month the Security Council adopted resolutions
establishing two peacekeeping missions, one in Sierra
Leone and another in East Timor. For Sierra Leone, with
an area of 71,740 square kilometres, the Security Council
decided that the military component should comprise a
maximum of only 6,000 military personnel, including 260
military observers. And yet in the case of East Timor,
with an area of less than 5,000 square kilometres, the
Council authorized a military contingent of up to 8,950
troops and up to 200 military observers. It is difficult for
the Security Council to escape the perception of a double
standard in the treatment of conflicts in Africa as opposed
to those in other regions of the world.

In this area of preventing and halting conflict,
African leaders have shown willingness to take risks for
peace. They have taken initiatives to deal with threats to
peace and stability on the continent. Through its
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, and along with two subregional groupings -
the Southern African Development Community (SADC)
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) - the Organization of African Unity has
succeeded in concluding ceasefire agreements in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sierra Leone.
These initiatives, without doubt, are an indication of the
determination of African leaders to search for lasting
solutions to the continent's problems.

These efforts, however, are complementary and are
not meant to absolve the Security Council of its
responsibility for maintaining peace and security in the
world, Africa included.

Having authorized a peace Mission for Sierra Leone,
the Security Council now has a great opportunity to
prevent the crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo from developing into a wider conflagration in
Central Africa. As already noted, a Ceasefire Agreement
is already in place and the Joint Military Commission
(JMC) has begun to lay the basic infrastructure in the
implementation of that Agreement. While on the subject,
my delegation expresses gratitude to all those countries
that have extended financial support to the Joint Military
Commission. The JMC will need continued support from
the international community for it to effectively carry out
its responsibilities under the Lusaka Agreement.

 

The successful implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement offers the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its neighbours a chance to enjoy genuine
peace and stability. We cannot afford to miss this
opportunity. The continued support of the Security Council
is therefore not only expected but imperative.

My delegation welcomes the positive steps already
taken by the Council relative to United Nations deployment
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I am referring to
the Security Council's approval of the deployment of up to
90 military liaison officers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and, as required, to the belligerent and other
neighbouring States. Zambia is, however, gravely concerned
that the Security Council is not moving quickly enough to
authorize the second stage of the deployment of 500
military observers. We believe very strongly that the delay
is sending the wrong message to all the parties involved in
the conflict. There is a real danger now that the peace
process, so delicately nurtured, could unravel.

We call upon the Council to take action on the second
stage of the peace process. Indeed, the third stage,
involving the creation of a peacekeeping force, is itself
unnecessarily being held hostage to preoccupations with
demands for security guarantees. The situation on the
ground demands quick action by the Security Council in
order to prevent the development of a vacuum that could
easily be filled by forces working against peace in the
region.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has the largest
land mass area in Africa. The nature of the conflict is also
complex. Africa expects that the envisaged peacekeeping
force to be deployed will be of an appropriate size with a
clear mandate. Such a force must be deployed under
Chapter VII of the Charter, as envisaged in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Indeed, such a peacekeeping force
must be several times larger than that mandated for East
Timor. We call upon the Council to summon the necessary
political will to also commit the financial resources that will
enable such a force to carry out its mandate.

Failure to have a clear mandate for the peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, failure
to have a force strong enough to carry out the mandate and
failure to deploy the force under Chapter VII will only
serve to reinforce the perception that conflict in Africa does
not command the same priority as that attached to hot spots
elsewhere in the world.

I would like to conclude my contribution by
referring once again to the Secretary-General's report on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. The observations
and recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
that report continue to be relevant. They provide ready
options for the Security Council in its role of enhancing
peace and security by preventing armed conflicts.

