Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): First of all, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency and to assure you of
our full support and cooperation. I would also like to
convey our appreciation to the United States delegation
for their leadership during last month's presidency.

I would like to thank Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, for her briefing. We
have taken note of the Office of Prosecutor's report and
update on the activities regarding the situation in Libya.
The current security and political situation in
Libya continues to create a breeding ground for the
growing impunity of terrorist groups and armed
militias. Widespread violations and abuses continue
to be committed against civilians and vulnerable
populations. We take note with concern of the
information on increasing numbers of migrants,
smuggled or trafficked through Libya to Europe, who
have been inhumanly detained, extorted and sexually
assaulted - a serious violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law. We urge all parties
to refrain from unlawfully targeting civilians and
migrants, and call for those responsible for serious
crimes to be held accountable.

Kazakhstan believes that an effective and credible
Government is crucial to bolstering Libya's commitment
and capability to restore and promote the rule of law,
to address impunity, to protect basic human rights and
to provide justice for past violations. To that end, the
international community's support of Libya remains
vital to restoring stability and security throughout
the country. Such stability and security requires the
unification and rebuilding of all national institutions,
including political authorities, security and defence
forces. In that regard, we welcome the recent meeting
of Prime Minister Serraj with General Haftar in Abu
Dhabi, and consider that meeting as an important step
to advancing the political process in Libya.

Finally, we commend the remediation efforts of
regional organizations - such as the African Union,
the League of Arab States and the European Union, as
well as neighbouring countries - to support the Libyan
political process.

