Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes today's adoption of resolution 2244
(2015) and the 14 positive votes it received.

The Monitoring Group has a key role to play in
keeping the Security Council informed about sanctions
issues in a region that is so important to our collective
work. At the heart of the Group's ability to do its
work is the willingness of Governments to cooperate.
Unfortunately, today's resolution reflects two very
different approaches to that cooperation. On the one
hand, cooperation between the Monitoring Group and
the Government of Eritrea is on the wrong trajectory.
The Group has not been able to Visit Eritrea since
February 2011, in spite of successive Security Council
resolutions that make clear the importance of the Group
being able to discharge its mandate fully by visiting
Eritrea. Today's resolution could not be clearer on What
Eritrea needs to do: deepen engagement with the Group
and facilitate the Group's regular entry into Eritrea.
Eritrea is the master of its own destiny and it is at a
crossroads, that is, either admit the Group to Eritrea and
show the Council that is has nothing to hide and then
engage in a serious discussion on the appropriateness
of sanctions, or choose continued isolation. The United
Kingdom very much hopes that it will choose the first
course of action.

On the other hand, in Somalia the Monitoring Group
has built a strong relationship with the Government.
We applaud the Group and the Government for their
constructive engagement throughout the course of the
Group's mandate. We are pleased to see the Group
spending more time in Somalia. The United Kingdom
commends the progress that the Government of Somalia
has made in managing its weapons. There are still
some worrying reports of weapons being diverted for
Government stocks, but the trajectory is the right one.

On public financial management, again there is
progress. But much more needs to be done. Proper
management of public finances in the run-up to next
year's elections is key to ensuring trust between the
Government and its people. The United Kingdom will
continue to be at the forefront of efforts to support the
Somali Government to strengthen its management of
public resources.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Monitoring Group. We look forward to its reporting
over the coming year. We hope that the Government of
Eritrea will choose cooperation over isolation.

