I would like to thank our briefers today and pay particular tribute to civil society organizations for their action in the field. I also welcome the leadership of Germany and the Dominican Republic, co-Chairs of the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, on this subject. We share the concerns expressed by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2020/487). Access to justice and basic health care for victims, including sexual- and reproductive-health services, are major challenges, particularly in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We regret the politicization of these issues to the detriment of women and girls. We strongly condemn the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and terror with the aim of permanently traumatizing populations, thereby undermining all efforts to find a sustainable solution to crises. The fight against impunity is the best deterrent. Those responsible for sexual violence must be systematically prosecuted and sentenced. This must be a priority at the national level. International justice also has a role to play in cases of mass atrocities. We support the work of the International Criminal Court in this regard. Preventing sexual violence requires tackling gender inequalities. Sexual violence remains exacerbated by discrimination, prejudice and stereotypes. The rise of overtly sexist, misogynist and homophobic political discourse reinforces sexual and gender-based violence. The Security Council has clearly identified solutions to combat this scourge: when the participation of women at all levels of the decision- making process is ensured and real attention is paid to their economic and social emancipation, societies emerge reinforced from crises more just and equal. Supporting survivors of sexual violence, including when court proceedings are inaccessible or blocked, is essential. This is why France has decided to grant €6.2 million to the Global Survivors Fund, spearheaded by the Nobel Laureates Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad. Such support must be comprehensive. To this end, France provided €5 million in funding for a project that empowers women by improving access to sexual- and reproductive-health services and tackles sexual violence in the Wadi Fira region in Chad. The Special Representative's warning and documentation role is crucial. We will continue to support the inclusion of conflict-related sexual violence in country- specific resolutions and advocate for adequate resources for the teams on the ground. We urgently need to transform commitments into compliance. France will do its part, including in the context of the Generation Equality Forum, which we will organize in partnership with Mexico, UN-Women and civil society.
