Mr. Khalil (Egypt): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency. We trust that you, Sir, will steer the Council
in addressing this very serious situation. We would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We
express our support for his efforts in support of our
initiative to achieve an immediate ceasefire and for
the three points that he mentioned, namely, stopping
the fighting, starting dialogue and addressing the root
casues. I would like to welcome the presence earlier
today of Minister Asselborn. We pay tribute to his
commitment and courage.

In our most recent open debate on the Middle East
(see S/PV.7164), we assessed the situation following
nine months of unfruitful negotiations between
Israel and Palestine. The negotiations failed because
Israel, the occupying Power, refused to abide by the
agreed rules of the game. It continued to build illegal
settlements and refused to release the last batch of
pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners. It called off the talks
when the Palestinian Government had the audacity to
respond to those illegal measures by exercising its fully
legitimate right under international law to adhere to a
number of human rights conventions.

We all concluded that the situation was not
sustainable. We predicted that it could explode at any
time. Unfortunately, our forecast was all too accurate.
It took less than three months for the entire situation
to explode. The collapse of the peace talks and,
since then, the deplorable kidnapping and killing of
teenagers from both sides, the exaggerated retaliatory
measures of Israel, the escalation of the racist price-tag
attacks against Arabs, Muslims and Christians alike,
the continuous provocation and attempts to change the
status quo with regard to the Holy Mosque in Jerusalem,
the launching of rockets and projectiles towards Israel
and the many other events that we have witnessed during
the past three months, leading to the current war being
waged on Gaza, are all painful symptoms of a chronic
and deadly disease called occupation. That has led to
the current tragic cycle of violence and will continue to
give rise to similar tragedies until it is eradicated.

No matter how strong Israel's denial, the occupation
remains the principal cause of the instability for both
Israelis and Palestinians. The solution is simple. Once
there is no occupation, there will be no violence from
either side. Once there are two States living side by side
within the defined and recognized borders of 4 June
1967, peace will be achieved. How many more lives
must be lost and how many more children, women
and men must be killed, maimed or pyschologically
destroyed for life before Israel recognizes that
occupation is not sustainable? How many times has it
tried the same policies and how many times has it seen
the same results? Instead of achieving the security ofits
citizens, Israel still feels threatened despite its military
might, which exceeds the military capabilities of all its
neighbours combined.

Egypt therefore commends the recent warnings
issued by more than a dozen European countries about
the possible repercussions of investment in entities
involved in settlement activities. We believe that such
moves, in addition to the steps taken by civil society to
divest from activities directly linked to the occupation
or to grave breaches of international law, such as the
decision taken by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
to divest from a British company linked to the Israeli
prison system, can contribute to convincing Israel that
occupation has a price.

Egypt condemns the indiscriminate killing of
civilians in Gaza. The horrible scenes of death and
destruction in Shujaiya and the fatally wounded bodies
of the four innocent boys who were playing soccer
in an open area on a beach two days before that call
into serious question the logic of the Israeli army. It is
not credible to pretend that children were mistakenly
identified as terrorists.

More than 600 Palestinians have been killed. At
least 20 per cent of them were children, and the death
count is rising. We condemn the disproportionate use
of force. The Torah mandates an eye for an eye; it never
called for taking 100 eyes for only 1.

Egypt has spared no effort to help in stopping the
atrocities in Gaza. We have launched the only serious
ceasefire initiative aimed at stopping the hostilities
and negotiating the terms of a sustainable solution that
can bring the Palestinians and the Israelis back to the
negotiating table. The clear and broad support for the
initiative expressed by the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council reflects the fact that
the proposed approach might be the only opportunity
available to stop the fighting and restore normal life for
the civilian population in Gaza.

We call on all those who have not accepted the
initiative to reconsider their positions. Today the
Secretary- General was in Egypt. United States Secretary
of State John Kerry was also in Cairo. We hope that our
common efforts will result in an immediate ceasefire
followed by negotiations to address the root causes
of the ever-repeating, never-ending conflict, first and
foremost by ending the illegal blockade imposed on
Gaza and opening the crossings administered by the
occupying Power.

Meanwhile, we support in full the request by the
Palestinian President to provide international protection
for the Palestinian people, which was endorsed by the
League of Arab States. We look forward to concrete
and creative steps on the part of the Secretary-General
and the Security Council to deliver the much-needed
protection for the Palestinians.

I would like to end my statement by reading out
excerpts from articles written by an independent Israeli
journalist, Noam Sheizaf on 10 July, before the ground
campaign against Gaza started. He wrote,

"Even today, when rockets are exploding above
the city I love most in the world, even when we
rush into a makeshift bomb shelter, even now, I
oppose this military operation wholeheartedly. The
sight of the [Israeli Air Force's] attack helicopters
going south does not fill me with pride or
gratitude - it horrifies and depresses me;

"[I]fI had to explain the whole thing briefly,
I would use the following metaphor: we have built
two giant prisons -'West Bank Prison' and 'Gaza
Prison'. The West Bank Prison is similar to a
minimum security facility, where prisoners get to
run their own affairs as long as they behave;

"Gaza, on the other hand, is a maximum
security facility. It is difficult to visit and impossible
to leave;

"I believe the prisoners will never love those
who have locked them up, but there is a good chance
that their children might be able to forgive - if for
no other reason than a desire to move on with their
lives;

"Hold your fire. Tear down the prison walls.
Set the prisoners free."

I hope Israel will listen to that voice of reason.
I hope one day the Israelis will be convinced that
occupation will never bring security; on the contrary, it
will only bring instability, death and war crimes.

