Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
France's position on the occupied territories, including

 

Jerusalem, and on the peace process, is well known. We
share that position with the members of the European
Union and with many other States that associate
themselves with our statements. We believe, in
accordance with the almost identical terms of six Council
resolutions, that all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel that have altered or
purported to alter the character and status of Jerusalem
are null and void and must be rescinded forthwith.

We have supported the peace process since its
inception and have on several occasions - including
recently, with our European partners - reaffirmed our
support for the efforts of the United States to secure the
agreement of the parties on proposals that we regard as
reasonable. These positions are well known, and we will
therefore merely recall them.

Too frequently we hear that the peace process is
going through a crucial stage and that we should continue
to be patient. Patience is warranted and, indeed, essential,
when a situation is developing in the right direction. We
would be the first to remind all the parties concerned that
changes cannot be achieved in one day, or even in a year,
that we must allow time for attitudes to evolve and that
we must move in stages, each stage being well
established so as to ensure the success of the next. That
is what is generally called a process.

Unfortunately, we are witnessing a reverse trend:
there has been no response to the proposals made by the
United States several months ago, while at the same time
an increasing number of decisions have been taken that
have created faits accomplis. The expulsions and
demolitions taking place in Jerusalem are causing
humiliation, despondency and anger. This policy seems to
arise out of a movement aimed at creating an irreversible
situation in Jerusalem that in the long term would strip
the question of the status of the city of any real meaning.
We are meeting today because of a new decision that, if
it were implemented, would amount to accepting a plan
altering the boundaries of the city and creating an
expanded municipal structure. Inasmuch as that new
structure would include West Bank settlements close to
Jerusalem, it would clearly alter the existing status quo.
Such an action would run counter to the spirit and letter
of the agreements signed between the parties. It would be
a breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention. It would
disregard the decisions of the Security Council. We
therefore appeal to the Israeli authorities to renounce this
approach.

 

The city of Jerusalem is a special and sacred place for
three major religions. That is why, in 1947, the decision
was taken to give Jerusalem an international status. Today,
as then, only agreement between the parties can yield a
solution that is acceptable to the international community.
The chance for a lasting peace hinges on that agreement.

The deadlock in the peace process is profoundly
disappointing and saddening to all those who admired the
courage and vision of the Israeli and Palestinian leaders
who committed themselves to it. But above and beyond our
disappointment, it is the danger that this deadlock poses for
regional stability that concerns us.

Israel's security is a legitimate concern, recognized by
the international community and by the Palestinians. In this
regard, the latter have taken brave measures which should
be continued. But the only genuine security, as France itself
knows, lies in the resolve of peoples and their leaders to
choose coexistence and cooperation. Fortunately, Israel's
right to live within secure and recognized borders is now
well established. But the choice must be made once and for
all in favour of discussions in good faith, rather than
tensions. We therefore call once again for the Israeli leaders
to choose negotiation, and we encourage those who are
playing a special role in the peace process to pursue their
efforts without respite.

We are ready to consider any decision whereby the
Security Council, in accordance with its responsibilities,
would place on record its concern in the light of the Israeli
decisions relating to the boundaries of the municipality of
Jerusalem and would also make a strong appeal to the
parties to allow the peace process in the Middle East to
break out of its deadlock. We fervently hope that it will be
possible to secure consensus on such a decision, and we are
ready to work to that end.

