Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to welcome Mr. Harri Holkeri
and thank him for his comprehensive briefing, which
provided us with further details about the development
of the situation in Kosovo. His description of the
situation there is in many respects encouraging.
However, the international community and the people
of Kosovo in particular must redouble their efforts to
implement resolution 1244 (1999).

With regard to the functioning of the democratic
institutions, my delegation appreciates Mr. Holkeri's
decision to continue in a decisive manner with the
policy of "standards before status", as well as the
gradual transfer by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) of the
responsibilities listed in chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework. We also appreciate the improvement in
relations between the Government and the Assembly
and the participation of all political groups in the
meetings of that body; the establishment of the
recruitment committee; the increasing determination of
the Provisional Institutions to focus on the adoption of
policies and laws conducive to meeting the specific
needs of the population; and, finally, the establishment
of an Inter-Ministerial Working Group on Gender
Equality and, within the Assembly, of a Gender
Equality Commission.

We encourage the authorities to continue their
efforts to include minorities in central and local
administrations, and we hope that UNMIK'S mission
performance management plan will achieve conclusive
results.

We deplore the continued existence of the parallel
structures and urge the Serbian authorities to cooperate
more effectively with a view to reaching a definitive
resolution of that question.

With regard to the rule of law, my delegation
remains concerned about the ongoing Violence, as well
as the effects of such violence. It is likewise concerned
about the situation prevailing in prisons and the
problems associated with freedom of movement;
appropriate solutions need to be found to those
problems.

The progress made by UNMIK in setting up
effective, solid judicial institutions, in combating
serious crime, prostitution and trafficking in human
beings, and in improving the Kosovo Police Service
deserves support. We encourage the police cooperation
that is taking place at the provincial and regional levels
and the strengthening of the Kosovo Organized Crime
Bureau.

Returns and the rights of minorities are sources of
major concern, since the resolution of those issues
could have a beneficial impact on the process of
integration and reconciliation, which in turn could be
conducive to the stabilization of the area. My
delegation welcomes the number of returns registered
during the reporting period, as well as, inter alia, the
clearly more robust intervention by representatives of
the Provisional Institutions, such as can be seen from
the open letter by Albanian leaders and Kosovo
minorities, and the provision of $67 million for that
process.

Turning to the integration and utilization of
public services, my delegation appreciates the work
done by UNMIK and the United Nations Development
Programme, which has made it possible for work to
start on about 50 houses, as well as the work of the
Housing and Property Directorate, which should be
supported.

While we encourage UNMIK in its support for
the initiatives to encourage returns and inter-ethnic
dialogue, we await with interest the outcome of the
evaluation process for this season, which will make it
possible to better prepare a strategy for 2004. We hope
that the draft anti-discrimination law submitted to the
Kosovo Assembly will be given favourable
consideration. Furthermore, we have taken note of the
progress being made in the economic area, in particular
in the fields of privatization and taxation. We welcome
this momentum and stress our concern about
unemployment, an issue which must be definitively
resolved.

We welcome also the work of the European
Union's Stabilization and Association Efforts Tracking
Mechanism, and we hope that the holding of sectoral
meetings with the relevant Kosovo institutions will
yield positive results.

Moreover, my delegation - which has always
recommended dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade
and encouraged regional cooperation - is grateful to
Mr. Holkeri for his efforts, which have made possible
the launching of direct talks on questions of mutual
interest. We hope that the dialogue that took place on
14 October at Vienna, which is only the start of the
process, will have a positive outcome.

We commend also the work done by UNMIK to
promote direct cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina, which made possible the holding of meetings
between officials of the Ministry of Labour and Social
Welfare with counterparts from Belgrade.

On the question of the Kosovo Protection Corps,
my delegation appreciates the steps taken by UNMIK
and KFOR on its structure and functioning, in
particular those measures aimed at increasing its
professionalism and reliability and making it more
operational. It welcomes the establishment of a high-
level Civil Protection Development Group, co-chaired
by Mr. Holkeri and the commander of KFOR. It
stresses training as well as the importance of the multi-
ethnic composition of the KPC. We await with interest
the definition by UNMIK of the legal basis for KPC
activities as a civil emergency agency.

With regard to support activities, we hope that the
current downsizing strategy will in no way affect the
process of the effective restoration of peace.

Finally, my delegation endorses the comments
made by the Secretary-General in his report, and we
thank his Special Representative and all the members
of the Mission for the work they have done and
reiterate our support for them.

