The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Security
Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Roed-Larsen to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/262, which contains the fifth semi-
annual report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).
Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in English)

"The Security Council recalls all its
previous resolutions on Lebanon, in particular
resolutions 1559 (2004), 425 (1978), 426 (1978),
520 (1982), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006), as well
as the statements of its president on the situation
in Lebanon, in particular the statements of
18 June 2000, 19 October 2004, 4 May 2005,
23 January 2006, 30 October 2006, 12 December
2006 and 17 April 2007.

"The Security Council welcomes the fifth
semi-annual report to the Security Council of
7 May 2007 on the implementation of resolution
1559 (2004).

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the legitimate and democratically-
elected Government of Lebanon, calls for full
respect for the democratic institutions of the
country, in conformity with its constitution, and
condemns any effort to destabilize Lebanon. The
Security Council calls upon all Lebanese political
parties to show responsibility with a View to
preventing, through dialogue, further
deterioration of the situation in Lebanon.
Recognizing the need to hold free and fair
presidential elections in conformity with the
Lebanese constitution and without any foreign
interference and influence, the Security Council
urges political parties in Lebanon to relaunch a
national dialogue with the aim to reach an
agreement to settle all political issues.

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
support for the territorial integrity, sovereignty,
unity and political independence of Lebanon
within its internationally recognized borders and
under the sole and exclusive authority of the
Government of Lebanon.

"The Council condemns the ongoing
criminal and terrorist acts in Lebanon, including
those perpetrated by Fatah al-Islam, and fully
supports the efforts carried out by the Lebanese
Government and army to ensure security and
stability throughout Lebanon. The Council
underlines the need to protect and give assistance
07-37747

to the civilian population, notably the Palestinian
refugees. The Council reiterates that there should
be no weapons in Lebanon without the consent of
its Government and no authority other than that
of its Government.

"The Security Council notes with
appreciation that further progress has been made
towards the implementation of resolution 1559
(2004), in particular through the extension of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout its territory, particularly in the South,
but it also notes with regret that some provisions
of resolution 1559 (2004) have yet to be fully
implemented, particularly the disbanding and
disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias, the strict respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity, and political
independence of Lebanon, and free and fair
presidential elections conducted according to the
Lebanese constitutional rules, without any
foreign interference and influence.

"The Security Council reiterates its deep
concern at mounting information by Israel and
other States of illegal movements of arms into
Lebanon, and in particular across the Lebanese-
Syrian border, and looks forward to the
conclusions of the Lebanon Independent Border
Assessment Team. It reiterates its call for the
07-37747

strict respect for Lebanon's sovereignty and
territorial integrity, including its air space.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
and urges all concerned States and parties, as
mentioned in the report, to cooperate fully with
the Government of Lebanon, the Security Council
and the Secretary-General to achieve this goal.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
to the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy in
their efforts and dedication to facilitate and assist
in the implementation of all provisions of
resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006) and
looks forward to the Secretary-General's next
report on implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and to his further recommendations on the
relevant outstanding issues."

(spoke in French)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/17.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m.

