Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Mr. Ladsous and the
Police Commissioners of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, the African Union/United Nations
Hybrid operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for sharing their
experiences with us. I also express my heartfelt
appreciation to all peacekeepers for their contribution
in the face of severe challenges on the ground. Today's
briefings remind us of the complex and diverse
mandates being undertaken by United Nations police
components, including protecting civilians, creating
amenable conditions for humanitarian assistance,
supporting peace processes, restructuring and
reforming the security sector and promoting the rule of
law and human rights.

Today, I would like to focus on national police
capacity-building, in line with the presentation given by
Mr. Monchotte, the MINUSTAH Police Commissioner,
but I also listened with interest to references to the
capacity-building of local police forces, which includes
a gender focus, provided by the Police Commissioner of
UNAMID. I believe that one of our long-term priorities
should be to help build and reform the police and law
enforcement institutions of host nations, although that
may not always be the top priority in all cases in the
short-term as pointed out by one of the briefers. That
process will enable such institutions to play a sustained
role in maintaining peace and security, including after
the withdrawal of the peace operations.

The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-
Leste (UNMIT) was a particularly solid example of
the successful deployment of civilian police exploits.
National police commanders identified the greatest
improvements in administrative support areas such
as project management, training, development and
maintenance of databases, human resources and
finance. Work to strengthen the capacity of the national
police contributed to UNMIT's successful closure at
the end of 2012.

I believe MINUSTAH has the potential to be another
successful example in that area. While challenges
remain, MINUSTAH has successfully supported the
Haitian National Police in a number of areas centred on
capacity and the rule of law. Progress has been made
through community violence-reduction programmes,
improved criminal justice procedures, security sector
reform, joint patrols, community policing and the
development of the 2017-2021 strategic plan.

Police capacity-building efforts like these can play
a major role in enabling United Nations peacekeeping
operations to draw down and eventually withdraw.
On that note, I would like to thank Mr. Monchotte
for providing us with interesting statistics on the
improvements and a list of the remaining challenges. I
would like to ask Mr. Monchotte if he could describe, in
concrete terms, some examples of successes and lessons
learned from addressing challenges he has faced on the
ground with regard to police capacity-building.

