The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Kazakhstan.

I would like to join previous speakers in thanking
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, President Mogae
and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings on the situation in South Sudan.

Kazakhstan commends the efforts of the United
Nations, the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for their
steadfast efforts to advance the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, which is the only
way to achieve stability and progress in South Sudan.
We welcome the success ofthe first phase ofthe eagerly
awaited IGAD's High-level Revitalization Forum,
concluded with the signing on 21 December of the
Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities, Protection
of Civilians and Humanitarian Access. However, we
are gravely concerned about the reports that the parties
are violating the Agreement.

The continuing military action has deepened the
dire humanitarian and economic crisis, which has
already caused severe food insecurity for more than
half of the population and forced 4 million South
Sudanese to flee their homes. The presidential decree of
9 November ordering free movement for humanitarian
actors has not produced tangible improvements in
humanitarian access for those in greatest need. In this
vulnerable situation, the task of protecting civilians and
of ensuring compliance with international humanitarian
law becomes all the more critical. We therefore call on
all the signatories to immediately cease all hostilities,
abide by their commitments and demonstrate their
genuine political will ahead of the second phase of
the High-level Revitalization Forum, which should
be seen as a unique opportunity, not to be lost. They
must invest and commit to making the Forum succeed.

The Security Council must show unity in pressing the

Government and the other parties to end all hostilities

and act in good faith in the interests of the people of
South Sudan.

In order to be more effective, the political
negotiations should be accompanied by intercommunal
reconciliation and confidence-building among local
populations. International support in addressing the
complex causes of the conflict, by implementing
comprehensive strategies in economic development,
disaster-risk reduction and resilience-building, is
equally essential. Women and young people must be
fully engaged in those tasks in order to ensure far-
reaching and long-lasting results.

Finally, Kazakhstan greatly appreciates the work of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
in implementing its mandated tasks. We note that some
progress has been made in deploying the Regional
Protection Force, which will enhance UNMISS's
capacity to protect civilians, improve the security
environment and support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

Before I conclude, on behalf of the Council I would
like to say goodbye to Mr. Petr Iliichev, first Deputy
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
since today is his last meeting in the Chamber in
his current capacity. I hope that all the Heads of
delegations share our sentiments and acknowledge
and appreciate the professionalism and dedication
that he has demonstrated throughout his five years of
tireless work in New York. We cordially congratulate
him on his promotion to the position of Director of
the Department of International Organizations at the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
and wish him every success.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
