Ms. Pieper (Germany): I too would like to thank
you, President Zuma, for convening this important
debate today. Let me also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Commissioner for Peace and Security of
the African Union, Mr. Lamamra, as well as the
Chairperson of the African Union Peace and Security
Council, Mr. Metangula, for their important
contributions.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations envisaged in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations is indispensable for
finding appropriate solutions to crises and conflicts and
for making optimal use of resources and capacities.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) is particularly well developed.
Their expanding involvement and achievements in past
years have made the African Union and the subregional
organizations into indispensable actors in resolving
crises in Africa. I would especially like to call attention
to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). That involvement deserves our
great respect.
Another important contribution by the AU to
solving humanitarian crises is its regional initiative in
the fight against the Lord's Resistance Army. The
pragmatic cooperation between the United Nations and
the AU in resolving conflicts was recently illustrated
when their representatives in charge of issues relating
to the Lord's Resistance Army jointly travelled to
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Uganda
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In recent years, much has been accomplished in
promoting cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union at both the strategic and operational
levels. We especially welcome the regular meetings
between the members of the United Nations Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as the work of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa,
joint high-level meetings, more desk-to-desk meetings
and also the recent joint assessment mission to the
Sahel. More progress is possible. We must use both
formal and informal means to intensify cooperation.
Specifically, I would like to mention the following
areas.

At the strategic level, the dialogue between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the AU should be strengthened.
The African Union's position and that of subregional
organizations are important for the United Nations
Security Council when it deals with issues relating to
Africa. That does not mean that the positions will
always be the same and must always be so. In addition
to the annual meetings of the members of the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, Germany supports inviting
representatives of the AU and subregional African
organizations to the meetings of the United Nations
Security Council on an ad hoc basis. At the same time,
we welcome the participation of United Nations
Special Envoys at meetings of the AU Peace and
Security Council.

More attention must be paid to conflict
prevention and mediation in the future. The AU,
subregional African organizations and the United
Nations Secretary-General's special representatives are
already active in this field. In the future, they should
work together more systematically, both formally and
informally. Cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and African organizations should also be
strengthened in order to support national and regional
efforts to consolidate peace.

At the operational level, we should constantly
analyze the experience gained in the various
partnerships between the United Nations and the AU in
the area of peacekeeping, especially the current
AMISOM. and UNAMID missions, and put that
knowledge to use for further cooperation. Examples for
such study are providing and training troops and the
close integration of political mediation and the
presence of peace missions on the ground. Capacity-
building in the AU must continue to be pushed
forward. The lO-year capacity-building programme has
so far proven to be a useful instrument, but clearly
defined guidelines for implementing its aims could
make it more efficient.

Effective cooperation between the United Nations
and the AU on peace and security issues can also profit
from the efforts of others, such as the European Union
(EU) and bilateral partners. The European Union offers
considerable financial and logistical support for
African initiatives and capacity-building for the
African Union. Worthy of special mention in that
context are the joint Africa-EU Partnership on Peace
and Security and the African Peace Facility. Well-
known examples are the joint efforts of Operation
Atalanta, AMISOM. and the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM, as well as the EU's support for
the AU's efforts within that framework.

Those efforts are complemented by bilateral
support. Germany, for example, is currently supporting
construction of the peace and security building for the
AU Commission in Addis Ababa. We support the AU
programme for border management in Africa within the
framework of our joint efforts in conflict prevention.
We also support the reinforcement of African peace
and security structures, for example by training and
equipping African police officers for the African
Standby Force and for deployment in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Finally, I would like to express the support of my
delegation for the draft resolution to be voted on today.

