President Gusmfio: I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for inviting me to speak to this body
today. I ask the indulgence of the members of the
Security Council in offering special thanks. On my
own behalf and on behalf of the people of Timor-Leste,
I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, and to the
people of Tanzania, our profound gratitude for the
strong support you have given us, beginning in
December of 1975, when Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, our
Minister for Foreign Affairs, arrived here for the first
time to seek the assistance of the Security Council. He
was literally met at the front door by Mr. Salim Ahmed
Salim, who looked after him. I express our deepest
gratitude to the late President of Tanzania, Mr. Julius
Nyerere, Father of the Nation. In the 19805, when I
was still in the mountains of Timor-Leste leading the
FALINTIL guerrilla army, I was informed that
President Nyerere had raised the issue of Timor-Leste's
self-determination during a visit to Indonesia. Words
cannot do justice to the feelings we experienced or to
the way our spirits soared when we received the news
of that.

In the interest of time, my presentation will be an
abridged version of the statement that has been
circulated in the Chamber. I will address three issues:
my thoughts on the report of our Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, current
developments and challenges, and our ongoing needs
and expectations vis-a-vis the international community.

On 31 October 2005, Mr. Aniceto Guterres,
Chairman of the Commission, handed to me the
Commission's final report, pursuant to regulation
No. 2001/10 of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as amended
by our National Parliament. Abiding by the law and in
an effort to expedite the process, I handed the report
over to the National Parliament on 28 November, and
thereafter to the Government. On 20 January 2006, the
Secretary-General was gracious enough to receive me.
On that occasion, I presented him with a copy of the
Commission's report.

When I addressed our National Parliament on
28 November, I said that, upon learning about the
contents of the report, I concluded that both Minister
Ramos-Horta and I were right in saying that true
justice for the East Timorese was the recognition by
the international community of the right of the people
of Timor-Leste to self-determination and
independence. That understanding is crucial to our
analysis and conclusions. Therefore, if we consider that
the previous 24 years were years of injustice -
injustice in which part of the international community
was implicated - then the collective actions taken by
the United Nations in 1999 in freeing our people, and
in assisting us since, are acts of redemption and of
superior justice.

The following excerpt can be read in the report
handed to me on 31 October 2005:

"The Commission is of the opinion that it is
not possible to achieve long-lasting reconciliation
without establishing the truth, obtaining justice
and providing compensation to the victims."

Before the Commission for Reception, Truth and
Reconciliation was established, the National Council of
Timorese Resistance, with the support of the
International Organization for Migration, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor, was engaged in meetings at the border
involving victims and perpetrators in an effort to
encourage the Timorese who had fled to West Timor to
return home. Those meetings were also aimed at
fostering genuine reconciliation among the people, and
genuine reconciliation means the way that people
accept each other without sentiments of revenge and
hatred.
We need not evaluate the report of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
solely from the incomplete perspective of exposing the
truth regarding violations of human rights. I
acknowledge that the Commission's mandate was the
pivotal element leading to all other activities. We all
acknowledge the merit that the Commission has earned
in the search for truth. Further, we all acknowledge that
truth is seminal to the quest for justice for the victims.

Reconciliation, however, has been a long-
standing process for the people of Timor-Leste. It is as
a result of our efforts at reconciliation that there has
not been a single revenge killing of suspected elements
implicated in the occupation of our country. If the
elections of August 2001 for the Constituent Assembly
represented a great moment of civic behaviour on the
part of the citizens of Timor-Leste, and if the elections
of April 2002 for the President of the Republic were
held in a commendable climate free from violence,
they should be seen as a reflection of the profound
consciousness of our people of the need never, ever
again to allow any space in Timor-Leste for political
violence. That is why we are living in an environment
of political stability and social harmony.

The investigations of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation can be grouped
into two main areas: the international dimension,
pertaining to the way the international community
positioned itself in relation to the question of Timor-
Leste, and the internal dimension, which dealt with
acts committed against the Timorese.

Regarding responsibility for the acts committed
by us Timorese since the 1980s, we acknowledge that
such violations of human rights took place. We knew
that the report of the Commission would suffer from a
lack of impartiality and objectivity unless the human
rights abuses committed by Timorese against Timorese
were addressed as well.

Some of the report's recommendations with
respect to justice are very ambitious. What, after all, is
the objective of justice? It is promoted mostly as
retribution - punishing those who act outside the rule
of law. Retributive justice is found in the legal systems
of all countries, yet we know that justice has a
deterrent component and that most countries
incorporate that aspect of justice into their legal
systems.

The report of the Commission for Reception,
Truth and Reconciliation states that "the absence of
justice is a fundamental obstacle in the process of
building a democratic society". My reply to that would
be: "Not necessarily". Justice cannot be abstracted, and
I would say that the building of a democratic society is
very much dependent upon the context in which we
apply that concept. Our own process in building
tolerance and reconciliation as the bases for a
democratic participation of the people is applying
restorative justice.

What also concern me are the report's
recommendations pertaining to reparations for the
victims and further prosecutions. The report asks the
permanent members of the Security Council, the
Governments that sold weapons to Indonesia and
supported Indonesia's policy, as well as the Portuguese
and Indonesian Governments, to pay reparations to the
victims.

In regard to the responsibilities of those who,
during the 24 years from 1975 to 1999, by indifference
and inaction or by direct participation enabled an
unjust situation to persist for so long, I can only
express my deepest gratitude for what the countries
mentioned in the Commission's report and many others
have done to free us and to rebuild our country. There
are not enough words to express the gratitude of our
people.

The prosecution's recommendation suggests, on
the one hand, the establishment of an international
tribunal and, on the other, that the contracts of the
international judges who served on the Special Panels
for Serious Crimes be renewed and that the resources
allocated to the investigation and trial of all crimes
committed between 1975 and 1999 be enhanced. That
recommendation does not take into account the
situation of political anarchy and social chaos that
could easily erupt if we should decide to bring people
to court for every crime committed by ourselves since
1975.

Finally, the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation also deals with the
Commission for Truth and Friendship, considered as
the opposite of punitive justice. While there have been
many national truth commissions, there has never been
one jointly initiated by two countries, and we regret
that the United Nations has so far not shown much
interest in or support for that novel initiative. The
establishment of the Commission for Truth and
Friendship was an undertaking of the State. The State
of Timor-Leste works on the principle that truth-telling
is a way of achieving justice, which, under the current
circumstances, is the best approach to the democratic
development of both countries - Timor-Leste and
Indonesia. In our perception, it is not easy for anyone
to accept the truth. The acceptance of the truth is
therefore the acknowledgement of responsibility.

On the way here, I came across an article by
Nobel Peace laureate Archbishop Desmond Tutu on the
very issue on which I am reflecting. For members'
benefit, I have attached to my speech a copy of that
timely article, entitled "Justice is Reconciliation", but
allow me to read out some salient parts that speak to
our situation as much as any other can.

"In our case neither, the apartheid
Government nor the liberation movement could
defeat each other. We had a military deadlock.
Moreover, in the case of Nuremberg, the
prosecutors and judges could pack up their bags
after the trial and leave Germany for their homes.
We had to make our homes in this, our common
motherland, and learn to live with one another
Such trials probably would have gone on nearly
forever, leaving gaping wounds open."

Whilst we do not share a common motherland
with Indonesia; we do share a border; we do share
history; we do have citizens of Timor-Leste living,
working and studying in Indonesia; we are both
nascent democracies struggling to put behind us years
of conflict; and our fates are in many ways conjoined.
Timor-Leste is not a conquering nation and Indonesia
is not a conquered one.

I have had to ask myself if it would be in our
national interest - which must include social
harmony - to begin a process that, I am told by some
friends, will bring justice, and have this process go on
for years, possibly setting back the democratic
consolidation that is being undertaken in Timor-Leste
and in Indonesia, respectively. The answer that I came
to, after wide consultation with the people, was that it
would not be.

Archbishop Tutu spoke at length on this issue,
and what is most telling is that he mentioned both the
necessity and desirability of adopting a restorative
justice model. He said:

"So it was a mercy that our country chose
this way to go the way of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission - granting amnesty
in exchange for the truth. This was ultimately
based on the principles of restorative justice and
ubuntu.... It sets high store by healing... Justice
as retribution often ignores the victim, and the
system is usually impersonal and cold.
Restorative justice is hopeful."

We, too, are hopeful, and it is important that we,
too, follow the path of restorative justice, in step with
our needs.

Finally, what should be the true lesson learned
from this report?

There are many valuable recommendations that
deserve in-depth study by Timorese society and
particularly by the political forces of our nation. The
commitment that we should all undertake is not to
allow, under any circumstances, a recurrence of
political violence in our beloved homeland.

Allow me now to turn to current developments in
Timor-Leste and to speak of the achievements and
challenges.

As we are nearing the end of the mandate of the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
allow me to express in this forum the collective and
sincere gratitude of the people of Timor-Leste to the
Council for the critical role that this body has played in
the recent history of our country. Though it might
sometimes seem to us that 1999's dark days of
senseless violence and destruction are a thing of the

past, let us not forget that it all happened only a few
years ago.

Yet in this short time span much has happened
and much has changed for the better - so much so that
our people, despite the fact that many are still trying to
come to terms with their personal suffering, are happy
that we are at peace with ourselves and with our
neighbours and that we are living in a free and
democratic country. We would not have achieved this
without the Council's steady and generous assistance.

In the short period of time that has elapsed since
the transfer of sovereignty in May 2002, our new
nation, building on the impressive through basic and
precarious institutions left by UNTAET, has made
some strong progress.

The Secretary-General's report provides a good
overview of the achievements made and the challenges
my country still faces. To add to the Secretary-
General's positive assessment of the situation in the
country, Council members might wish to read another
recent, positive report - this one by the World Bank.

As head of State, I am fully aware of the
criticisms levelled at our security forces, namely the
national police. One need only listen directly to those
on the receiving end of the abuses or read our media
reports to conclude that there have been too many
unacceptable breaches of our own laws and of
international obligations.

However, I believe also that, compared with the
situation that prevailed only two years ago, there has
been a marked improvement in the overall conduct of
our police force. We are very grateful to those
countries that have made such an important
contribution to the development of our police force.

Unfortunately, our shortcomings and failings are
not confined to one area alone. We are conscious of our
shortcomings in the justice sector - as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Hasegawa, stated earlier - which are the result of an
extreme shortage of trained and experienced judges,
prosecutors, public defenders and court clerks.
Although the situation has improved somewhat with
the recruitment of a number of competent foreign
jurists, the reality is that, for a long time to come,
Timor-Leste will continue to require international
assistance in that sector if we are to offer our people an
independent and professional judiciary that is
fundamental to our democratic process.

Our relations with our two closest neighbours
continue to develop on a sound basis. The high point of
our relationship with Indonesia came last year, when
President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono visited our
country. Despite a series of incidents involving
repeated incursions into our territory, in the Oecussi
district in September and October 2005, by civilian
elements that destroyed private property and a police
post, the overall situation has been very calm.

On 6 January, an incident occurred when three
indicted persons based in West Timor entered our
territory. In the ensuing scuffle, the three were shot
dead. We must await the results of the investigation, to
be undertaken by a joint commission of investigation
agreed by the two sides, before we can be certain of the
facts surrounding the incident. Nevertheless, regardless
of the facts that emerge, any loss of life is regrettable.

With our other neighbour, Australia, we have
taken another significant step. On 12 January the two
foreign ministers signed an agreement that provides for
a 50-50 sharing of oil and gas resources in the Greater
Sunrise area, one of the richest in the entire Asia-
Pacific region, and a 50-year moratorium on our
maritime boundary, without prejudice to our sovereign
claims.

In the course of this year, we will see heightened
political activities in Timor-Leste as we approach the
2007 general elections for the national parliament and
the presidency. As head of State, it is my duty, under
the Constitution, to set the dates for the elections.

In that regard, I have found very useful the report
of the United Nations Electoral Assistance Division of
the Department of Political Affairs assessment mission
that visited Timor-Leste in December 2005 to evaluate
our needs in regard to the electoral process.

Against that backdrop, it is my duty to appeal to
the international community to continue to assist us in
meeting some of our most critical needs. Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri has written to the Secretary-
General conveying our needs and our request for
assistance. That letter was also sent to the President of
the Security Council.

While we agree that UNOTIL should come to an
end, and with that I must say that we should close the
United Nations presence in our country on a high note,
I would propose that the Security Council consider the
establishment of a special political office in Timor-

Leste with the following components, as outlined in the
Prime Minister's request.

First, electoral assistance is needed to provide the
Government with technical and logistical support.

Secondly, civilian advisers are required. As
members are aware, while we have made continuing
progress during UNOTIL's mandate, there are critical
areas that remain in need of secure and steady
assistance, specifically in the justice and finance
sectors.

Thirdly, Timor-Leste continues to require support
in police training. Although we have had an excellent
bilateral assistance programme funded by Australia and
the United Kingdom, we believe it is important to
maintain a degree of United Nations involvement in
police training.

And finally, in view of the forthcoming elections
in 2007 and the need to ensure enhanced dialogue and
cooperation between East Timorese and Indonesian
security elements in order to prevent tension and
conflict along the border, we believe that the
deployment of some 15 to 20 military liaison personnel
as part of the special political office would be of
crucial importance.

In the meantime, we are planning a celebratory
event on 19 and 20 May 2006 to say farewell to the
United Nations and our friends and to thank them as
the current United Nations mission comes to a close
after nearly six years. We hope that Council members
will honour us with their presence on that occasion.

Last but not least, as this might be the final time I
address this body in my current capacity before the
formal closure of the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions in my country, allow me to
thank each and every member of the United Nations
family for playing a role in securing peace, security
and progress in my country. I wish to thank all
countries that have contributed troops to the
International Force, East Timor, and in particular
Australia for its decisive leadership in 1999, which
made possible the landing of peace enforcers in our
country.

I wish to pay tribute to our dear friend the late
Sergio Vieira de Mello, a unique human being and one
of the best-ever servants of the United Nations and its

highest ideals. I wish also to thank his immediate
predecessor, Ian Martin, head of the United Nations
Mission in East Timor, which paved the way for what
followed. I wish further to pay tribute to Kamalesh
Sharma, head of the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor, and to our friend Sukehiro Hasegawa,
head of UNOTIL, who has been in Timor-Leste since
2002, displaying admirable energy and dedication in
his mission. To him I say, "Arigato, Sukehiro-san".

Through them I pay tribute to all their immediate
staff and to the peacekeeping forces, police and civilian
personnel and United Nations Volunteers under their
command, from so many nationalities. We owe them
all a great deal.

We might not have too many virtues, but we
possess one quality that makes up for any lack, and that
is our sense of gratitude to anyone who has done good
to us. We have learned a great deal from them all,
through both good and bad, and I hope they have
learned something from us: some good and some bad,
but all part of life's wonderful learning experience.

