Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would first of all like
to join other delegations in welcoming the presence of
Prime Minister Aznar of Spain at this meeting. I would
also like to say how much we appreciate his important
statement, to which we listened with great attention.

The fight against terrorism remains one of the top
priorities on Germany's foreign policy agenda. I would
like here to briefly point to three fundamental
considerations guiding Germany's counter-terrorism
policy.

First, international terrorism is a strategic threat
to peace and to the international order. It is essential to
fight and weaken existing terrorist structures with
determination. The whole gamut of diplomatic,
intelligence, police, judicial and - as ultima ratio -
even military measures must be applied diligently. But
it is just as important to prevent people from becoming
terrorists: to win the battle for their hearts and minds.
We therefore need a dialogue among civilizations. We
need tolerance and respect for different cultures. We
need economic and social development to provide
people with a decent life. Crisis prevention and conflict
resolution are equally high on the agenda if we want to
fight terrorism successfully.

In that context, I would like to highlight the
recent publication of the road map to peace in the
Middle East. That initiative for a comprehensive
peace - which is sponsored by the United Nations, the
United States, Russia and the European Union - opens
up new prospects for overcoming a conflict that has
long been a breeding ground for terrorism. We hope
that that road to peace will be travelled with
perseverance and dedication. We will give our full
support to the successful implementation of the road
map.

Secondly, international terrorism requires
international cooperation to defeat it. The impressive
international coalition against terrorism that was forged
after 11 September 2001 must be preserved and
stabilized. Cooperation must be further deepened, and
assistance to requesting States must be increased. It is
the United Nations and its Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) that provide us with an appropriate
global framework for that.

Thirdly, our fight must always be legitimized
under international law. It must respect national and
international law, human rights and the United Nations
Charter. Human rights in particular should not be
suspended on the pretext of combating terrorism. After
all, this fight is not only about defending our security,
but also about our fundamental values: freedom,
democracy and human rights.

Strengthening the rule of law and efficient
administrative structures worldwide is one of the main
objectives of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. The
CTC's chairmanship has recently passed smoothly
from the able hands of Ambassador Greenstock into
those of Ambassador Arias. We wish him well, and we
wish him lots of success. Prime Minister Aznar's
presence here underlines Spain's firm commitment to a
continued strong and effective role to be played by the
CTC. We assure him that the German delegation will
continue to fully support the Committee's work.

