Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this public meeting to consider the situation
in Somalia, thereby giving us an opportunity for an
open discussion of a matter that has led to criticism of
the Security Council has been criticized for lack of
proper attention.

I am pleased to welcome the participation of
Prime Minister Ali Khalif Galaydh of Somalia, and I
thank him for his important statement. My thanks also
go to the Secretary-General for his excellent report,
and to Mr. David Stephen, Representative of the
Secretary-General in Somalia for his supplementary
briefing.

Much progress has been made since our last
meeting on the situation in Somalia, but, given the
Somali people's tremendous need for peace,
insufficient progress. The report of the Secretary-
General describes a complex reality that calls for action
by both Somalis and the international community.

Another source of concern is the serious
humanitarian situation across the country. As the
Secretary-General underscores in his report, the
country's economic and social systems have been
compromised by more than 10 years of war and by a
series of national disasters. This situation is
compounded by the effects of food insecurity, which is
likely to intensify between now and the end of the year.
There is therefore a need to continue to monitor the
situation.

The security situation is also worrisome,
particularly in "Puntland", as is the serious human
rights crisis, especially in southern and central
Somalia.

Nevertheless, the prospects for the peace process
in Somalia continue to be encouraging. Here I would
like to mention first the results of the Arta Peace
Conference and the establishment of a Transitional
National Assembly and a Transitional National
Government, as well as the forthcoming setting up of a
National Commission for Reconciliation and Property
Settlement.

In the same vein, we welcome the important
regional peace initiatives, in particular the one led by
President Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir of the Sudan,
current Chairman of the Inter-Governmental Authority
on Development (IGAD). We also welcome the
involvement of the Organization of African Unity,
whose Council of Ministers at their most recent
meeting extended the Organization's support to the
Arta process and reaffirmed its commitment to the
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Somalia.

Likewise, the Secretary-General's initiative to set
up a Committee of Friends of Somalia is also welcome,
and we fully support it. That Committee will make a
useful contribution to resolving the immense problems
that Somalia will have to overcome in its
reconstruction and development process. Perhaps Mr.
Stephen could give us more information about how it
will operate. In addition, at an appropriate stage, the
establishment of a peace-building mission would
contribute to Somalia's stabilization and development
process. In that connection, sending an inter-agency
mission to Somalia in the near future also seems
necessary.

In conclusion, I wish to note that we support the
Secretary-General's proposal to renew the mandate of
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia for two
years, and to pay tribute to the Representative of the
Secretary-General and all his staff for their important
work for Somalia's reconstruction.

