Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by thanking Special Coordinator Robert Serry for
his comprehensive briefing on the status of the Middle
East peace process and the situation in the region. I
would also like to thank the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for
their valuable statements.

The Middle East peace process has been stalemated
for a long time. Informal talks over the past two years
have not resulted so far in any substantive progress
towards the resumption of direct talks. The efforts of
the international community, including the Quartet,
to create an environment conducive to meaningful
negotiations have not yielded any positive results either.
Recent efforts towards addressing basic differences
over the parameters for the resumption of direct talks on
final status issues 4 settlements, borders, security and
resources - have also failed to make any progress. The
focus of the international community on the unfolding
events in the region appears to have overshadowed the
Middle East peace process.

Under such circumstances, there is a growing
risk of a sharp deterioration in the situation. Clearly,
the status quo in the Palestinian question is untenable
and unsustainable, particularly when the leading
members of the international community claim to be
supporting the democratic aspirations of other peoples
in the region. Before it gets too late, the international
community, particularly the Quartet, must redouble
its efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating
table. The parties should also remain engaged and
take confidence-building measures that may help to
resume dialogue. In that regard, the joint statement
issued by Israel and the Palestinian Authority in
May, committing the sides to peace and the release of
Palestinian prisoners, is a welcome sign. The parties
must implement their commitments under the joint
statement fully and without further delay.

We think that the first step to be taken for the
resumption of direct talks between the parties is the
freezing of illegal settlement activities by Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territories. The continuing
settlement activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
are threatening the basic premises of the two-State
solution. Settlement activities have also exacerbated
the humanitarian problems of the Palestinian people,
with increasing violence and the aggravation of tension
between the settlers and the Palestinian population.
We therefore reiterate our call on Israel to stop all
settlement activities.

The blockade of Gaza has entered its sixth year.
The humanitarian situation continues to be grim, with
disruption to essential services, economic activity and
infrastructure. While Israeli security concerns are
legitimate, there is a need to avoid all violence against
civilians everywhere. The blockade of Gaza is causing
severe hardships, amounting to collective punishment
of the population. While Israel has taken some positive
steps to relax the blockade by allowing essential
commodities to enter Gaza, those steps fall short ofwhat
is required. Israel should immediately lift the blockade
and allow for the resumption of normal socio-economic
activities in Gaza so that the residents can rebuild their
lives and their dependence on humanitarian assistance
is reduced.
In line with their commitment to democratic values
and principles, the progress made by the Palestinian
factions on the reconciliation front is welcome. We hope
that those efforts will bear fruit soon, leading to the
formation a unity Government, the holding of elections,
the reunification of Palestinian State institutions and
measures for the reconstruction and development of
Palestinian society.

Despite severe political and economic constraints,
the progress made by the Palestinian Authority in
institution-building is commendable. Various studies
have indicated that Palestinian institutions have reached
the threshold required for a functioning State. We
expect the Organization to reaffirm that fact through
a favourable decision on Palestine's application for
membership. Meanwhile, the donor community should
provide additional resources to address the severe
financial difficulties that the Palestinian Authority is
facing. Palestinian tax revenue must be transferred to
the Palestinian Authority regularly and on time.

India has a long history of solidarity with the
Palestinian people. India has extended its consistent
and unwavering support to the Palestinian cause in
word and deed. Let me reiterate that India continues to
support the legitimate right of the Palestinian people
to a State living side by side and in peace and security
with Israel based on the pre-1967 borders, as enunciated
in the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
principle of land for peace endorsed by the Quartet
road map and the Arab Peace Initiative. India will also
continue to provide material and technical assistance
to the Palestinian people through budgetary support to
the Palestinian Authority, various development projects
undertaken under the India-Brazil-South Africa
Facility for Hunger and Poverty Alleviation, bilateral
training programmes for institutional capacity building
and human resource development, and regular financial
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

With respect to Syria, let me state that we do not see
an alternative to the full implementation of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012) for a political resolution of
the crisis without further bloodshed. A right step in that
direction will be for all sides to implement resolution
2059 (2012), adopted unanimously by the Council last
week. It is necessary that all parties, inside and outside
of Syria, fully cooperate with Joint Special Envoy Kofi
Annan.

In conclusion, the Palestinian question remains at
the centre of the Arab-Israeli conflict, which includes
other Arab lands under occupation. The Security
Council should remain cognizant of the fact that the
final and comprehensive settlement of all Arab-Israeli
issues is paramount to an enduring and lasting peace
in the region. Developments in the Middle East since
early 2011 underscore the urgent need to expeditiously
address those issues. India stands ready to play its
role in our collective endeavours to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

