Mr. Cardi (Italy): I, too, would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Wane and President
Mogae for their briefings today.

The situation on the ground continues to be pretty
terrible. Half of the population of South Sudan needs
food or other aid. The South Sudanese authorities
continue to violate the status of forces agreement,
including in cases of the arrest and arbitrary detention
of the personnel of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). Despite the commitments on
allowing unhindered humanitarian access, there has
been an increasing number of attacks on humanitarian
workers. The human rights situation is also worsening,
with 250 children trapped between the clashing parties
and an increase in arrests ofjournalists, to givejust two
examples. Despite the Government's announcement
of a unilateral ceasefire, the fighting rages on. In
that context, I would like to commend the Sudan for
the one-year deal it has offered to permit the flow of
aid to South Sudanese refugees after the opening of
the humanitarian corridors, in an affirmation of the
constructive spirit shown by Khartoum in this crisis.

We reiterate our firm belief that the only solution
to the crisis is a political one, a position that we have
taken in previous Council meetings, bilaterally and as
co-Chair of the Partners Forum of the 12 June Summit
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). It is also clear to all of us that, without the
collaboration of the members of IGAD, there can be no
peace in South Sudan. Together with the African Union
and the United Nations, IGAD is the organization that
can and must develop a political track for inclusive
dialogue between the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan. We therefore greatly appreciate the growing
intensity of its diplomatic action in recent weeks.

The communique of the IGAD ministerial Summit
on 2 July is an important step in that direction. We also
agree with the Secretary-General that the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force to Juba, which is slowly
proceeding, will help UNMISS to concentrate more
effectively on other areas of the country. We therefore
call on the South Sudanese authorities to facilitate its
rapid deployment.

But that will not be a panacea. It is the South
Sudanese leaders who must negotiate the peace. They
have the responsibility for ending the conflict and to
feed and protect their population, or face accountability
for failing in that. In that regard, the work ofestablishing
a hybrid court must be speeded up.

In conclusion, Italy will continue to work on two
fronts. At the political level, we will make efforts in
every possible forum to encourage a solution to the crisis,
starting with South Sudan's stakeholders, including civil
society and regional stakeholders. At the humanitarian
level, we will provide aid and financing programmes
aimed at addressing the country's emergencies. We also
look forward to hearing from Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix, who is currently visiting the region, and we
hope that, at the upcoming IGAD ministerial Summit
on 24 July, the indirect communication channel that has
been reopened between the South Sudanese leaders can
reinvigorate the process.

