The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Uruguay.

We thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his
briefing and reiterate once again that Uruguay fully
supports his work.

The Middle East region continues to be the
epicentre of multiple armed conflicts, which are
promoted by various causes and interests and by a
multitude of stakeholders who participate in them in
one way or another.

Despite the complexity of the current situations in
Syria, Yemen and Iraq, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
because of its duration and its spillover towards the
rest of the region, remains the most prominent of all
of the situations affecting the Middle East. For that
reason, Uruguay reaffirms once again, as it has done
unwaveringly since 1947, its unwavering support for
the right of Israel and of Palestine to live in peace,
within secure and recognized borders, in a framework
of renewed cooperation, free from any threat or action
that breaches the peace.

Over these past seven decades, while Israel has
become consolidated as a fully modern State and a
full Member of the Organization, Palestine continues
to face serious difficulties in terms of its development,
its international integration and the consolidation of
its territory, which has led to grave consequences for
its population and heightened tensions throughout the
whole region.

Uruguay, together with almost all members of the
international community, firmly strongly supports the
solution of two independent States, convinced that it is
the only option that will make it possible for Israel and
Palestine to coexist peacefully.

We reiterate that there can be no just and lasting
peace in the absence of a two-State solution, which in
turn cannot become a reality ifthe parties do not create
the conditions for a peaceful, negotiated and mutually
satisfactory way out of the conflict that puts an end to
all pending issues of this protracted conflict.

In this vein, we call on the parties to relaunch
direct bilateral negotiations as quickly as possible,
without preconditions, as an essential path to that goal.
To that end, it is key to reverse the current trends on
the ground identified in the most recent Quartet report;
failing that, it will be extremely difficult for Palestine
to consolidate itself as a State.

It is also imperative that the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities comply in good faith with their obligations
under international law and with the resolutions of the
Council; send clear political signs aimed at breaking
the vicious circle of mutual distrust; and refrain from
adopting unilateral decisions that hinder dialogue. As
we are far from seeing such signs, we urge the parties to
carefully consider their next steps and prevent the most
extremist sectors of their respective Governments from
prevailing over those that are truly committed to peace.

The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016) barely
five months ago was a clear demonstration of the
importance that the international community attaches
to the peaceful, successful conclusion of this process.
However, Israel from that point on intensified
announcements of its continuing policy of establishing
settlements on Palestinian territory, which violates
the provisions of that resolution as well as those of
resolution 242 (1967), which affirms the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force.

Furthermore, Uruguay reiterates its vigorous
condemnation of the continued episodes ofviolence and
terrorist attacks and expresses its complete rejection of
the incitement to and glorification of such acts by the
Palestinian authorities. There is no place for complicit
silence on this front.
All of the aforementioned in no way helps to make
progress towards peace and jeopardizes the possibility
of reaching a two-State solution. Uruguay welcomes
all international, regional and unilateral initiatives that
would make it possible to move forward in the quest
for solutions in the Middle East peace process, in order
to achieve a peaceful, just, negotiated, lasting way out
of the situation that, in accordance with international
law, takes account of the legitimate aspirations of both
parties. We are pleased at the stated intention of the
President of the United States to work so as to finally
achieve peace between Israeland Palestine. Such
commitments will be fundamental to bringing the
parties together and to achieving a two-State solution
in which both States coexist in peace and security.

In conclusion, we reiterate to the key actors in this
process that moderation is essential to avoid unilateral
announcements and actions that may seriously harm
the future of the peace negotiations and the two-State
solution. At the political level, it is crucial to seek new
channels for dialogue and to keep those channels open.
We cherish the hope that some day, which we hope comes
sooner rather than later, both parties will prioritize the
immense potential of their region and move forward
sustainably on the path of bilateral economic, historical
and cultural cooperation. I reiterate that both parties
have an enormous shared heritage. They can count on
Uruguay to help strengthen this dialogue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.
