Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of July. I am convinced
that your diplomatic skills will ensure smooth and effective
work during this month and I assure you of the full
cooperation of my delegation.

I also wish to extend our deep appreciation to the
President of the Security Council for the month of June,
Ambassador Graf zu Rantzau, and to the German
delegation, for the outstanding way in which he guided the
work of the Council last month.

The resolution the Security Council has just adopted
extends the suspension of certain sanctions against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in
the areas of civil aviation and cultural and sport events, for
another 75-day period.

Italy would have rather preferred a suspension of the
sanctions for a lOO-day period. We decided however, to
join the majority within the Council and to vote in favour
of the resolution, which is a logical consequence of the
report by the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia of
23 June 1995, with particular reference to the measures
taken by the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to maintain the
effective closure of the international border with the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We maintain that it is possible to further improve the
effectiveness of the closure of the border. We therefore
encourage the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to make every effort to this end and to continue
the ongoing cooperation with the Mission of the
International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia.

Italy is also well aware of the important role that
Belgrade plays in the framework of the peace process. We
encourage the Belgrade authorities to actively carry out this
role, and to exercise every positive influence on the
Bosnian Serb side in order that they accept the peace plan
of the Contact Group as a starting point.

Finally, we expect that the Yugoslav Government
will show the utmost goodwill in its efforts to ensure a
positive outcome of the negotiations which Mr. Carl Bildt
is currently conducting in Belgrade.

