Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Ms. Navanethem Pillay, and Mr. Adama Dieng, the
Special Envoy for the Prevention of Genocide, for their
briefings. We especially appreciate their undertaking a
joint visit to South Sudan.

Chile has stated that accountability in the area
of human rights must be a priority in the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS). We are witnessing what could
be the start of a humanitarian catastrophe, and there
are strong indications that compel us to believe that
genocide and crimes against humanity are taking shape
in South Sudan. While there is no question that every
State is responsible for protecting its people from
large-scale and widespread abuses of human rights,
the international community, in accordance with the
concept of the responsibility to protect, as set out in
the outcome document of the 2005 World Summit, is
obliged to support States when they will not meet or are
clearly incapable of meeting that obligation.
The Council must act rapidly. Prevention is
possible and we should make use of all the early-
warning mechanisms that can help us avoid the loss of
more lives while also promoting dialogue between the
parties. We cannot remain indifferent to the information
Ms. Pillay and UNICEF gave us on 30 April on the
deaths of children as a result of indiscriminate attacks
on civilians, many of them internally displaced; on the
recruitment of more than 9,000 children by the armed
forces on both sides, which is a war crime under the
Rome Statute; on the seizure of 32 schools and attacks
on about 20 clinics and health centres by armed forces;
and on sexual violence against girls and women.

We believe that those facts, and previous ones, that
the Council has received on human rights violations
and other atrocities in South Sudan, including the
reports from UNMISS since the conflict broke out in
December, are enough to get us started on an in-depth
discussion on imposing specific sanctions on the
individuals responsible. We hope that the African Union
commission of inquiry can submit its report soon. We
trust that there is sufficient coordination with UNMISS
in order to ensure that background information and
evidence are not lost, which would make accountability
difficult.

We appreciate the courage and the determination
of Ms. Johnson and the UNMISS staff to protect the
internally displaced persons and to forge ahead with
the investigation on human rights violations, despite
the prevailing violence and the constant attacks and
threats. As the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights did, we extend our appreciation to
the peacekeeping staff from India whose actions have
allowed for the protection of many civilians during the
CI'lSlS.

The Council and the other bodies of the United
Nations system must step up efforts to prevent a
catastrophe in South Sudan, which would lead to the
deterioration of the youngest State Member of the
Organization. We believe that it is time for the Council
to refer the background information it has on the
situation in South Sudan to the International Criminal
Court in order to show that we can take concrete actions
to strengthen those already taken by the United Nations
to protect the civilian population.

