Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Special Representative of the

Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his
briefing and express our appreciation for his efforts
and those of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan, and
Ms. Samar, Chairperson of the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, for their statements.

China congratulates Afghanistan on the 100th
anniversary of its independence and wishes the country
stability and development as soon as possible and
lasting peace in the future.

The situation in Afghanistan is now at a critical
juncture. The general elections and the peace and
reconciliation process are intertwined. The country's
security situation is a cause for concern and its
humanitarian situation remains challenging. The
international community should earnestly fulfil
its commitment by continuing its strong support
for Afghanistan.

First, we should support Afghanistan in holding a
safe and successful presidential election in September.
We hope that the electoral institutions will learn from
the experience and lessons of last year's parliamentary
elections and make orderly preparations for the
upcoming election. UNAMA must provide strong
support in that regard. We hope that the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces will plan their
deployment arrangements in advance to ensure security
and stability in the election period. All political
parties in Afghanistan should strengthen cooperation
and resolve their differences related to the elections
through dialogue.

Secondly, we should support the Afghan-owned
and Afghan-led reconciliation process. Recently, the
international community and countries of the region
have made efforts to actively promote direct dialogue
between the Afghan Government and the Taliban. The
loyajirga consultations also yielded positive results. We
call on all parties in Afghanistan to act for the greater
benefit of the country and its people and to seize this
significant opportunity for political reconciliation.
We hope that UNAMA will support the Government's
efforts to promote political dialogue and encourage
the Taliban to promptly return to the negotiating
table. The international community should push for an
intra-Afghan dialogue as soon as possible.

Thirdly, the international community must support
Afghanistan in building its capacity for combating
terrorism and maintaining stability. Recently, the
number of civilian casualties caused by the conflict
in Afghanistan has decreased compared to the same
period last year. However, the number of civilian
deaths attributed to air strikes and search operations
has increased while terrorist groups remain active.

China, the Russian Federation and the United
States have recently reached trilateral consensus on the
peace process in Afghanistan, calling for the orderly
and responsible withdrawal of foreign troops from
Afghanistan. We hope that UNAMA will continue
to help Afghanistan strengthen its security capacity.
The international community should strengthen
coordination and cooperation to support Afghanistan
in its counter-terrorism efforts to effectively respond
to terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking,
among other threats.

Fourthly, we must effectively help to improve
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. Recently,
conflict and natural disasters have led to a significant
increase in the number of newly displaced people
in Afghanistan, while millions of drought-affected
Afghans still need humanitarian assistance. UNAMA
should coordinate with the United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan to help the Afghan people and Government
eradicate poverty and improve people's livelihoods. The
international community should honour its assistance
pledges, help the people of Afghanistan seriously
affected by natural disasters, improve the humanitarian
situation of the Afghan refugees in the neighbouring
countries and support their return to their homeland at
an early date.

From 13 to 14 June, the 19th meeting of the
Council of Heads of State of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) was held in Bishkek, the capital of
the Republic of Kyrgyzstan. Afghan President Ghani
attended the meeting. The SCO member States have
always supported the efforts of the Afghan Government
and people to rebuild peace and promote stable
economic development. They reiterated their readiness
to support the Afghan-owned and Afghan-led political
reconciliation process bilaterally and as part of the
SCO-Afghanistan Contact Group.

At the SCO summit, Chinese President Xi Jinping
met with President Ghani. The two Heads of State
had an extensive and in-depth exchange of views on
issues such as the reconciliation process, development
of the Belt and Road Initiative and counter-terrorism
cooperation and reached many important agreements.
China and Afghanistan are old friends, close neighbours
and strategic partners. China has consistently supported
the Afghan reconciliation process and will continue to
use channels such as the SCO-Afghanistan Contact
Group, the China-Afghanistan-Pakistan Foreign
Ministers' dialogue and the China-United States-
Russian Federation consultations on Afghanistan to
actively promote peace and encourage dialogue to help
the Afghan people achieve intra-Afghan dialogue.

China actively supports Afghanistan's
reconstruction and integration into regional economic
development. From 25 to 27 April, the second Belt and
Road Summit Forum for International Cooperation was
successfully held in Beijing. The Afghan Government
sent a delegation to the forum. In recent years, China and
Afghanistan have continuously increased cooperation
within the framework of the Belt and Road Initiative
and have achieved fruitful results.

China will continue to work with Afghanistan to
further implement the Sino-Afghanistan Memorandum
of Understanding on Joint Promotion of the Belt
and Road Initiative and advance results-oriented
cooperation across all sectors.

Lastly, I reaffirm that China stands ready to work
with the wider international community to contribute
to the security, stability, development and prosperity
of Afghanistan.

