Mr. Ka (Senegal) (spoke in French): Madam, the
fact that you are presiding over this meeting, devoted
to the consideration of the situation in Guinea-Bissau
from the perspective of post-conflict peace-building,
bears eloquent witness to your own personal
commitment, and to that of your country, to the cause
of peace and stability in Africa. May I therefore, in
welcoming you to New York, extend my delegation's
warmest congratulations to you on this positive and
very timely initiative taken by the Dutch presidency of
the Security Council. I wish also to welcome among us
the Vice-Prime Minister of Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Faustino Imbali.

The Security Council is today holding an
important debate on the situation in Guinea-Bissau, at a
time when, more than ever, that country, which is
linked to Senegal by history and geography, needs the
aid and support of the international community.

This initiative could not have been more
welcome, as it comes at a time of doubt and fragility,
following the recent attempt by the former head of the
junta to destabilize the democratically elected
Government of President Kumba Yala. This seditious
movement, which is in the process of being quashed,
reflects the full scope of the potential danger that the
enemies of peace, national reconciliation and even of
democracy pose to the process of rebuilding the
country and to social reintegration programmes, which
were designed, with the assistance of the United
Nations, to ease the suffering of thousands of refugees
and displaced persons.

Since his inauguration to the highest office in the
land in January 2000, President Kumba Yala has been
carrying out commendable actions to strengthen the
spirit of reconciliation among the population to
consolidate democracy, the rule of law, the sound
management of public affairs and respect for human
rights. In this context, the new Government set as
priority objectives the depoliticization of the army and
the reduction of its ranks to a level compatible with the
country's limited resources in order to devote more
financing to the revitalization of the functioning of
public institutions, relaunching the economy and for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme.

President Kumba Yala has also been personally
committed to improving, through confidence-building,
measures the country's relationship with neighbouring
countries, particularly Senegal. He has also
endeavoured to build and strengthen cooperation
between Guinea-Bissau and the international
community.

It must be recognized that in carrying out the
objectives and programmes defined so far, the United
Nations has played a primary role under the
enlightened leadership of the Secretary-General, to
whom I wish to pay tribute for the preventive
diplomacy measures that he has always recommended
to the authorities of Guinea-Bissau. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General understood very early on that all
acute crises or prolonged political instability in that
country could have grave repercussions on the security
of the countries of the entire subregion.

The case of Guinea-Bissau allows us to affirm
that the United Nations, with the international
community's cooperation and with the will of the
political actors, can make a significant contribution to
the efforts made by all countries, following the
example of Guinea-Bissau, to move from a situation of
war to the dynamics of peace in order to gradually
restore constitutional order and resolutely embark on
the path of rebuilding a nation reconciled with itself.

In spite of the recent regrettable and condemnable
events, my country believes that the international
community, beginning with the United Nations, must
continue to support peace and reconstruction efforts in
Guinea-Bissau. It is therefore our duty to support the
efforts of the democratically elected Government of
President Kumba Yala to design and implement the
many programmes that he has devised to strengthen
peace, promote national reconciliation and speed up the
country's economic and social recovery.

It is because Senegal shares a common destiny
with Guinea-Bissau that President Abdoulaye Wade,
fortified by this conviction, has undertaken important
political action to strengthen the special relationship
between the two countries. In our view, the personal
friendship that binds President Wade and President
Kumba Yala augurs well for the advent of an era of
peace and stability between the two neighbouring
countries and between those countries and the entire
subregion.

The fact remains that stabilizing the situation in
Guinea-Bissau depends on the consistency and the
amount of assistance provided by the international
community, a prerequisite for the economic and social
rebirth of that fraternal country. Certainly the Security
Council meeting today can be seen by the people of
Guinea-Bissau as a source of regained hope of an entire
people in an international community rallying together
again to help it. The international community of
donors, in order to respond to the appeal made by the
Secretary-General this morning, must support the
programmes developed by the Government of President
Kumba Yala, programmes which already benefit from
United Nations support.

In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the
proposal to convene another round table of donor
countries, which would, in the context of a coordinated
and integrated approach, make it possible to mobilize
additional resources for the reconstruction of Guinea-
Bissau.

