Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey and the countries of the European
Free Trade Association Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his comprehensive briefing.

The European Union is grateful for this
opportunity today to consider the situation in Kosovo.
The Union has strongly condemned the recent
ethnically motivated violence in Kosovo, the loss of
life, the damage to property and the destruction of
religious and cultural heritage, which is the common
property of all Europeans. The Union has also strongly
condemned the attacks on the troops of KFOR and the
personnel and sites of UNMIK. The European Union
calls on all leaders, especially the Kosovo Albanian
leadership, to take responsibility for the situation and
to ensure that such acts and threats of violence are not
repeated. Those responsible for the violence must be
brought to justice.

We call on the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to demonstrate their commitment to a
multi-ethnic Kosovo. As an immediate step, we
welcome their decision to allocate funds for
reconstruction and we urge them to take further
responsibility for the urgent reconstruction of damaged
property, including places of worship, to ensure the
earliest possible return for internally displaced persons.
We also stress the need for political leaders in Kosovo
to work closely with UNMIK and KFOR to ensure the
physical security and the full protection of the rights of
members of all communities in Kosovo.

The recent events have been a serious setback for
Kosovo and have endangered the progress made in
recent years. The European Union reaffirms its strong
support for Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Harri Holkeri, UNMIK and KFOR in their
determined efforts to stabilize the situation and to
ensure the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) and the policy of standards-
before-status. These remain the foundation of the
international community's commitment to Kosovo. The
path ahead for Kosovo lies in the implementation of the
standards. In this regard, we take note of the
presentation on 31 March of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan as a step forward in the standards
process. We reiterate the European Union's
commitment to a stable future for a secure, democratic,
prosperous and multi-ethnic Kosovo, with its place in
Europe.

