Ms. Bird (Australia): I would like to join others
in thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haysom and Executive Director Fedotov for
their briefings, and also in welcoming the contribution of
Afghanistan's Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin. I echo others in wishing him well in his
next assignment.

As we approach the first anniversary of the National
Unity Government's formation, it is an opportune
moment to acknowledge the leadership and resolve
that President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
have displayed and the progress that Afghanistan has
made. In embarking on its transformation decade,
Afghanistan has made genuine gains spanning the
political, economic, security and social spheres.

Over the past year, however, the insurgency has
continued to prey on civilians, with attacks that have
killed and injured hundreds of non-combatants. The
Afghan national defence and security forces have
demonstrated bravery, spirit and dedication in defence
of their nation. We reaffirm our commitment to
supporting the Afghan Government in defending its
citizens against the insurgency. Australia is providing
financial assistance totalling $300 million over three
years, through 2017. More than 25,000 Australian
personnel have served in Afghanistan, and 400 continue
to serve now.

Australia welcomes the positive steps the National
Unity Government has taken to advance the cause of
peace and reconciliation, including direct talks with
the Taliban in Murree, Pakistan. Against a background
of ongoing challenges, peace can be achieved only if
reconciliation efforts are approached with a sense of
purpose and pragmatism.

Australia was pleased to join with international
partners this month in Kabul in endorsing the self-
reliance mutual accountability framework. The
commitments made by the Government of Afghanistan
on human rights and empowering women and girls
will build on the progress that has been made over the
past decade. The full implementation of the law on
eliminating violence against women and the national
action plan on women and peace and security is an
essential element ofthe reform agenda. We will continue
to assist the Afghan Government by providing shelter
and support for more than 2,300 women and girls and
training for more than 2,800 police and justice-sector
officials in upholding women's rights. Australia thanks
and congratulates the National Unity Government on
a successful first year in office and looks forward to
continuing to work towards peace and prosperity in
Afghanistan.

The United Nations has played an important
and constructive role in Afghanistan since 1961. We
welcome the work of the Tripartite Review Commission
on future priorities for United Nations engagement
in Afghanistan and encourage Council members to
consider its recommendations in the lead-up to renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan in March 2016.

