Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in French): | would like to begin by sincerely congratulating you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I look forward to working with you and your team to ensure peace and security throughoutthe world. Through you, Mr. President, we sincerely congratulate our colleague from Viet Nam on a very successful presidency. I would also like to commend you for your selection of today's agenda item, as the subject is crucial for our region, Africa. I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her very informative and useful briefing. I also thank Mr. Spleeters for being here and for his briefing. (spoke in Arabic) The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons remains one of the elements that contribute to the exacerbation of internal armed conflict in many countries and regions, particularly on the African continent and the Arab world. It results in the targeting and killing of a large number of innocent civilians, especially women and children, and in the deepening of conflict-related humanitarian tragedies. The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons also undermines regional security and stability, while supporting terrorism and transnational organized crime as a key source of funding. In that regard, we reiterate our deep concerns about the continued illicit flow of weapons to Libya and the Sahel, which hampers the prospects for a political solution and emboldens terrorist organizations to take advantage of the ongoing unrest in order to implement their schemes and further expand in the region. Therefore, Tunisia reiterates that weapons control and addressing the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons are sine qua non for reducing tensions, facilitating peace and security and restoring stability in hotspot areas, as well as creating an environment conducive to boosting socioeconomic development in the countries concerned. In addition, they would also help ensure the success of the African Union initiative, Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, which is greatly supported by the United Nations. It is a priority for the Heads of State and Government of the African Union, in particular at the start of this year and decade. We thank all delegations that expressed their support for that initiative today. As Tunisia calls for concerted efforts to achieve the goals set, we support the recommendations of the Secretary-General to continue working to address multi-dimensional challenges resulting from _ the large-scale circulation of small arms and light weapons and ammunition. Tunisia is a peaceful country that - I underscore - does not produce or export weapons of any kind. Based on our firm commitment to international peace and security, we are committed to actively participating in all efforts aimed at finding effective solutions to the problem of small arms and light weapons, in addition to redressing the devastating consequences of the wide-scale availability of such weapons, in particular instability, violence, insecurity and the undermining of development in many countries. In that regard, Tunisia supported the adoption of the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, along with the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons. Tunisia is also party to the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components and Ammunition supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. As evidence of that orientation in the foreign policy of Tunisia and its principled positions, we endorsed the adoption of the Arms Trade Treaty at the General Assembly. We took that step because we believe that the Treaty could significantly contribute to finding solutions to the illicit trade in conventional weapons, including small arms and light weapons, without prejudice to the sovereignty, security and legitimate needs of States in terms of their national defence and without impacting the regular and legal trade in arms among States. In conclusion, I reiterate the position of my country's delegation that combating the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons hinges primarily on the national responsibilities of States and necessarily requires cooperation among States and _ with international organizations. It is also necessary to increase assistance provided to developing countries in order to promote their capacity to manage stockpiles, the marking and tracing of arms, as well as collecting and destroying illicit weapons. We again commend the President's initiative to convene this meeting.
