Mr. Hassouna (League of Arab States) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend to you, Sir,
our sincere thanks for allowing our delegation to
address the Council under your presidency this month.
You are from a country that we hold in high esteem.
We cherish your country's friendship with the Arab
world and its support of our just causes.

The League of Arab States firmly believes in the
importance of the role played by the Security Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The cooperation of the League of Arab States with the
Council is based on our position of principle, which is
embodied in the League's participation in the Council's
work, its cooperation with the Council and its
continuous support for the Council's efforts.

Our delegation would like to recall that the
relationship of the Somali people with the Arab nation
has deep historical roots. It was crowned by Somalia's
joining the League of Arab States in 1974. This
historical and organic relationship requires us not to
abandon the fraternal Somali people and to continue to
support them fully, so that they can find a way out of
their current predicament and regain authority over
their national soil and unified country. The League will
stand side by side with the Somali people in helping
them rebuild and rehabilitate their country, so that they
can resume their prestigious place among the peoples
of the world.

There is no doubt that the Arab, African and
Islamic character of Somalia, as well as its membership
in the United Nations, demand that all the international
organizations to which Somalia belongs continue to
cooperate and to coordinate their efforts so that peace
and stability - the coveted objectives - can be
restored to Somalia.

We firmly believe, however, that the solution to
the Somali question lies in the hands of the Somalis
themselves. They should be supported and assisted to
achieve this solution in an objective manner, avoiding
the pursuit of narrow, selfish interests.

The League of Arab States therefore welcomes
the convening of this plenary meeting of the Council.
We hope that the solutions and conclusions arrived at
will expedite the finding of a solution to the
predicament of the Somali people.

We hope that we can do what is necessary to
build peace in Somalia, but this cannot be
accomplished by good wishes alone. We must be
determined to overcome the problems and obstacles of
the past and agree to integrate all of our regional and
international efforts in order to realize our desired
objective.

The League of Arab States has made concerted
efforts to bring about peace in Somalia. It has
participated in all efforts made at the regional and
international levels to find a solution to this question.
Our objective has always been the restoration of peace,
stability and security in Somalia and national
reconciliation among the Somalis, so that they can
establish a broad-based government that will assist in
rebuilding the country, along with Member States and
the League of Arab States, and that will enable it to
play its rightful role in the Arab, African and national
arenas.

History will show that the Council of the League
of Arab States was the first to discuss the situation in
Somalia, in September 1991. Its resolution 5097,
adopted at that time, was the first decision taken at the
regional or international level on the Somali crisis. All
Somali factions welcomed that resolution, and
international and regional organizations used it as a
guideline in addressing the Somali crisis.

The Council of the League of Arab States thus
welcomed Security Council resolution 733 (1992)
imposing an arms embargo on Somalia. It considered
the resolution as a necessary step on the road to the
integration of international efforts aimed at finding a
solution to the Somali crisis. The League of Arab
States affirmed its full readiness to cooperate with the
United Nations and the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), among others, to put an end to the crisis in
both its humanitarian and political aspects. This was
made clear by the League of Arab States' participation,
with the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, in all regional and international
meetings held on the question of Somalia.

The League of Arab States has also made
concrete contributions by supporting Security Council
resolutions on Somalia and by providing assistance to
both Somali operations. Many member States of the
League of Arab States participated in the peacekeeping
forces that were sent to Somalia at that time. Moreover,
the League of Arab States hosted, at its permanent
headquarters in Cairo, a meeting of the heads of Somali
clans as well as other meetings that also included
representatives of the United Nations, the OAU and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

Proof of the importance that the League of Arab
States attaches to this question is the fact that the
Somali question has been inscribed on the agenda of
the Council of the League of Arab States since 1991,
thereby ensuring that developments in the conflict are
continually monitored by the highest authority in the
League.

Ever since the outbreak of the Somali conflict,
the Arab countries have featured prominently among
those that have provided humanitarian assistance to the
Somali people. The aid provided by the Arab States so
far totals more than $150 million. The Arab States that
participated in the second peacekeeping operation in
Somalia focused on the humanitarian aspect of their
task, as evidenced by the distribution of food assistance
and the provision of top-notch medical services
through their field hospitals. These actions won the
confidence and admiration of the Somali people.

Moreover, the secretariat of the League of Arab
States continued, in 1992 and 1993, to send medical
personnel and equipment, and it also provided
emergency food assistance to the victims of the 1997
floods in Somalia, in cooperation with the United
Nations Emergency Relief Coordinator. Its
humanitarian efforts are ongoing; for instance, it
provides scholarships to Somali students who are
studying at universities and institutions of higher
education in the Arab world.

As concerns regional and international initiatives
on Somalia, which include the signing of the Sodere
and Cairo agreements, the Somali crisis has shown the
need for integrated and consolidated efforts on the part
of the international community. The Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States therefore recommended
the establishment of a regional and international
coordinating mechanism that would include all
subregional, regional and international organizations as
well as other States concerned, with the goal of
providing assistance to the Somalis and enabling them
to bring about reconciliation, guarantee the
implementation of their agreements, avoid potential
conflict between regional and international efforts, and
bring all Somali actors and clans together to enable
them to fulfil their commitments. That mechanism
succeeded in realizing its objectives in an effective and
meritorious manner.
Among the many initiatives taken on Somalia, the
League of Arab States, when it met in Beirut in March
of this year, welcomed in particular the initiative of the
President of Djibouti, which is aimed at bringing about
national reconciliation in Somalia in a comprehensive
manner that guarantees the unity and territorial
integrity of that country. As an affirmation of the
support of the League of Arab States for the initiative,
the League participated in the inaugural session of the
Somalia National Peace Conference on 2 May of this
year. In his opening statement, the head of the League's
delegation highlighted the Arab States' support for the
Djibouti initiative and called on all of the various
actors and factions in Somalia to use this opportunity
to bring about national reconciliation.

We believe that Djibouti has exerted considerable
efforts and shouldered a heavy burden in order to
convene this Conference and ensure its success. The
League of Arab States therefore appeals once again to
the international community to provide financial
assistance to the Government of Djibouti so that it can
continue its efforts in the area of reconciliation and so
that we can achieve the desired outcome. Needless to
say, the secretariat of the League of Arab States has
already provided financial assistance to the
Government of Djibouti so that it can continue to
shoulder the responsibility of holding the Conference.

In conclusion, allow me to outline the elements of
what is required of the Council at this very important
and critical time and to state what we expect from it at
this stage, which, we believe, is in accordance with the
key role of the United Nations in the building and
maintenance of peace. This is a topic that has recently
been discussed by the Council.

First, we affirm the role of the Security Council
in supporting and enhancing the peace process in
Somalia through the adoption of the initiative of the
President of Djibouti. It should urge the international
community to support the Somalia National Peace
Conference politically and financially and to work to
establish a mechanism that would guarantee the
implementation of the agreements reached at that
Conference, in order for the initiative to be crowned
with success. It should also urge the Somali actors that
have not yet responded to the initiative to come on
board quickly.

Second, the Security Council should enforce its
resolution 733 (1992) on the arms embargo on Somalia
and reactivate the sanctions committee in order to put
in place the mechanisms necessary to halt the arms
trade within and to Somalia and to strengthen the
embargo.

Third, the Security Council should urge the
continuation of coordination between the United
Nations and the relevant regional organizations,
including the League of Arab States, the OAU, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, in order
to support the positive role of these organizations in
resolving the question of Somalia.

Fourth, it should work to restore confidence
among the Somali parties to the conflict on the one
hand, and between these parties and the United Nations
on the other, so that the settlement efforts will be
successful.

Fifth, it should confirm respect for the unity and
territorial integrity of Somaliland, and urge all
concerned to refrain from interfering in the internal
affairs of Somalia. Ensuring a permanent peace is, first
and foremost, a responsibility to be shouldered by the
Somalis themselves. The international community will
spare no effort to support them in realizing this
objective.

Sixth, the Council should call upon all the parties
to the conflict to respect the principles and provisions
of international humanitarian law, particularly those
relating to the protection of civilians in time of war,
and to spare the organizations working in the
humanitarian field.

Seventh, it should support the establishment of
the trust fund that has been proposed to finance efforts
to achieve peace in Somalia and translate it into action
by encouraging a return to social and economic
activities in the country in support of peace and
stability there.

Eighth, it should appeal to the States and
international and regional organizations concerned to
provide assistance for demining activities in Somalia.

Ninth, it should give due importance to the
question of Somali refugees in neighbouring countries
and elsewhere, and urge the international community to
provide humanitarian assistance so that the Somali
people can overcome their predicament, which is
getting worse, in most of the Somali territories.

Tenth, it is important for the Security Council to
consider the Somali question periodically so as to
follow up developments and facilitate a positive
response in this respect.
Since, thanks to the efforts that have been made
to resolve the Somali crisis, we finally seem to be able
to see light at the end of the tunnel, let us proceed
steadily towards the objective for which we have met
today, so that the brotherly Somali people may at long
last enjoy the life and dignity that they deserve.

