The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of C6te d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-Bi
(Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2006/516, which
contains a letter dated 12 July 2006 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
initiative of the Secretary-General, who organized
the high-level meeting in Yamoussoukro on 5
July 2006. It urges all Ivorian parties to
implement, in close liaison with the Impartial
Forces, all their commitments taken on this
occasion concerning the identification operations,
the establishment of a monitoring group on the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the completion of the pre-
cantonment process, the adjustment to the
electoral code, the dismantling of militias and the
establishment of a code of conduct for the media,
and urges them in particular to meet the agreed
deadlines.

"The Security Council urges also all Ivorian
parties to accelerate the implementation of the
road map in order to create the conditions
indispensable for the holding of free, open, fair
and transparent elections by 31 October.

"The Security Council calls on the
International Working Group (IWG) to monitor
the full implementation of the decisions taken by
all Ivorian parties in Yamoussoukro on 5 July
2006 and to report to it on its assessment in that
regard.

"The Security Council underlines that it is
fully prepared to impose targeted measures
against persons to be designated by the
Committee established by paragraph 14 of
resolution 1572 (2004) who are determined to be,
among other things, blocking the implementation
of the peace process - including by attacking or
obstructing the action of UNOCI, of the French
forces which support it, of the High
Representative for the elections or of the IWG -
responsible for serious violations of human rights
and international law committed in Cote d'Ivoire
since 19 September 2002, inciting publicly hatred
and violence or in violation of the arms embargo,
as provided in resolutions 1572 (2004) and 1643
(2005).

"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to call a
meeting on the situation in Cote d'Ivoire in
September 2006 to take stock of the situation and
to make any further determinations as may be
needed. In this regard, it requests the Secretary-
General to report to it before the September
meeting on the obstacles remaining to the
implementation of the road map and on those
responsible.

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the IWG and endorses its eighth final
communique dated 23 June 2006. It reiterates its
full support for the Special Representative of the
06-43498
Secretary-General and the High Representative
for the Elections."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/32.
06-43498

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.

