First of all, we are grateful to Director-General Fernando Arias for his presence at today's meeting, and we thank him for his valuable contributions and leadership. We are also grateful for the briefing delivered by High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu and would like to take this opportunity to highlight the professional performance of the members of her team and the support they have provided in the two years of our Security Council membership. We welcome the recent holding of the first session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, as well as the considerable efforts made by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to fulfil its mandate, despite the challenges and limitations caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic. The Dominican Republic reiterates its unwavering commitment to non- proliferation and the total and irreversible destruction of chemical weapons. We also reaffirm our full support for the OPCW and our confidence in the professional, impartial and objective work that it has been doing since its foundation in order to prevent the development of chemical weapons and eradicate their use throughout the world. In that regard, we commend the efforts made by the OPCW and the member States that have demonstrated a firm commitment to implementing the provisions outlined in the Convention and the relevant Security Council resolutions. With regard to the updates contained in the eighty-sixth monthly report of the OPCW (see S/2020/1152), we are pleased to note that the information provided by the Syrian Arab Republic during the twenty-third round of technical consultations led to the closing of three outstanding issues related to its initial declaration. In that respect, we encourage the Syrian authorities to continue those technical consultations in order to strengthen collaboration with the OPCW and provide the required information to resolve the remaining outstanding issues. We continue to emphasize that the good-faith collaboration of the Syrian Arab Republic with the OPCW is an essential element in reaching a final solution on this dossier. In that regard, we believe that the misinformation, persistent questioning and discrediting of the work carried out by various OPCW investigation teams are strategies that are detrimental to the overarching goal of this file. Despite the momentous achievements of the OPCW in destroying Syria's declared chemical stockpiles and production facilities, numerous chemical-weapon attacks have been documented by various OPCW investigation teams, proving the existence of toxic chemical agents in Syrian territory. It is also regrettable that the Syrian Arab Republic has not fully complied with the measures contained in the Executive Council decision of 9 July, which was based on the findings of the first report of the Investigation and Identification Team. It is therefore urgent that the parties show firm signs of political will reflecting significant changes regarding the total elimination of chemical weapons and guaranteeing full compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention and accountability for the heinous crimes that have been perpetrated against men, women and children. The Dominican Republic strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances, as a threat to international peace and security and a flagrant violation of international law and the Convention. In conclusion, we believe that greater efforts must be made to ensure that actions carried out in total disregard of international law do not go unpunished. We therefore reiterate our call for unity in the Security Council, which is vital if we are to move in that direction.
