I thank the Indonesian presidency for organizing this virtual high-level open debate. I also express my sincere appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Voronkov and Executive Director Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their insightful briefing. The coronavirus disease pandemic has brought about new dimensions in the growing linkages between terrorism and organized crimes. As the State security apparatus remains seized with the pandemic, organized criminal networks are getting increasing leeway. Movement restrictions have increased the use of irregular transaction channels, creating favourable conditions for criminals and terrorists alike. The closure of educational institutions has led young people to immerse themselves more in the cyberworld, making them susceptible to online criminal activities, including violent extremism. These new challenges require due understanding, recognition and new dispensations. The Council's attention to this issue at this trying time is therefore reassuring. Bangladesh maintains a policy of zero tolerance towards terrorism and organized crimes. We have been investing heavily in these areas through various preventive measures, which include awareness-raising, community engagement and resilience, the empowerment of women, creating opportunities for young people through the digital Bangladesh campaign, et cetera. We have developed a strong legal and regulatory framework to address terrorism, which also takes into account the potent linkage between terrorism and organized crimes. Let me share some of our national efforts. Our anti-terrorism law automatically transposes United Nations designations into domestic obligations to prohibit any kind of funding to Security Council-listed persons and entities, freezing their assets, et cetera. Furthermore, we were the first among South Asian nations to enact an anti-money laundering law, which defines terrorist financing as one of the 27 predicate offences. To address human trafficking, people smuggling and related criminal activities, Bangladesh has adopted laws and rules in strict compliance with international standards, including the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crimes and the Palermo Protocol. We are a State party to both. The implementation of a national action plan to combat human trafficking is under way, involving all key stakeholders, including the CSOs. Our Department of Narcotics Control is empowered to investigate possible illicit financial transactions by drug- related accused, dealers or peddlers. To facilitate international cooperation, we have enacted legislation on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters and the extradition of criminals. We have joined a number of regional initiatives with regard to terrorism and organized crimes within the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multisectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation. That is also a manifestation of the importance that our region attaches to the linkage. We have concluded bilateral agreements with others, including our neighbours, in the areas of international terrorism, organized crime and illicit drug trafficking. The capacity-building of national stakeholders is critical to addressing the menace of terrorism and organized crimes. In close coordination with the United Nations country team, the respective United Nations agencies have been providing such support to Bangladesh. Terrorism is a threat to global peace and the risks of terrorism are compounded by the global network of organized crime. To break that unholy alliance, we must take a holistic approach. In that regard, we wish to make a few points. First, vulnerability, deprivation, repression and desperation lead people to fall prey to terrorist and organized crime networks. National Governments should address such root causes. Second, effective and real time intelligence and information-sharing platforms among Member States need to be established. We must strengthen cooperation on the investigation, prosecution and execution of sentences through the transfer/ extradition of criminals under trial and those who have been convicted. Third, vigorous efforts are needed to ensure the universal acceptance and application of international conventions and related protocols on transnational organized crimes and terrorism. Fourth, organized crime networks and terrorist networks are increasingly abusing digital platforms and specific features of globalization, such as the liberalization of financial markets and electronic and off-shore banking, to expand their unscrupulous activities. Countering extremist propaganda requires digital means. Digital surveillance and the use of information and communications technology should therefore be strengthened, which would require the capacity enhancement of national Governments. Fifth, women and girls are disproportionately affected by organized crimes, including trafficking. On the other hand, they are capable of making a distinct contribution to prevention efforts. We must therefore redouble our efforts to integrate the gender dimension in national and international campaigns against terrorism and organized crimes. Sixth, terrorist networks and organized criminal networks both recruit from the same social catchment, the prevention of which would serve to disrupt the nexus between the two. For that, we need to take a whole-of-society approach, involving key agents, such as the business community, civil society, non-governmental organizations, religious and community leaders and young people. Seventh, the deployment of resources is usually skewed towards anti-terrorism efforts vis-a-vis anti-organized crime efforts. The uneven progress limits overall accomplishment, whereas a balanced resource allocation may better serve to break the linkage between terrorism and organized crimes. Finally, during pandemics or other health emergencies, we need to stop, to the extent possible, the diversion of resources and attention from anti-terrorism and anti-organized crimes efforts. There is no doubt that it is a tall order but it can be achieved through concerted efforts and with international cooperation. We expect the Security Council to continue its lead in that regard and to complement and collaborate with other relevant bodies.
