Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
bringing much needed focus to an issue which touches
on the ethos and character of how we do business here
at the United Nations. As new and diverse forms of
threats - some clear and present, others only dimly
perceived - test our collective resolve and call into
question the validity of existing mechanisms, it is time
to assess if we can work together on what is in our
collective interest. The briefings today have provided
insight in that regard.

Africa is unique, as the whole continent is
committed to working together on the entire spectrum
of issues, including peace and security, through the
African Union. Regional and subregional organizations
probably enjoy the advantages of language and
situational awareness and can respond more quickly as
they have a better understanding of the complexities
of the situation. Africa's wish to play a leading role in
addressing African problems is, therefore, a work in
progress and needs to be supported. However, issues
of capacity and resource constraints do exist. On the
other hand, the maintenance of international peace
and security is one of the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. It also entails the
collective responsibility of Member States to extend
mutual support for strengthening capacities and
capabilities to address threats to international peace
and security. I shall focus on three issues.

First of all, it is a well-known fact that despite
the deployment of large peacekeeping contingents
in Africa, their record of success has been mixed,
somewhat reflecting the complexities of geopolitics,
political will and the capacities and resources
supporting peacekeeping efforts. We should analyse
various missions for the important lessons to be drawn
from them. India has participated in most peacekeeping
operations in Africa and is ready to contribute to any
future such operations based on our limited capabilities
and capacities.

As part of our efforts to share experiences in
strengthening the capacities of African peacekeepers,
we have focused on human-resources development and
capacity-building. India has worked both bilaterally
and in tripartite partnerships to build the defence
capabilities of several African States. As we speak,
as part of our trilateral cooperation with the United
States, a United Nations peacekeeping course for
African partners based on the concept of training the
trainers is ongoing in New Delhi, with the participation
of officials from 18 African nations who are deployed
in various African peacekeeping training institutions.

India is also committed to promoting gender
equality and sensitivity. Our l25-member all-women
police contingent in Liberia was the first such
deployment in a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The presence of a female police unit has inspired
several women there to come forward to join the police
force and participate in maintaining law and order. We
should make such role models essential ingredients
of every United Nations peacekeeping operation with
police deployments.

Secondly, the importance of comprehensive
sustainable development, inclusive economic growth
and political processes in preventing conflict and
implementing effective peacebuilding efforts is broadly
recognized. The adoption by the United Nations of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
African Union Agenda 2063 represent a recognition
of the fact that the key factors for sustaining peace
are cross-cutting and interlinked. That requires long-
term commitment and sustained investment, including
vastly expanded funding.

The identical resolutions on the review of the
peacebuilding architecture adopted last year by the
General Assembly (70/262) and the Security Council
(2282 (2016)) defined the concept ofsustaining peace and
called for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission to
be strengthened. There has been no agreement, alas, on
increasing the funding for the Commission to even 1 per
cent of the annual total for peacekeeping operations.
As a member of the Commission since its inception,
India has so far contributed more than $5 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund.

More substantively, as part of its tradition of
South-South solidarity in development cooperation
and working within the limits of its capacities
and capabilities, India has extended concessional
credit worth $10 billion and doubled the numbers
of scholarships for African students to 50,000 over
a five-year period. India's partnership with Africa is
based on a cooperation model that is responsive to
African countries' needs. It is demand-driven, free of
conditions and provided in a non-prescriptive manner.
We firmly believe that a commitment to supporting
peacebuilding is crucial to sustainable peace in Africa.

Thirdly, the ever-expanding terror networks have
endangered peace and security in the African region in
unprecedented ways. Time and again, from Boko Haram
to Al-Shabaab, they have shown themselves to be ever
more connected to other such networks all over the
world. They pose a threat to the broader international
community in many ways. The United Nations response
to such threats continues to be unsatisfactory. The price
of such indifference is immeasurable. It is time for a
strong, effective and coherent response that reflects the
international community's collective commitment to
defeating the scourge of terrorism.

The complex nature of modern conflicts makes it
necessary to respond to the changing needs ofour times.
In the African Union, the United Nations has a willing
partner. The question that the Council should answer
is whether it is ready to do what is required to make a
difference where it matters most. I hope that today's
discussions lead to specific steps in that direction.

