Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Haysom, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South
Sudan; and Mr. Wais, Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) Special Envoy to South Sudan,
for their respective briefings. We thank them for all the
efforts made to promote peace and stability in South
Sudan. Mr. Haysom has been appointed to a new post,
and China commends him for all the work he has carried
out in his current capacity as Special Envoy for the
Sudan and South Sudan. We also note the intervention
of Ms. Grace John.

South Sudan is an important country in Africa.
Maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan has
a bearing on the prosperity and development of the
region. Thanks to recent joint efforts by the various
South Sudanese parties and regional organizations,
the peace process in South Sudan has made important
progress. Last week at the Extraordinary Summit of the
IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government, the
South Sudanese parties formally signed the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its implementation
documents, thereby laying an important foundation
for South Sudan to end the conflict and move towards
peace. We welcome that development, and we commend
the steadfast efforts, mediation and good offices of
such regional organizations as IGAD and the African
Union, as well as of Ethiopia, the Sudan, Kenya and
Uganda. We also applaud the cooperation and flexibility
demonstrated by the various parties in South Sudan.

At the same time, it must be recognized that the
overall situation in South Sudan remains very fragile.
There is a plethora of challenges to achieving enduring
peace and sustainable development. The United Nations
and the international community need to continue to
pay attention and provide the necessary assistance to
South Sudan. It is imperative to push the various parties
in South Sudan to effectively implement the series of
peace agreements signed so far, ensure a comprehensive
ceasefire and cessation of violence as soon as possible
and restore and increase mutual trust so as to achieve
lasting peace. The international community should
focus on the following tasks in the next phase.

First, it should continue to fully support the
good offices and efforts by regional organizations
and countries. The international community should
respect South Sudan's leadership in handling its
domestic affairs; realize the full potential of regional
organizations, such as IGAD, and countres as the main
channel for mediation; support South Sudan's national
dialogue process; and push the various parties in South
Sudan to resolve their differences through peaceful
means, such as inclusive dialogue, and to build mutual
trust. As the primary institution for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council should send out positive messages and play an
important role in promoting the political peace process
by working together.

Secondly, the international community should
continue to help South Sudan maintain domestic peace
and security. For a long time, the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan has actively supported the
implementation of peace agreements, in that way
contributing positively to the maintenance of peace and
stability in South Sudan. China commends the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan for its efforts and
supports its continued implementation of its mandate
in accordance with the Security Council resolutions.
We hope the Secretariat and the Mission will continue
to enhance communication with the Government of
South Sudan, help to build the security capacity of
the country and support South Sudan in advancing its
political peace process.

Thirdly, the international community should scale
up humanitarian assistance and economic support
for South Sudan. The protracted conflict has caused
large-scale displacement and a high number ofrefugees,
thereby stalling economic and social development in
some areas. According to the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/83l), only 50 per cent of the funding
for the humanitarian response plan for South Sudan is
in place, leaving a huge gap yet to be filled. China calls
upon the international community to actively support
South Sudan in addressing the humanitarian difficulties
and tackling both the symptoms and root causes with
an integrated approach and increased investment in
agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education and
health care, thereby assisting South Sudan in rapidly
advancing its State-building process and relaunching
its economic and social development.

China has consistently attached great importance to
peace and stability in Africa, and has always supported
African countries in solving African problems in
African ways. China will continue as always to actively
support and constructively participate in the peace
process in South Sudan and to play a constructive role
in achieving lasting peace and sustainable development
in South Sudan.

