The President: I thank Ms. Elman for her very
powerful briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister of State for the Commonwealth, the United
Nations and South Asia of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.

On behalf of the Government of the United
Kingdom and as current Council President, I would like
first to thank everyone for joining us today and sharing
thoughts on this important issue. In particular, I thank
Mr. Ozerdem and, of course, Ms. Elman for their very
powerful, touching and poignant contributions. I also
pay tribute to the contribution of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres. His words resonated very strongly,
in particular when he spoke of no reconciliation without
justice and no justice without truth. That should remain
our primary aim and objective.

We all recognize that reconciliation is an important,
indeed pivotal, block for lasting peace. Why? Because it
has the power not only to resolve existing conflicts but
also to prevent future violence, by helping people and
communities overcome old grievances. That is why the
United Kingdom is and will remain a steadfast champion
of the Secretary-General's vision for sustaining peace,
which puts conflict prevention and peacebuilding at the
very heart of the important work of the United Nations
around the world.

It is also why we, the United Kingdom, along with
other nations, have long advocated for faith leaders to
play a key role. When we look around the word today - a
world where more than three-quarters of people say
directly that their faith is important to them - there
can be very little doubt that faith leaders have the
ability to influence individuals and communities in a
way that Governments simply cannot. Faith is part of
the solution. Faith leaders can also amplify the voices of
vulnerable communities and support reconciliation and
peacebuilding by mediating and encouraging dialogue
among different groups. As Mr. Ozerdem said, we must
also remember the causes of the conflict and then move
forward and change.

The United Kingdom and I, personally, as the
Minister who oversees human rights, have been
focused regularly on seeking insights from faith and
belief leaders around the world, not only to seek their
support but to directly inform policy and our work
on finding practical, workable and, more important,
sustainable solutions.

I would emphasize that it is also important to get
one's own house in order. We should reflect. Never is the
job done. We should constantly evolve as Governments
ourselves. This year, therefore, we asked the Bishop
of Truro to look at our response to the persecution of
Christians around the world as well as of members
of other religious minorities - Muslim minorities,
including Ahmadi and Shia Muslims, and members of
the Baha'i faith, to name but a few.

We are proud of both the honesty and the
transparency shown during this process, as we are
of the important priority we are giving our global
campaign in support of media freedom. It was Thomas
Jefferson who said, "The liberty of speaking and
writing guards our other liberties." That is why the
United Kingdom, together with our partners around
the world, is also seeking to defend media freedom and
protectjournalists who do an incredible job, often with
great danger to themselves. We support this campaign
because it is as important as working with religious
communities to defend their religious freedom and
protect the persecuted.

Accordingly, as a Government, we have already
accepted all of the wide-ranging recommendations
set forth in the Bishop of Truro's review, including
establishing an early-warning system to accelerate our
response to atrocities. As I look around the Security
Council table this morning, we will be seeking a
Security Council resolution on the persecution of
Christians and of people of all faiths. We hope that
today's debate will prepare the ground and inform later
discussions on this important priority.

With regard tojustice, we have seen how transitional
justice mechanisms can support persecuted people and
lay the foundations for peace. For these mechanisms to
be successful, they must involve, as Ms. Elman said, all
parts of the community, particularly women. The United
Kingdom has been and will remain a steadfast advocate
for engaging and involving women at the heart of
conflict resolution, not as an afterthought, but because
we believe they can be pivotal players in ensuring that
peace is achieved and sustained and that countries
and nations can build. It is also important to involve
women to ensure that children's views are represented
effectively. Faith, belief and community leaders also
need to be involved. Indeed, all voices should be heard
as we look towards building justice. This inclusiveness
is vital, but our efforts must of course be tailored to the
country concerned.

Mr. Ozerdem talked about local ownership. We have
seen that in certain areas of the world. The Gambia has
shown one possible model. It secured the confidence
of the public by establishing a truth, reconciliation and
reparations commission that was seen to be independent,
consultative and inclusive. Similarly, accountability is
another important element for long-term reconciliation.
Impunity must no longer be the default option. That is
why the United Kingdom has supported the established
United Nations policy to oppose amnesties for war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide or gross
violations of human rights, including in the context of
peace negotiations.

And what about the Security Council? The Council
has a pivotal and key role to play, working with the
Secretary-General and his Offices - for mediation and
support, special political missions, the Peacebuilding
Commission and others. As countries make the
transition from conflict and instability to sustainable
peace and security, all of us on the Security Council
have a particular responsibility to ensure that their
efforts succeed. That means monitoring reconciliation
processes, women mediators, deciding when to deploy
special political missions, and ensuring that women and
other excluded groups have a place at the very heart of
the table at every stage of recovery and reconciliation.
It is also important that we should consider how faith
leaders can support our efforts in this regard.

In conclusion, I thank the Secretary-General, our
briefers and all participants from whom we will hear
today for their continued commitment in support of
reconciliation that is fair, inclusive and effective. After
all, we owe it to all those who have suffered from
conflict and to those who continue to suffer to help
them overcome their differences and return to their
homes and communities. Ultimately, we all need to
play our part in building a lasting peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
