Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your commitment
to this important debate and for chairing this meeting
here today. We congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December and for the concept paper that was
circulated. We also note with great appreciation the
presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and of the
Deputy Secretary-General at today's debate.

We are gathered here today to address a great
common threat to international peace and security:
terrorism. First and foremost, I stand with my
Government and people in firmly condemning the
atrocities that occurred in Mumbai almost two weeks
ago. Afghanistan extends its greatest sympathies to and
expresses its solidarity with our brothers and sisters in
India, because we feel and understand their suffering.
A few hours after the first attack in Mumbai, there was
a terrorist attack in Kabul, killing and injuring tens of
civilians. It is even more sobering to understand that
Mumbai is only one example. For terrorists, the theatre
of destruction is ever-widening: Mumbai, Kabul,
Islamabad, New York, London and Madrid.

In Afghanistan, the scars and the burns of
terrorism stare us in the face every day. In Afghanistan,
spectacular terrorism has become everyday terrorism.
Terrorism undermines daily efforts on the part of our
Government to provide a sense of safety for families,
to provide education for our children and to create
conditions for free and fair elections for our citizens.
Afghans at all levels bear the day-to-day burdens of
terrorism. Because of our own experience, Afghanistan
participates in this debate with a great sense of
urgency.

Today Afghanistan would like to call the world's
attention to the overarching ideals that terrorism is
seeking to destroy: moderation, coexistence and peace.
Terror has an end goal: by murdering humans, it hopes
to murder moderation. It hopes to provoke the leaders of
the world to be careless in their anger. It aspires to
create rifts between countries and drive wedges between
us. It plans to murder peace and incite us to war.

We cannot play out this script that the terrorists
have written for us, for that is how they win. Today we
can strike a great blow against terror by affirming our
honest collaboration and cooperation. We can only
fight terror by standing together, shoulder to shoulder.
Cooperation is our key. Cooperation is how we win.

We should commend the recent steps forward we
have taken together. The Governments of Afghanistan
and Pakistan are embarking on the first real steps
towards cooperation against the common threat. We
hope this new atmosphere will lead to the end of
sanctuaries for Al-Qaida, the Taliban and other terrorist
groups and to more mutually beneficial relations
between our two countries.
In addition, the recent joint strategy that
Afghanistan and Pakistan forged in Turkey is a critical
step forward. We should also commend and fully
support the cooperative work between India and
Pakistan to investigate the perpetrators of the Mumbai
attacks. The United Nations and all of its Member
States must recognize the necessity of international
support for regional cooperation in the pursuit of peace
and security and the fight against terrorism.

When we speak of effective cooperation, we must
be aware that a cooperative strategy will be strongest if
it is consistent and comprehensive. First, our
inconsistent approach towards terrorism in the past has
already strengthened terrorist groups around the world.
We have to understand that these groups did not drop
from the sky; the funding of terrorist groups served
short-term, short-sighted policies to promote certain
political agendas. However, we have seen these
terrorist groups hit back, wreaking more destruction
than any benefit we could have gained.

We must learn from the consequences of our past
and be aware of our current actions. We must
uniformly and consistently work towards the
eradication of terrorist groups. There should be zero
tolerance for terrorism and zero support for terrorism.
In Afghanistan, our recent initiative to pursue peace
talks will also abide by this principle of consistency.

Secondly, a successful cooperation strategy
should address terrorism comprehensively, from its
root causes upward. Terrorism gains its converts from
those who suffer from socio-economic imbalances,
social handicaps and wrenching poverty, and it hides
behind popular political discontent. Terrorism tries to
indoctrinate the young and innocent. We need to
engage in preventive measures and policies that
address the social and economic inequity upon which
terrorist elements prey. Our cooperative strategy
against terrorism should not only be about decapitating
individual terrorist groups; our strategy must also be
about bringing about security, development and good
governance.

In Afghanistan, we are fighting against terrorism
on a daily basis by building schools for our children,
by putting an end to the narcotics industry that feeds
terrorism, by locating rural enterprises for our people
in order to improve their livelihoods and by providing
water and sanitation to our people. We are fighting
corruption by renewing the leadership of our ministries
and local administrations. We are training our security
forces so that our people can live without fear. This
constant and comprehensive approach will improve our
cooperation and fight terrorism effectively.

We cannot wait for the next terrorist attack to
re-energize our efforts in favour of such a cooperative
strategy. We cannot wait for another attack to join
together. We have to be as committed to cooperative
measures following 100 days of peace as we are after
an attack as bloody as the one in Mumbai.
Organizations such as the Security Council should
further contribute to cooperation by calling for new
sanctions against terrorist groups and those elements
and entities that seek to sponsor and support terrorism.
Without that consistent and comprehensive
commitment to cooperation, we will walk into the traps
the terrorists have laid for us. Reckless anger, further
fighting and war are how terrorism wins.
30

At a time when the world is celebrating the
sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, it is appropriate that we should reassert
that all people - regardless of religion, ethnicity,
nationality, class or gender - deserve a life free of fear,
free of oppression and free of war. Cooperation and
unity is how we forge a world that will be just, peaceful
and strong against terror. Cooperation is how we win.

