Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We support the initiative to extend for a
further year the special control regime on the high seas
off the coast of Libya, established under resolution
2292 (2016), with the objective of ensuring respect for
the Security Council's arms embargo. Those measures
apply to flows both into Libya and out of Libya. Such
special instruments can be useful, as the Libyan
crisis remains a serious source of regional instability,
accompanied by illicit trafficking in arms. We expect
more effective inspection actions in that maritime area,
which must take place with unswerving compliance for
international law.

It is, unfortunately, difficult to refer to last
year's outcomes as impressive. We underscore that
international and regional efforts to reach a settlement
in Libya must be forged on the basis of an understanding
and assessment of the priority tasks necessary to unite
the country and its Government institutions, including
of course the structures of power. This applies to
assistance in the military field, including in conducting
training programmes. Libyans must feel that their
international partners are not interested in creating new
divisive lines such as those that in recent years have
prevented Libya from re-establishing its statehood.
Any policy in this field that is careless or disconnected
from reality could lead to further mistakes.

We cherish the hope that the mediation role of the
United Nations will lead to success. All activities of
the world Organization should be underpinned by the
principles of objectivity, impartiality and assistance
to the Libyans in unifying their State and resolving
Libya's current problems, first and foremost in the
field of combating terrorism. It is quite clear that the
United Nations work on Libya must be based on the
consolidated support of foreign players, which in turn
must act according to the same rules of the game.

Russia and Libya are linked by long-standing
friendly relations, and we have always championed a
unified, flourishing Libya. Our actions are guided
by the objective of rapidly resolving the challenges
facing today's Libya, which require joint regional and
international efforts. We stand ready to participate in
any such work.

