Mr. Machado (Brazil): At the outset, I would like
to join other speakers in condemning the appalling
attack on the United Nations compound in Mogadishu
and in expressing our condolences to the families of the
victims.

On the issue before us today, as in many others,
the link between security, development and sustainable
peace is quite evident, and it is appropriate for this
body to continue to reflect on that crucial relationship.

I also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
and Mr. Annan for their briefings.

The link between natural resources and conflict
prevention has been considered by this Council before.
It is relevant that the Council reflect on a number of
important elements in the ongoing discussion about how
to avoid natural resources from feeding armed conflict
and to recognize that peacebuilding strategies can play
a role in gearing the exploitation of natural resources

towards sustainable development and concrete peace
dividends.
It is certainly important for the Council to make
its contribution, within its competencies, to the fight
against the illegal exploitation and trafficking in natural
resources, where they relate to armed conflict. At the
same time, as widely recognized, there are no necessary
or mechanical linkages between the exploitation of
natural resources and armed conflict. On the contrary,
such resources are generally an important source of
prosperity and stability, and they must be seen as such.

It is also crucial to look at the international demand
for natural resources as a decisive part of our collective
effort to prevent natural resources from fuelling
armed conflict. In 1998, in his report entitled "The
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa" (S/1998/318),
Secretary-General Annan called attention to the impact
that business interests in natural resources could have
on the success or failure of peace efforts. Since then,
progress has surely been made.

Now it is time to further articulate conflict
prevention and the demand side of the equation. Due
diligence is certainly an important tool in that regard,
and has helped address the problem. More is needed,
however, to identify new means to stop such resources
from fuelling armed conflict. We believe that could
matter in the further reflection and work of the Security
Council, as well as that of the General Assembly and
the Peacebuilding Commission.

The sound exploitation of natural resources is,
for many States in conflict or post-conflict situations,
the single most important vehicle for economic
development. The international community, including
the Security Council, within its competencies, should do
more to assist such countries. We must help strengthen
national ownership and the State institutions necessary
to exercise national oversight over natural resources,
as well as to develop or consolidate policies to ensure
that the extractive industry always serves development
and not war. When State sovereignty is fully exercised
in the exploitation of natural resources, fewer are the
chances of their misuse for fuelling conflict.

In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its support for
actions and strategies - here and in other forums, in
full respect for the mandates of each - that help ensure
that natural resources in conflict-affected States are a
powerful tool of development with social justice, and
therefore, stability and peace.

