Mr. Almagro (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I should like to begin by congratulating President
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner and the delegation of
Argentina on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council and on having convened this high-level open
debate aimed at strengthening our understanding of
the role of regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security and
incorporating new regional and subregional actors
that reflect the dynamics of sociopolitical realities
throughout all regions of our planet.

Uruguay also welcomes the presence of
the representatives of regional and subregional
organizations, in particular from Latin America and
the Caribbean, including the Common Market of
the South, the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States, the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR), and the Organization of American States,
and our dear friends from the League of Arab States.

Notwithstanding the responsibility that the Charter
of the United Nations Charter entrusts to the Security
Council in maintaining international peace and
security, regional and subregional entities make a clear
and ineluctable contribution to preventing, resolving or
minimizing most of the situations that threaten global
peace. The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
is a contribution of our countries to protecting our region
from military adventurism. It has opened a path to
cooperation, completely changing the logic in the South
Atlantic with respect to the North Atlantic, which has
its defence mechanisms and its military alliances. This
strategy, which has been strengthened politically by the
importance attached to it by such organizations as the
African Union and UNASUR, to which our countries
belong in our respective regions, is also strengthened
by the greater interaction achieved through the Africa-
South America summit that took place in Abuja,
Margarita Island, and Equatorial Guinea. These entities
recognize the Zone as a fundamental instrument for
promoting peace, security and cooperation among our
countries.

The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
embodies a commitment to the essential values of
peaceful coexistence, democracy and respect for
human rights. For our countries, these are fundamental
and undeniable principles. The Zone is an initiative of
international scope, and we manage it in strict respect
for the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
including the sovereignty and legal equality of States
and the peaceful settlement of disputes, as well as
non-interference in internal affairs of other countries.
As current Chairman of the Zone, I note some of the
fundamental provisions of our Montevideo Declaration.
Our meeting in that city helped to reiterate our
commitment to the consolidation of the South Atlantic
as a zone of peace and cooperation free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. We
urge other States to recognize it as such.

We know that the very existence ofweapons ofmass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, remains
a serious threat to humankind, creating tension and
mistrust among peoples. We believe that progress in the
multilateral agenda, especially concerning compliance
with disarmament obligations under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, must be a high
priority for Member States.

The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
countries clearly recall the 1994 declaration of the Zone
on the denuclearization of the South Atlantic, adopted at
the third ministerial meeting. We are therefore doing all
we can to ban and prevent in our respective territories
and territorial waters the use, manufacture, production,
acquisition, reception, storage and deployment of
all nuclear weapons, as well as any direct or indirect
attempt to encourage any of these activities in the
South Atlantic. In that regard, we urge the international
community to respect the Zone's status.
In addition to the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean
and the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty,
which are currently in force, we urge the international
community to fully respect the denuclearized status
of our Zone. Our countries are unfailingly committed
to disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy, the three pillars of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty.

We also understand the importance of preventive
diplomacy, mediation and good offices, and the
establishment, maintenance and consolidation of
peace to the maintenance of international peace and
security; the key importance of avoiding the escalation
of conflicts and of settling disputes; and the important
role played by women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and in building peace. We highlight the
importance of their full participation in all initiatives
to maintain peace and security, and the need to increase
their participation in decision-making with respect to
prevention and resolution of conflicts.

Our country is concerned by the negative role
played by the exploitation of natural resources in the
exacerbation of conflicts. We welcome efforts under
way in Africa, in particular on the part of the States
members of the Zone, to implement a legal framework
designed to address this practice. In this respect, we
urge the international community to support these
efforts.

For Uruguay and the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone, it is crucial to stress the importance
ofthe United Nations peacekeeping operations, to which
some States members of the Zone are contributors. We
recognize the potential for cooperation in strengthening
the capacity of member States of the Zone to take part
in peacekeeping operations. We also reaffirm the need
to support the peace processes under way, as well as
the United Nations peacekeeping operations deployed
in States member in the Zone. We reiterate the need
to further study mechanisms and possibilities for
cooperation in peacekeeping operations.

The South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone
supports the efforts of its member States in promoting
the principle of the peaceful resolution of conflicts and
the quest for negotiated solutions to territorial conflicts
which affect member States of the zone. In that respect,
the Zone calls for the resumption of negotiations
between the Government of the Argentine Republic
and the United Kingdom, in accordance with resolution
General Assembly resolution 2065 (XX) and other
resolutions of the General Assembly on the question
of the Malvinas Islands with a view to finding a just,
lasting and peaceful solution as soon as possible.

We also reaffirm GeneralAssembly resolution 31/49,
which calls on both parties to the dispute concerning
the Malvinas Islands, South Georgia Islands and South
Sandwich Islands, and the surrounding maritime areas
to refrain from taking decisions that would involve the
introduction of unilateral changes in the situation while
the Islands go through the process recommended in
resolutions of the General Assembly. In that context,
we are concerned to see the development of illegitimate
activities of oil exploration in the zone in dispute.

Uruguay, as Chairman of the South Atlantic Peace
and Cooperation Zone, maintains along with other
countries of the Zone, that we must eliminate the vision
of the South Atlantic as a stage for strategic action
between antagonistic States with competing interests.
The South Atlantic is a geostrategic area that endows
our countries, through the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone, with a new instrument to move
forward in the major objectives of the international
community: peace, security and the development of our
societies.

