Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Sir, on your able stewardship of
this Council during the difficult month of July. May I
also take this opportunity to extend to you and to your
people an early but very happy wish for a happy
14 July.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the United States for its bold stand and to express our
appreciation to those countries that, by their vote,
showed the understanding we had hoped all the
international community would show.

Allow me to recall a very different time in two
very different places. Nearly a year ago, Israel
disengaged from Gaza. The disengagement was not an
easy process for us; it took place under dramatic and
heart-wrenching circumstances and came at a huge
political and personal price to Prime Minister Sharon,
who took that brave decision. At that point in time, the
Palestinians had two choices. The first was to care for
their own people, raise their standard of living,
improve their quality of life, and concentrate on the
welfare and well-being of their own people. The
second was to turn Gaza into a terror base and a
launching pad for deadly rockets into Israel. Tragically,
the Palestinian leadership chose the latter, making their
own people hostage to their terrorist agenda.

And, over six years ago, Israel completely
withdrew from southern Lebanon. That withdrawal was
not an easy process for us either and was questioned
internally. At that point in time, the Government of
Lebanon, too, had two choices: to care for their own
people and to rehabilitate their country after decades of
a civil war, or to allow their sovereign territory to
become a terror base from which Hizbollah terrorists
could launch attacks against Israeli civilians.
Tragically, the Lebanese Government also chose the
latter.

In both cases, the respective Governments chose
to make their own people hostage to the path of terror,
destruction and bloodshed. There is no reason for
violence from these two places from which Israel has
completely withdrawn. Israel cannot and will not
permit these areas to be used as a breeding ground for
terrorists or a launching pad for terrorist actions. Israel
will not be held hostage to terror.

Let us consider who is Hamas. What are their
strategies and intent? The Hamas, leading the
Palestinian Authority, is an entity that not merely
sympathizes with terrorists; it is itself an
internationally recognized terrorist organization. Think
of the significance of the fact that this is the recognized
leadership of the Palestinian people. Think, also, of the
way it has conducted itself since assuming power,
showing no sign of changing its ways and rejecting the
international community's demand to renounce terror,
recognize Israel and honour all previous international
agreements.

Weeks ago, terrorists infiltrated the area of
Kerem Shalom, near the border crossing. The attackers
killed two Israeli soldiers and kidnapped a third,
Corporal Gilad Shalit, who was taken into the Gaza
Strip. During that very same week, Palestinian
terrorists also kidnapped an Israeli teenager and
brutally executed him. Israel has been under attack for
weeks. But only after all international efforts to
mediate in the crisis failed did Israel take the steps
necessary to defend itself and quell the ceaseless
assaults.

Let me be perfectly clear. What we are seeing are
the actions of Hamas and Hizbollah. But they are
merely the fingers of the bloodstained hands and the
executioners of the twisted minds of the leaders of the

world's most ominous axis of terror, Syria and Iran.
This axis of terror, which we have warned against
repeatedly, including in the Security Council, is
constituted of Iran, whose President repeatedly denies
the Holocaust while preparing the next one, and Syria,
a host country to the world's major terrorist
organizations. Iran, Syria, Hamas and Hizbollah are a
threat not just to Israel and to the region, but to the
entire free world. Several days ago, the Hamas terrorist
leader, Khaled Mashaal, who is warmly harboured in
Damascus by the Syrian Government, thanked the
Syrian leadership for resisting international pressure to
help a peaceful solution to the kidnapping of the Israeli
soldier Gilad Shalit. Another member of this axis, Iran,
is repeatedly calling for the annihilation of Israel while
acquiring the nuclear capability to carry it out.

Both the Syrian and Iranian Governments have a
long, documented history of sabotaging efforts towards
peace in the region. They actively support radical
elements and weaken voices of reason. They host
terrorist organizations and finance their deadly acts.
We must recognize these regimes by their words and
deeds. They are instigators and supporters of
international terrorism, and their heinous acts know no
moral bounds. No nation should turn a blind eye
towards the Governments of Syria and Iran simply
because their actions have not yet touched its own
citizens. Left unchecked, these terror regimes soon
come to menace even those with whom they have no
quarrel. History tries to teach us a lesson that we too
often forget: appeasement and silence make a perilous
strategy.

We have been hearing the Palestinian observer
and other Arab delegations repeatedly state that Israel
is - and here comes the mantra - "the occupying
Power". Let there be no confusion with reality. We
disengaged from the Gaza Strip precisely because we
do not want to be an occupying Power. We do not want
to control Palestinian lives. Let it be made very, very
clear: it is not Israel, but terror, that is the occupying
power of Israelis, Palestinians and Lebanese alike.
They are all held hostage to that occupying power of
terror.

We are doing what we can under the
circumstances to balance our duty as a Government to
free our kidnapped soldiers and protect our citizens
8

from further attacks, as any responsible Government
would do, with a wish to minimize any negative impact
this duty might have on civilian populations. But let
me point out to the Council the very clear difference
between the two sides, when it comes to civilian
casualties - and there is a very clear difference.

On the one hand, you have a terror organization
committed to the destruction of Israel who specifically
targets civilians, innocents, women and children. On
the other hand, you have a democratic State acting in
self-defence and, as happens in war, especially when
the attacks are launched from densely populated
civilian areas, sometimes, unfortunately, tragically,
painfully, civilians get hurt. But there is another
difference. For us, every dead Palestinian child is a
mistake and a tragedy. For them, every dead Israeli
child is a victory and a cause for celebration.

Israel cannot be held hostage to terrorism in its
various forms, including kidnapping, suicide
bombings, rockets or any similar threats. We urge the
international community to continue applying all
possible political pressure on the Palestinian Authority
and on the Hamas terrorist organization, including its
members and sponsors in Damascus, so as to ensure
the immediate and safe release of Gilad Shalit and to
finally bring an end to the use of Palestinian territory
as a base for terrorist operations.

In conclusion, Mr. President, as we sit here
during these very difficult days, I urge you and I urge
my colleagues to ask yourselves this question - what
would you do if your countries found themselves under
such attacks? If your neighbours infiltrated your
borders to kidnap your people and if hundreds of
rockets were launched at your towns and villages,
would you just sit back and take it? Or would you do
exactly what Israel is doing at this very minute, making
every effort to protect its people and allow them to live
in the peace and security that they long for and that all
the people in the region have for so long been deprived
of by the forces of terror.

