Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): At the outset, let me make
it very clear that we have a firm and uncompromising
policy against the use of chemical weapons, born of our
own experience. We have no reason for laxity on that
issue. We believe that the use of chemical weapons, for
any reason and under any circumstances by any party,
is not only abhorrent but also violates international
law. That is why we condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, the use of chemical weapons in Syria, as
reported by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons Fact-Finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic. We believe that those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, whether State
or non-State actors, whether individuals or entities,
should be identified based on conclusive findings
and must be held accountable. That is why we attach
great importance to the work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM).

Since wejoined the Security Council, we have been
carefully examining the draft resolution (S/2017/172) on
the use of chemical weapons in Syria with a great sense
of responsibility. In that connection, we have been very
frank and open in raising questions on the third and
fourth reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(see S/2016/738/Rev.l and S/2016/888), which the draft
resolution used as a basis for proposing a sanctions
regime. We came to realize that, due to a number of
constraints, the Joint Investigative Mechanism could
not find "highly convincing evidence", "substantial
evidence" or even "sufficient evidence". As the
Joint Investigative Mechanism made clear in its
report, what it was able to find was only "sufficient
information" - and I want to underline that. Of course,
we understand the JIM's real constraints. It was not
under ideal circumstances that it was called upon to
undertake that onerous task.

Therefore, when we affirm that its current
conclusions are not yet firm enough to make the kind of
decision proposed, it is not intended to cast aspersions
on the work done by the JIM, which, in our judgment,
was carried out with objectivity and a high level of
professional responsibility. We nonetheless believe
that we have the obligation to point out areas that
are in need of further clarification and investigation
to determine the specific individuals and entities
responsible for those acts. That is to say that we are
only stressing that making a decision on a very vital
matter, such that which had been proposed attributing
responsibility for the use of chemical weapons, should
have been based on convincing and robust evidence.
Whoever is responsible for such abhorrent acts must
be explicitly identified and accordingly punished. That
requires establishing clear and unambiguous evidence.
Thus far, the JIM. has not come up with a specific and
detailed list ofpersons or entities that fully corresponds
to the annex of the draft resolution.

In resolution 2319 (2016), the Council renewed the
mandate ofthe JIM. for one additional year. As we heard
just this past Friday from the Head of JIM, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, a new investigative team with better skills
has been formed and is ready "to examine additional
information and evidence that was not obtained or
prepared by the Fact-Finding Mission". It would have
been only appropriate and logical to allow the JIM. to
continue its work and come up with an unambiguous
conclusion. That, we thought, would have contributed
to ensuring the unity of the Council, which is critical
with regard to very weighty issues such as the one
at hand.

I should say parenthetically that one of the most
successful arms control agreements was concluded in
September 2013 with the aim ofremoving or destroying
Syria's chemical weapons. By comparison, we feel that
it would have been much easier to move together this
time around. Nevertheless, we remain fully confident
with regard to the work of the JIM. We understand that
it has not received the necessary support commensurate
with the unprecedented responsibility given to it by the
Council. We believe that, as it resumes its important
work, it is absolutely important to provide all the
necessary support to the JIM. and protect its professional
independence. It is also vital that we use the important
work of the JIM. and the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission

in the Syrian Arab Republic to address the proliferation
of chemical weapons in Syria, the magnitude of which
experts tell us is indeed downright scary, with the
potential to affect and endanger the wider region.
Criminal groups are having a field day in that regard.
We need to get our act together before it is too late, as
happens on too many occasions.

Finally, the Syrian people have been going through
unspeakable suffering and pain over the past six years.
I should like to therefore conclude by once again
expressing our support for ongoing Syria peace talks
in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations,
which, we believe, should be the most important focus
of the Council to end the suffering ofthe Syrian people.

