It is a pleasure once again for me to interact with the Council, albeit virtually, as I present my Office's thirty-first report on the Darfur situation, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). At the outset, I wish to congratulate France on assuming the presidency of the Council and to express my sincere appreciation for facilitating today's briefing amid a rather hectic work plan for the month of June for this organ. I am grateful for the flexibility and the importance attached to this briefing. As the world continues to navigate the uncertain and unprecedented era of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the wheels of justice have continued to turn at the International Criminal Court (ICC), and in my Office in particular. We have made every effort to adapt to the current reality of a virtual world, and the Office has maintained a notable degree of business continuity despite the challenges presented by the pandemic, including the closure of the ICC premises since March. As many members will be aware, yesterday, ICC suspect Ali Kushayb was transferred into the custody of the Court following his surrender. This is a pivotal development in the Darfur situation, especially for the victims who have waited so long for justice. I hope that the suspect's transfer to the Court also sends a clear and unequivocal message that, no matter how long it takes or the obstacles placed in our path, my Office will not stop until the alleged perpetrators of Rome Statute crimes are brought to justice. Indeed, while many had either abandoned hope in the situation or had actively sought to stifle progress, we maintained our focus and perspective, never giving up on our investigations despite cooperation challenges or on building the necessary networks and partnerships. Our commitment to the situation and the victims in Darfur remains unwavering, as does our conviction about the importance of fighting impunity for atrocity crimes. There should be no escape from justice for perpetrators of the world's most serious crimes under international law. We have continued to make important progress in the collection of evidence to strengthen our cases relating to the Darfur situation, in line with our strategic plans, and will continue to honour our obligations under the Statute. I would be remiss if I did not seize this occasion to express once again my sincere appreciation for the impressive cooperation of all those States, organizations and individuals that contributed to this pivotal development, in particular the Governments of the Central African Republic, the Republic of Chad, the French Republic and the Netherlands, as well as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. Apart from the success of the operation, this development also demonstrates, in clear terms, support for the ICC and its crucial mandate and, indeed, how effective the Rome Statute system of international criminal justice can be through timely and devoted collaborative action. We have always welcomed such efforts and look forward to continued collaboration in the service of the Rome Statute. I cannot be faulted for also being proud of my dedicated team, along with colleagues from the Registry of the Court, whose tireless efforts in the exercise of our respective independent mandates contributed to yesterday's development and successful transfer to the ICC. That outcome was achieved notwithstanding the complexities of the operation, which were aggravated by having to operate in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. And here, I salute my colleagues for the hours of preparation and travel time dedicated to the operation in these exceptional circumstances. This development highlights yet another obvious need. All ICC suspects for whom arrest warrants have been issued must face justice. I take this opportunity to call on Mr. Abdallah Banda and all other ICC suspects who are at large to follow Mr. Kushayb's lead and surrender to the ICC and answer for the charges against them through a fair, objective and independent judicial process. We remain optimistic that the ongoing transitional process in the Republic of the Sudan augurs well in terms of prospects for finally achieving justice for Darfur victims. In particular, we are encouraged by the ongoing peace talks in Juba between the Government of the Sudan and rebel groups and urge all parties to stay the course in their quest for durable peace in that country. We have noted with keen interest media reports indicating that an agreement was reached with rebel groups and that justice in Darfur requires those against whom arrest warrants were issued by the ICC to appear. To date, the Court has yet to receive official communication from the Government of the Sudan relating to any agreements reached in respect of the Court's pending arrest warrants. At this point in time, my Office has not been informed by the competent authorities of the Sudan what actions they intend to take in relation to the ICC suspects. Accordingly, I take this opportunity to appeal to the Security Council and, through the Council, to the authorities of the Government of the Sudan to intensify dialogue with my Office to ensure accountability for the heinous crimes that have taken place in Darfur. I am pleased to note that I had the honour of placing a courtesy call to His Excellency the Prime Minister of the Sudan, Mr. Abdalla Hamdok, concerning yesterday's transfer of the ICC suspect into the custody of the Court. I was encouraged by that open and helpful conversation. I remain hopeful that a new chapter of constructive engagement between the ICC and the Sudan, rooted in mutual respect and a genuine commitment to providing justice for the victims of heinous crimes committed in Darfur, may be on the horizon. Dialogue between my Office and the Government of the Sudan is imperative. In keeping with the requirements of the Rome Statute, all ICC Darfur suspects must be brought to justice through genuine proceedings, either in a courtroom in the Sudan or at the Court at The Hague. To that end and pursuant to the principle of complementarity and my mandate as ICC Prosecutor, I reiterate that I welcome dialogue with the Government of the Sudan, while reassuring victims of the atrocity crimes committed in Darfur of my steadfast commitment to ensuring that those responsible for them ultimately face justice. Even as the Sudan continues its extraordinary transition, the situation on the ground remains volatile. The reported attempt to assassinate Prime Minister Hamdok in March underscores the fragility of the situation. At times like these, the Sudanese people look to the Council and the international community more than ever for tangible support and encouragement to forge ahead with their efforts to find lasting peace, of which justice and accountability are essential components. I reiterate my Office's commitment and readiness to engage with all sectors of the interim Government to ensure genuine justice for the crimes committed in Darfur in accordance with the requirements of the Rome Statute. My Office is pursuing its efforts to reach out to the Sudanese Government in order to open lines of communication with all its relevant components. Those efforts have been impeded by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has restricted travel and demanded the attention of Governments all over the world, including that of the Sudan. Given the current restrictions on international travel and personal interactions, my Office stands ready to facilitate virtual meetings with all stakeholders in the Sudan at the earliest opportunity in order to raise greater awareness about my Office's work, the Court's jurisdiction and what can be expected going forward. We are not oblivious to the tremendous challenges that the Government of the Sudan is currently facing, and can only wish it success in this transition phase towards achieving greater human security and prosperity for the Sudanese people. Securing justice for past crimes in Darfur must remain a priority as part of this national reset and response. The ICC arrest warrants for the four suspects in the Darfur situation remain in force. As I note in my report to the Council, Mr. Al-Bashir is serving a two-year sentence in the Sudan for a conviction relating to financial corruption. Furthermore, the Sudan's Public Prosecutor has reportedly announced additional charges relating to the 1989 coup. I am also aware of recent reports that the Sudan's anti-corruption body recently confiscated assets valued at $4 billion from Mr. Al-Bashir, his family members and associates. Mr. Ahmad Harun and Mr. Abdel Raheem Hussein are both reportedly in the custody of the Government of the Sudan, awaiting charges to be laid by the Public Prosecutor. I am concerned by recent reports that both of those ICC suspects are ill with COVID-19, and trust that adequate measures are being taken by the authorities to attend to their health in detention. Mr. Abdallah Banda, who is still at large, remains an ICC fugitive who should be arrested and surrendered to the Court. Pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005) and the subsequent orders of ICC Judges, the Sudan still has an international legal duty to surrender all the suspects subject to an ICC arrest warrant to the Court without delay. Regarding recent judicial activities, on 11 May, my Office filed a public redacted version of its observations on the possibility of a trial in absentia in the specific circumstances of the case against Mr. Banda. As set out in more detail in the filing, my Office argued that neither the Rome Statute nor the Rules of Procedure and Evidence permit a trial in absentia of an accused person, particularly in the circumstances of the case against Mr. Banda. On 13 May, the Trial Chamber, by majority, granted leave to the Legal Representative for Victims to file observations on the issue. My team continues to monitor alleged crimes in Darfur that may fall within the Court's jurisdiction. There have been allegations of attacks on the Krinding camp for internally displaced persons, as well as villages near El Geneina. The attacks reportedly resulted in significant casualties and caused the displacement of thousands of people. There were also reports of continuing sexual and gender- based violence. Attacks such as these must stop, and the protection of civilians must remain a priority. I welcome reports from the International Organization for Migration (IOM) that the number of returnees in 2019 exceeded the number of internally displaced persons in Darfur. However, I am concerned by reports of harassment of IOM staff and of the looting of humanitarian supplies from five local non-governmental organizations in Kabkabiya, North Darfur. I remain deeply concerned about the protection of civilians and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on humanitarian assistance. I welcome the Council's decision, last week, to adopt resolution 2525 (2020), which extends the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur until 31 December. I also welcome the Council's adoption, on the same day, of resolution 2524 (2020), which establishes a new political mission in the Sudan, the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan. The progress my Office has made thus far in this situation would not have been possible without the principled cooperation and unwavering support of a number of States, including those who sit on the Council. Allow me to express my sincere gratitude for that support. I must also express my heartfelt thanks to the inspirational individuals and organizations that continue to do everything in their power to pursue justice and accountability for crimes in Darfur. Allow me to reiterate that my Office attaches great importance to enhancing its fledgling relationship with the Government of the Sudan. We are alive to the complexity of the Sudan's transition process and the competing priorities that the Sudanese authorities must attend to. Even so, meeting the legitimate demands of the Sudanese people for justice and accountability must remain at the forefront. It is 17 years since many of the crimes occurred in Darfur. My Office has not been able to access the territory of the Sudan in the last 13 years. Now is the time for that to change. Mr. Kushayb's surrender to the Court further highlights the importance of that cooperation. I call on all the members of the Council, States parties to the Rome Statute and the international community more broadly to support and encourage the Government of the Sudan to fully and promptly cooperate with my Office. It is my hope that, when I next brief the Council, I will be in a position to report on key milestones in my cooperation with the Sudanese authorities. I hope the Council does not only share my optimism but will work hard to ensure that we achieve that aim. I recall the salient words of His Excellency the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations Omer Mohamed Ahmed Siddig in his response to my last report to the Council on 18 December 2019 (see S/PV.8691). Mr. Siddig referred to anew reality for the Sudan that has accountability as its cornerstone and in which there is no place for impunity. That is the goal that my Office and the Government of the Sudan, with the support of the Council, must work together to deliver for victims in Darfur. In that collective effort, there is no time to waste. Justice for Darfur has already been too elusive for too long. It is past time for that unsatisfactory state of affairs to change. A window of opportunity has been opened. We must collectively seize it. Let us act together to finally bring justice to the victims in Darfur. To conclude, on 29 May, I had the opportunity to brief the European Parliament's Subcommittee on Human Rights in relation to a number of situations before the Court, including Darfur. In the course of my exchanges with the Subcommittee, I was encouraged in particular by the strong support expressed for the mandate of the ICC and the independent exercise of its prosecutorial and judicial functions, as set out in the Rome Statute. For victims of atrocity crimes and affected communities in many conflict situations around the world, the ICC represents a last beacon of hope for independent and impartial justice. Yesterday's development, with the transfer of Mr. Kushayb to the Court, is also significant in that context, and it embodies the resilience, tenacity and reach of justice, as well as the crucial importance of the ICC in the global fight against impunity. We are committed to continuing to honourably fulfil our duties under the Rome Statute, without fear or favour, in the pursuit of justice for the world's most heinous crimes. We count on the Council's support as we make progress in this necessary journey forward towards a more just world.
