Mr. Roed-Larsen: Four years ago, this Council
passed resolution 1559 (2004). Today I will, on behalf
of the Secretary-General, use the opportunity to recall
the spirit and objectives of that resolution.

The main objective of resolution 1559 (2004) is
to reaffirm the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of Lebanon under the sole
and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon
throughout Lebanon. For that purpose, it calls for the
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the country and
the disarming and disbanding of all Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias.

The requirements of the resolution are merely a
reflection of - or literally quotations from - the very
provisions of the Taif Accords of 1989, to which all the
political parties in Lebanon committed. As such,
resolution 1559 (2004) is a mechanism of the Security
Council supporting the principles that the Lebanese
committed themselves to in 1989. The understanding
reached in the Taif Accords ended the civil war. It also
stipulated that all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
should disband and disarm. It led, at the time, to
Lebanese militias - with the exception of Hizbullah -
giving up their armed capacities.

I am pleased, in that context, to report that recent
opinion polls conducted in Lebanon show massive
support for the work of the United Nations in Lebanon.
The results emphasize in particular that the vast
majority of the population favours the implementation
of all the provisions of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1680 (2006), including the disarming and disbanding
of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias.

I am delighted to report that the Lebanese leaders
re-affirmed, in Doha, in May this year, their
commitment to the Taif Accords.

In the same spirit, in its resolution 1680 (2006),
the Security Council strongly encouraged Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic to establish full diplomatic
relations and to delineate their common border. That
reflects and arises from the requirements of resolution
1559 (2004) and is, as such, merely a road map
towards affirming Lebanon's sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence.

Since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004) in
September 2004, several of its provisions have now
been implemented. The Secretary-General was able to
certify that free and credible parliamentary elections
08-57736
had taken place in early 2005. The same conclusion
applied to the withdrawal of Syrian troops, military
assets and military intelligence apparatus from Lebanon.

Today, I am glad to report major strides over the
past six months towards the full implementation of the
requirements of resolution 1559 (2004). The most
significant progress made in the implementation of the
resolution during the reporting period has been
compliance with its requirement for a free and fair
presidential election according to Lebanese constitutional
rules, as called for repeatedly by the Security Council
since 2004. I am indeed pleased to report that the
election of the President has revived the constitutional
political process in Lebanon. That relates in particular
to the convening of Parliament, which, as the Council
knows, was paralysed for almost two years.

On 30 September the Lebanese Parliament
adopted a new electoral law based on the agreement
reached in Doha in May. The new law paves the way
for holding parliamentary election next spring.

Lebanon and Syria have engaged in high-level
talks on matters of relevance to Lebanon's sovereignty,
political independence and territorial integrity. On
14 August, the Lebanese and Syrian Presidents
concluded two days of talks in Damascus with the
release of a joint statement announcing the agreement
of the two States to establish diplomatic relations at the
ambassadorial level. That led to the signing of a
memorandum between the Foreign Ministers of Syria
and Lebanon, in Damascus on 15 October, announcing
the establishment of diplomatic relations, effective the
same day. That agreement also announced the two
countries' determination to reinforce and consolidate
their relations on the basis of mutual respect for their
sovereignty and independence.

We are looking forward to close adherence to that
understanding and the opening of embassies in Beirut
and Damascus by the end of the year. The Secretary-
General applauds the historic steps that have been
taken so far by Presidents Sleiman and Al-Assad
towards that goal. For the first time since their
independence, the two neighbouring States are
establishing diplomatic relations. Those developments
seem to signal that a new page has been opened in the
relations between the two countries. In that context, the
Secretary-General pays tribute to the personal efforts
deployed by President Sarkozy of France in convincing
the parties to make significant headway on the matter.
08-57736

The Secretary-General has also maintained his
efforts to encourage Syria and Lebanon to achieve the
full delineation of their common border. There was no
significant progress on that matter during the reporting
period. Accordingly, we welcome the renewed
intention of Syria and Lebanon to make progress on the
issue based on priorities set by both sides as announced
also at the conclusion of the Lebanese-Syrian summit
held in Damascus on 13 and 14 August this year. We
encourage the two countries to materialize that
commitment, in particular in those areas where the
border is uncertain or disputed, in the best interests of
both States.

We remain concerned by the general porosity of
the Syrian-Lebanese border, which renders it easy to
penetrate. The vulnerability of that border is reflected
by both the permanent presence of paramilitary
infrastructures belonging to the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifada, which straddle the border, and the growing
concern of a number of Member States regarding the
flow of weapons and fighters. Syria has continued to
deny any involvement in effecting breaches of the arms
embargo. At the conclusion of the Syrian-Lebanese
summit held in Damascus on 13 and 14 August, the
two parties agreed to take joint action to improve
border security and halt smuggling operations. It is
also important that Lebanon and Syria take tangible
steps towards implementing the other aspects of the
agreements reached in Damascus in August.

Over the reporting period, Israeli aircraft have
continued to violate Lebanese airspace. The
Government of Israel has continued to claim that those
overflights are carried out for security reasons. We
have regularly called on Israel to cease those
overflights, which violate Lebanese sovereignty and
Security Council resolutions. Israel continues to
occupy the northern part of Ghajar, which constitutes a
violation of Lebanon's sovereignty and of resolution
1701 (2006). The United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon is actively working with the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Israeli Defense Forces to find an early
solution to that matter.

On 16 October the Secretary-General received a
letter from Prime Minister Siniora of Lebanon, in
which he expressed concern at the threats by Israel
against Lebanon. The Secretary-General is indeed
disturbed by the escalation of threats, through the
media, between Israel and Hizbullah. He urges all
3
parties to cease that public discourse, which creates
anxiety among civilian populations on both sides.

Despite the progress achieved in some key
aspects of the resolution, other elements pertaining
directly to the sovereignty, stability and territorial
integrity of the Lebanese State remain unimplemented.
The violence that erupted in Lebanon and spread
widely across the country in May of this year served as
a shocking illustration of how armed groups outside
the control of the Government of Lebanon brought the
country to a state of near collapse. The events engraved
psychological scars on the civilian population.

Regrettably, over the reporting period there has
been no tangible progress towards the disbanding and
disarming of militias as called for by the Taif
Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). The most
significant Lebanese militia is the armed component of
Hizbullah. That organization maintains a massive
paramilitary infrastructure separate from the State,
including a secure network of communication, which
the group itself deems an integral part of its arsenal. In
May of this year, Hizbullah employed civil disobedience
but also elements of its military assets to protect that
very structure. Those assets and Hizbullah's resort to
armed action in response to a political decision by the
Government were a direct challenge to the fundamental
authority of the Government and its attempts to
consolidate its sovereignty.

The Secretary-General calls on Hizbullah to
comply with all relevant Security Council resolutions
and urges all parties that maintain close ties with it, in
particular Syria and Iran, to support its transformation
into a political party proper, consistent with the
requirements of the Taif Agreement and resolution
1559 (2004).

The Secretary-General is gravely concerned by
the possibility that the scars left by the clashes last
spring may have prompted, if not accelerated, a process
of rearmament in Lebanon. That activity and the
continued presence of groups with military and
paramilitary capacities threaten the holding of the free
and fair parliamentary elections scheduled for next
spring. We support the efforts of the Government of
Lebanon to ensure a stable security environment in
which those elections can be held.

I am pleased to report to the Security Council that
as an integral part of the Doha Agreement, the
Lebanese leaders committed themselves to prohibit the
use of weapons or violence in any internal conflict that
may arise. That and the ensuing national dialogue
under the leadership of President Sleiman have
provided Lebanon's leaders with a new opportunity to
recommit themselves to strengthening the sovereignty
of the State and the authority of the Lebanese
Government throughout its territory.

The Secretary-General has welcomed the first
session of the dialogue, which began by addressing
itself to the question of a national defence strategy for
Lebanon. In that context, we also welcome several
attempts by Lebanese leaders to normalize their
relations in the interests of Lebanon's security and
political stability. It is my profound hope that those
efforts will help prevent further violence throughout
the country and lay the foundations for an ongoing and
sustainable dialogue. It is important to reiterate today
the Secretary-General's call on all Lebanese leaders to
fully engage in a spirit of genuine cooperation and to
commit themselves to achieving meaningful progress
that consolidates Lebanon's stability and sovereignty.
That process will also require the constructive
engagement of States in the region, which also will
benefit from a stable and sovereign Lebanon.

Another serious threat to the stability and
sovereignty of Lebanon is posed by non-Lebanese
armed groups. The Secretary-General is gravely
concerned by the emergence and apparent strengthening
of extremist elements and foreign fighters based
largely in and around Tripoli. That phenomenon is but
another challenge to the consolidation of the
Government's authority.

There has been no progress towards the
disarming of Palestinian militias in accordance with the
agreement reached in the Lebanese national dialogue
of 2006. We welcome, therefore, the intention
expressed by Lebanese leaders at the first session of
the dialogue this year. They confirmed the decisions
reached in the previous dialogue and expressed their
commitment to work towards implementing them.

Of particular concern is the emerging pattern of
lethal attacks against the Lebanese Armed Forces, one
of the most prominent symbols of the authority of the
State. We are disturbed by the strengthening of
extremist elements and foreign fighters based largely in
and around Tripoli. That phenomenon is another
challenge that highlights the proliferation of weapons
and armed groups that continue to operate in Lebanon
08-57736
in violation of resolution 1559 (2004). In that regard, I
note the assertive action taken and arrests made by the
Lebanese security forces of late.

The Secretary-General would like to commend
the efforts of the Ministerial Committee of the League
of Arab States presided over by the Prime Minister of
Qatar and the Secretary-General of the League. He
wishes in particular to pay tribute to His Highness
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani for facilitating the
Doha Agreement that helped Lebanon to avoid the
spectre of a new civil war. Thanks to that accord,
Lebanon was able to make major strides towards the
affirmation of its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.

The Secretary-General reiterates his conviction
that the disarmament of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias should take place through a political process
that will lead to the monopoly on the use of force by
the Government of Lebanon throughout all of its
territory. I believe that there exists in Lebanon today
the possibility for the country's leaders to engage in a
process that addresses those issues, which remain at the
core of the Lebanese agenda. Achieving meaningful
progress in that regard is not only urgent but also
possible, should all sides continue to adhere by their
commitments to refrain from violence to settle political
08-57736

differences and commit themselves to a Lebanese
political process that safeguards the county's
sovereignty, stability and constitution.

Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) remains an
international support mechanism for the implementation
by the Lebanese of the relevant provisions and
understandings reached in the Taif Agreement, namely,
that all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias disband,
disarm and relinquish their military capacities. That
understanding must be preserved and implemented to
avoid the spectre of a renewed confrontation among the
Lebanese.

The Secretary-General is keenly aware of the
interlinkages between the various conflicts in the
region. It is indeed his profound belief that all possible
efforts must be exerted to attain a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace for all peoples in the Middle East,
consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions.

