Mrs. Cedano (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. In hearing about the growing deterioration of the situation in Yemen, we share the immense concern they have expressed today. Hostilities are increasing, and the civilian population, especially women and children, continue to be the innocent victims of indiscriminate attacks. In addition, forced disappearances and sexual violence and torture continue to be a common practice during the conflict. The repression of journalists, media collaborators and human rights defenders is increasing, hindering their ability to report onviolations of international humanitarian and human rights law - information that can ultimately help to protect the civilian population. This is all very alarming, and the bleak picture on the horizon is further marred by a lack of accountability. There is a dearth of concrete legal procedures to hold perpetrators accountable and provide remedies to victims. The absence of the rule of law increases the number of violations, thus perpetuating a vicious circle. The suffering of the people of Yemen has been exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic and the unsustainable economic situation and further worsened by fuel shortages, especially in the north of the country. We urge all parties to work constructively with the Special Envoy to find an immediate solution to this situation. Even more threats are on the horizon, such as the risk posed by the lack of access to the FSO SAFER tanker and the imminent closure of humanitarian assistance programmes due to lack of funds, which could lead to a famine situation by the end of this year, as Mr. Lowcock has already said. According to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, two years after the international community mobilized to prevent a famine in Yemen, similar conditions are now emerging, worsening key indicators beyond the levels seen in October 2018. Intensified conflict and limited access to affected areas also undermine efforts to control desert locusts, further aggravating food insecurity not only in Yemen but in nearby countries. Overall, food insecurity has increased by 56 per cent since the conflict intensified in 2015, and severe acute malnutrition among children has increased by 150 per cent. This situation is affecting at least 8 million people, some of whom are no longer receiving assistance or are receiving much less than what they were receiving before. After five years of conflict, neither side can claim victory. On the contrary, Yemen has been torn apart, and its people are suffering the consequences. There is no military solution to this war. Only a political agreement can lead the way. That is why we urge all parties to move without delay towards the adoption of the joint declaration proposed by the Special Envoy as the gateway to a definitive solution to this horrible conflict.
