Mr. Gaspar Martins: First of all, Sir, I would
like to say that this is a major occasion: it is likely to
be the final day of meetings under your presidency and
with the participation of the outgoing members.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me
to brief the Council on the activities of the Ad Hoc
Working Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution
in Africa. Your presidency of the Security Council
coincides with the end of the Angolan mandate on the
Council and our chairmanship of the Working Group.
May I express, through you, my delegation's
appreciation for the excellent working relations that
have existed among all delegations on the Council in
our collective search for enduring peace and stability,
particularly in Africa.

I am particularly grateful for their invaluable
contributions towards advancing the objectives of the
Ad Hoc Working Group. It is my delegation's belief
that the Group will continue to benefit from the rich
and valuable experiences of all.

Members of the Council will recall that the Ad
Hoc Working Group issued a detailed interim report on
its activities, dated 18 December 2003 and circulated
as a document of the Council under the symbol
S/2003/1188. A final report has been sent to you,
Mr. President, and will be circulated as a document of
the Council. Photocopies of the report have been
distributed to members.

My statement will highlight some aspects of that
report.

Regarding conflict prevention and resolution, the
Group has carried out actions aimed at examining
regional and cross-conflict issues. In that regard, the
Group held meetings on the Security Council missions
to Africa and on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with special emphasis on the
enhancement of the United Nations role. The Group is
particularly pleased with the reinforced role of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as decided by the
Security Council. Moreover, the holding of the first
international conference of the Great Lakes region
represents an important step forward in meeting the
concerns raised by the members of the Group.

In order to implement effectively its timetable for
action and hear varying points of view on issues of
interest to the Group and to the Security Council, the
Ad Hoc Working Group took advantage of the informal
nature of its meetings by involving non-Council
members in its deliberations.

In that connection, the Group held a roundtable
discussion with the International Peace Academy on
constraints, challenges and opportunities in resolving
conflicts, during which participants had a useful
exchange of views on the Sudan, Somalia, Guinea-
Bissau and the role of the Council in preventing
conflicts in Africa. Under the theme of regional and
international norms on unconstitutional regime changes
in Africa, the participants reflected on the proposal of
the Secretary-General inviting the international
community to consider how to deal with post-conflict
situations in which Governments, although
democratically elected, defy constitutional order and
flout basic practices of governance, thus becoming an
added source of instability. I would like to thank the
International Peace Academy for making it possible to
hold that important event. It is my conviction that the
Group will continue that experience with the Academy
and other relevant institutions.

In its paper on post-conflict recovery in Africa,
the World Bank states that because of their very nature,
African conflicts have become a development issue.
Taking that into account, especially given the
magnitude of the problem, no single institution can
address that challenge on its own.

The Security Council has reaffirmed the
importance of strengthening its cooperation and
interaction with the Economic and Social Council,
given that economic rehabilitation and reconstruction
constitute important elements in the long-term
development of post-conflict societies and in the
maintenance of peace.

The Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group
and the Economic and Social Council's advisory
groups on countries emerging from conflict, for
Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, have been instrumental in
materializing cooperation between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council.

At its historic meeting in Nairobi last month, the
Security Council adopted a presidential statement on
its institutional relationship with the African Union. In
the statement, the Council invited the Secretary-
General to explore, in close cooperation with the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, new
means of cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union, especially taking into consideration
the expanded mandate and the new organs of the
African Union.

To that end, the Group can play a pivotal role in
enhancing cooperation between the Security Council
and the newly established Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, bearing in mind that conflict
prevention, management and resolution in Africa must
be a truly complementary effort by Africans and their
international partners.

I take this opportunity to underline the active
participation in the Group's meetings of the
representatives of the Chairmanship of the African
Union, the office of the Permanent Observer of the
African Union in New York and the Department of
Political Affairs, mainly from its divisions dealing with
Africa. I express appreciation to those countries and
institutions that attended the Group's meetings and
stress once more the role played in the establishment of
the Group by the delegation of Mauritius when it was a
member of the Council.

As Angola ends its mandate on the Security
Council, it is our hope, as Chairman of the Group, that
the Group will continue to monitor implementation of
recommendations and resolutions concerning conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa, in conformity with
its mandate.

Three years after its establishment, the Ad Hoc
Working Group should reflect on how it can better
implement its mandate effectively. In that connection,
the Group should continue to develop partnerships with
other institutions by involving non-Council members
and by making relevant recommendations to the
Council based on those partnerships.

There is need for reflection on the future status of
the Ad Hoc Working Group within the Security
Council in order to respond to new trends in the search
for solutions to African conflicts, including
cooperation with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.

As a general observation, the Council's current
practice of assessing the work of the Working Groups
when their Chairmanships leave the Security Council
deserves reassessment. As a final recommendation, it
would be useful for Working Groups to present mid-
term reports on their activities, which, together with
the assessment of the members of the Council, could
help to identify areas for improvement in the work of
the Working Groups.

Finally, I would like to thank all members of the
Council for the spirit of cooperation they demonstrated
during our mandate and thank the Secretariat for their
invaluable support.

I thank you, Mr. President, and wish you success
in your future endeavours, and I wish all a happy New
Year.

