Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the initiative of the Chinese
delegation to lead discussions on the most topical
aspect of fighting terrorism in the framework of an
open debate. We believe that it is very timely.

Right now, with the fight against terrorism in
Syria and Iraq in full swing, there is a clearer picture
of the whole range of issues facing international
counter-terrorism cooperation. We call for a frank and
open discussion of those issues and a determination
of where the capacities for their resolution lie. The
steadily increasing activities of terrorist organizations
is at the centre Council's attention. Resolutions 2178
(2014), 2199 (2015) and 2253 (2015) adapted United
Nations mechanisms to the most recent threats
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and affiliated groups. The
obligation of Governments in the implementation of
sanctions regimes and in the suppression of illicit flows
of financing and human resources to terrorists was
stressed.

At the same time, despite the declared convergence
of positions and the existence of necessary tools for the
Security Council, in practice, combatting international
terrorism is far from ideal. The reasons lie largely in
the unprecedented spread of that scourge in the Middle
East and North Africa. In that region, carrying out
external geopolitical schemes, accompanied by gross
interference in the internal affairs of its States, led to
an erosion of Government institutions and pumping
resources into opposition forces and the uncontrolled
spread of weapons and ammunition. It was triggered
by an unprecedented surge in radicalization of local
populations. Several countries are ready to use terrorists
and extremists as a means of pressuring legitimate
Governments, and double standards in appraising the
activities of radicals have in the last analysis led to an
outburst of groups such as ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra.
These double standards are, unfortunately, obvious
in the implementation of counter-terrorism decisions
taken by the Security Council.

The largest portion of oil products, artefacts and
other items exported by ISIL from the territories it
controls continues to be sold through Turkey, owing to
its complacency or inaction. Turkey's borders with Iraq
and especially with Syria are the main transit routes for
foreign terrorists fighters and weapons, most of which
fall into the hands of the terrorists. In that regard, we
believe it is relevant, in the name of counter-terrorism,
to consider closing the Turkish-Syrian border. We
might also want to consider levying a comprehensive
economic and trade embargo against ISIL.

If Turkey believes that it is doing everything
necessary to curtail the flows of supplies to terrorists,
that could be corroborated by independent monitors. We
call on the Turkish Government to invite international
observers to the Syrian border and the Ceyhan port, on
a voluntary basis, for that purpose. To date, we have not
seen any explanation for the bad-faith implementation
by Turkey of its obligations under Security Council
resolutions, other than Ankara's desire to carry out its
own agenda in Syria and Iraq.

In future joint work, we need to take into account
the specifics ofterrorist threats, especially as they have
taken shape in recent years. In that regard, we would
necessarily underscore the threat of chemical terrorism.
Fighters from various radical groups, as recently as
this year, have used toxic chemical agents on several
occasions. There is a known case of ISIL having used
mustard gas in Deir ez-Zor.

Russia has long expressed concern that terrorist
groups, which are rampant in the Middle East, have
obtained a formidable capacity to wage war using
toxic substances. We believe that the Council has
yet to exhaust all of its options to combat that threat.
Yesterday, with our Chinese partners, we circulated a
draft resolution to the Security Council, clarifying the
counter-terrorism portion of the mandate of the joint
investigative mechanism of the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
for incidents involving the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, pursuant to resolution 2235 (2015). We hope that
there will be a speedy adoption of the draft resolution
by the Council.

As of now, the main phase of the operations of
Russian air forces against ISIL and other terrorist
groups in Syrian territory has been completed. The
objectives of the mission set out for the forces have been
carried out successfully. The terrorists have suffered
considerable damage and have been removed from a
number of areas in the country. A striking symbol of
ISIL's retreat was the liberation of the ancient city of
Palmyra by Syrian forces, with Russian support.

However, to fully defeat the terrorists, much
remains to be done. We once again call for strengthening
of coordination and cooperation among States to defeat
ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and affiliated groups. That
is necessary and should be done by dispensing with
double standards, with the United Nations playing a
central coordinating role and on the sound footing of
international law.
I necessarily have to comment on the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine. Unfortunately,
the Ukrainian delegation is once again using the
Council to diffuse its anti-Russian propaganda.
I believe that several of the statements made are
absolutely scandalous. The Security Council does
not benefit from that, and neither does the image of
Ukrainian diplomacy. There is a need to stick to the
agenda, which today does not contain an item on the
settlement of the situation in Ukraine. The full-scale
hostilities were begun in 2014 against the civilians in
the eastern part of the country by the Kyiv politicians
who came to power after a bloody coup d'etat, and they
continue to try to justify their actions unsuccessfully.

