Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing
this morning.

It is crucial that we uphold the commitment to full
compliance with the provisions of the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and ensure full compliance with all efforts
aimed at promoting peace and stability for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In that regard, Uruguay supports the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We also support the need to respect
the rule of law in all actions of political leaders in the
country.

We note with concern that the forty-ninth report
of the High Representative for Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/20l6/395, annex) indicates that little progress has
been made in achieving the five objectives and two
conditions still pending, as established by the Steering
Board, that are required for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative - known as the 5+2
agenda. In that connection, we urge that the process
move forward under more favourable conditions in the
coming months so that the 5+2 agenda can be fully
implemented through compromise by all parties.

Uruguay rejects all terrorist attacks, such as took
place in Rajlovac, on the outskirts of Sarajevo, on
18 November 2015, which cost the lives of two soldiers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are also concerned
about continuing incidents that risk undermining
inter-ethnic relations.

We also take note of positive developments. We
welcome the fact that the Ministry of Defence and the
Ministry for Foreign Trade and Economic Relations
oversaw the full implementation of their obligations
flowing from the Subregional Arms Control
Agreement, in line with article IV, annex 1-B of the
Dayton Peace Accord. We also welcome the fact that
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has adopted
decisions on the destruction of certain munitions and
explosive devices that have been stored in military
facilities. We particularly highlight the ratification of
the border demarcation agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Montenegro, especially as this is the
first such agreement to be ratified with a neighbouring
country. We hope that during 2016 Bosnia and
Herzegovina will continue along this course of positive
developments, thus generating trust in stability.

Uruguay believes that the presence of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea is a
guarantee for the political and security stability of the
country. It is essential that the authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina continue to cooperate fully with the
Office of the High Representative until the end of his
mandate, commensurate with the requirements of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. Uruguay hopes to see a stable
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which all communities can
coexist peacefully and harmoniously.

