Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to warmly thank Ambassador Dato Ramlan
Bin Ibrahim and the entire Malaysian team for all the
work accomplished in June. You, Sir, have managed the
agenda of a very busy and productive month in New
York outstandingly. In particular, I will remember
the excellent debate organized on children in armed
conflict, marked by the adoption of the important
resolution 2225 (2015). We also had significant
discussions on peacebuilding, in various formats, both
formal and informal.

I would like first to touch upon two African
questions. The first, that of Mali, is encouraging; the
other, that of Burundi, continues to worry us.

June marked a historic step taken forward for Mali
with the signing of the Bamako Peace Agreement by
all concerned parties. The Council took note of that in
the adoption of resolution 2227 (2015). That important
resolution gives the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
a new mandate to support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in all its aspects, in particular
security: and to support the cantonment, disarmament
and reintegration of former combatants, and the
redeployment of Malian armed forces in the north,
in the framework of the mechanisms contained in the
agreement.

The full and genuine implementation of the
Agreement by its signatories will be key to guaranteeing
peace and solidifying it. The Council made clear that it
will closely follow the implementation of the Agreement
and that those who would oppose its implementation
will have to bear the consequences. Thus, by giving the
Mission the task of supporting the Peace Agreement,
the Security Council recalled the first duty of the Blue
Helmets in Mali: helping Mali move towards a lasting
peace, in support of the Ouagadougou Agreement
during the establishment of MINUSMA and in support
of the Bamako Agreement now.

While Mali has embarked on a positive momentum,
that has not been the case in Burundi, which has entered
a tense period since President Nkurunziza's declaration
of his candidacy for a third term. In its press release of
13 June, the African Union established a framework for
a new dialogue to settle the political crisis in a long-
1asting fashion. The press release called, in particular,
for the electoral timetable to be agreed upon by the
parties. It also set a number of conditions to be met
before the holding of elections - such as the reopening
of media outlets, the release of those arrested during
protests and the disarmament of groups of young people
affiliated in particular with political parties.

In several press releases, the international mediation
team and the Secretary-General have indicated that they
felt that conditions have not been met at this stage for
the holding of free, credible, transparent and inclusive
elections. They called for a further postponement of
elections. That request we know was not accepted by
the Government of Burundi, which cited constitutional
constraints.

Unilaterally, the Government held communal and
legislative elections yesterday, in a tense atmosphere.
The opposition boycotted them. The strict control
of dissenting neighbourhoods by the police since the
beginning of June has curtailed demonstrations against
a third term. The Government seems determined to hold
presidential elections on 15 July and Pierre Nkurunziza
remains determined to maintain his candidacy. The
situation thus remains volatile and unpredictable. With
the support of the Council, international mediation
is continuing its efforts to find a common ground for
presidential elections. We are launching a heartfelt
appeal to all parties, in particular the Burundian
authorities, to demonstrate a spirit of dialogue and
compromise in the country's higher interests.

Those two situations remind us how much the
United Nations needs to improve its effectiveness in
both prevention and crisis management. Specifically,
the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
chaired by Jose Ramos-Horta, delivered its report to
the Secretary-General on 17 June. The report contains
around a hundred recommendations of all kinds:
doctrinal ones dealing with political processes, the
protection of civilians, the use of force, preventive
diplomacy, for example; and recommendations on
the functioning of peacekeeping operations, i.e.
regarding chains of command, the engagement of
troop-contributing countries, equipment, training, as
well as on the internal organization of the Secretariat,
in particular as pertains to strengthening analysis and
planning or mainstreaming logistical support.

The report should now give rise to work on the
part of the Secretary-General, who will propose an
implementation report. That should be coordinated
with Member States. The result will be presented at
the next General Assembly, and the recommendations,
addressed to the Security Council, the Secretariat,
troop-contributing countries and all players in the
peacekeeping arena, will, once approved, be gradually
implemented thereafter. We have high expectations
because through peacekeeping missions and their
ability to adapt to changing conditions, the image of
the United Nations, especially the relevance of the work
of our Organization, are at stake.

I will conclude my statement by briefly touching
on the Middle East. Consultations this month have
once again revealed the need for specific initiatives
for a resumption of the peace process. We cannot just
limit ourselves to calling upon the parties to resume
negotiations. In the light of the tensions and given
the prospects of a two-State solution moving further
away, France has proposed an international two-track
approach.
The priority here is to create an international
support group. Minister Fabius called it the "Quartet
plus", which would include, in addition to the current
members, the permanent members of the Council
and some countries in the region and the European
Union. Next, we will have to work for the adoption
of a resolution with parameters acceptable to all. A
resolution will only be meaningful if it is based on
consensus and would bring players to the negotiating
table again. We will therefore work in New York and in
the capitals to move forward on such an approach.

In Syria, the past weeks have seen the deadliest toll
since the conflict began. The number of indiscriminate
attacks against civilians has reached an all-time high.
The regime has stepped up attacks with barrel bombs. At
the same time, the Daesh and Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorist
groups have continued their onward march and targeted
civilians. Those attacks are intolerable and run counter
to international humanitarian law and Security Council
resolutions. Working with Spain, France has sought to
highlight the suffering of civilians and undertake an
approach to raise international awareness regarding
the gravity of those atrocities. Over the month of July,
we will be working with all delegations in the Council
to create a course of action that will be effective in
combating those indiscriminate attacks.

We have three priorities in Syria: seeking a political
solution, protecting civilians and combating terrorism.
We are convinced that those priorities are linked and
are complementary. As Special Envoy de Mistura
has recalled, ultimately, only a political solution will
guarantee Syrians stability and security. And there can
be no effective response to terrorism if we do not find a
solution that meets the aspirations of the Syrian people,
while sidestepping chaos. That is a very difficult path,
but one that France finds it necessary to promote
tirelessly.

We should not forget that this past month was
darkened by heinous terrorist attacks hitting several
countries, including France and several other members
of the Security Council. Our determination to combat
the scourges of terrorism and radicalism is total. More
than ever, the unity of the Council is necessary to stop
the fanatics.
Finally, I would like to thank the Malaysian
presidency and wish every success to New Zealand,
which can count on our full support.

