Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Keita for her briefing.

Every member of the Council is familiar with the
horrifying statistics being produced by the violence in
South Sudan. Millions of South Sudanese are facing
famine and have been driven from their homes. Tens
of thousands are dead, and thousands of children have
been forced into conflict as child soldiers. I, too, knew
these statistics before I travelled to South Sudan in
October, but that knowledge did not prepare me for the
suffering that I saw there. I saw a civilian population
that is deeply traumatized by the violence that it has
experienced and a population that is unacceptably
vulnerable to further violence.

I saw families living under tarps on mud floors. I
lost count of the number of women who told me they
had been raped, often repeatedly. I heard more stories
of husbands being shot and babies being taken and
killed than anyone should ever hear.

But maybe the most disturbing thing I saw was the
seed of hate being planted in future generations. In the
refugee camps, children roam around, malnourished
and uneducated. Young boys are traumatized and bored,
but soon they will be adults and will be uneducated,
untrained and resentful of the conditions they have
been living in. If we do not do something about the way
in which South Sudanese kids are being raised, we will
be dealing with them as adults on the battlefield.

I took pictures of these children and showed them
to President Kiir when we met. I told him that he could
not deny what the pictures represented. To his credit,
he did not try to deny it. But that is not enough. It was
not then, and it is not now. Simply acknowledging the
problem is not enough; President Kiir must act.

It is the Government that bears the primary
responsibility for the killing, raping and torturing in
South Sudan, and it is the Government that bears the
primary responsibility for ending the violence, easing
the suffering and saving future generations of South
Sudanese. President Kiir said all the right things in our
meeting; he made promises that he has made before.
But now things are different, and I told him so. Going
forward, the United States will judge President Kiir
and his Government by their actions, not their words,
and the actions needed are clear.

There is a way to end the violence in South Sudan.
As a first step, President Kiir needs to adhere to the
ceasefires he has declared many times. No more
promises; we need action.

There is a way to reinvigorate the peace process in
South Sudan. The country's leaders, both Government
and opposition, must take responsibility and seize
the opportunity presented by the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development. No more pointing fingers;
the process must be inclusive. The parties must be
willing to reconsider the parts ofthe 2015 Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
that are not working, and the leaders must now lead.

And there is a way to provide for and protect
innocent civilians in South Sudan. It is not complicated;
it is actually very simple. President Kiir and his
Government must end the violence and allow the
United Nations peacekeeping mission in South Sudan
to do its job.

Every month we continue to receive a report that
shows restrictions being placed on the peacekeeping
force. Government security forces stop peacekeeping
patrols at checkpoints, ask for documents that are not
required and deny personnel of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) entry into South
Sudan, in violation of the status-of-forces agreement.
Every month we see reports detailing how peacekeeping
personnel are being deliberately and repeatedly
harassed, threatened and even physically assaulted by
Government forces.

The Government has stooped so low as to impede
peacekeepers from providing water to their own
personnel and the people they are supposed to protect.
It is petty, it is cruel and it must end. Words are no
longer sufficient. The United States is prepared to
pursue additional measures against the Government
or any party, for that matter, if they do not act to end
the violence and ease the suffering in South Sudan.
That means putting down their weapons, coming to the
negotiating table through the high-level revitalization
forum and ending the harassment and obstruction of
UNMISS and other organizations that are trying to
help the South Sudanese people.

President Kiir's recent order requiring free and
unhindered access for humanitarian groups in South
Sudan was a good sign, and a welcome Sign. We
encourage him to follow through on his commitment,
and, to help encourage him, we make this commitment
in return: we will be watching. We are not interested
in one-time concessions or a stop-and-go approach to
allowing humanitarian access in South Sudan. The
South Sudanese need sustained access to food, water
and basic supplies.

We are encouraged by the Government's promise
to provide sustained humanitarian access. Again, only
actions will prove whether this intent is genuine.

In the midst of all the suffering I saw, I was struck
by the hope and the dignity of the people of South
Sudan. They want nothing more than to live normal
lives. They want to be productive and self-sufficient. In
every camp we visited, we asked the children, if there
was one wish they could have come true, what would
it be? In each and every case, they said they wanted to
go to school. Most amazing of all were the mothers.
With all the physical and emotional hardship they have
suffered and the constant fear of being raped, they did
what mothers do. They were still more worried about
their children than they were about themselves. They
see the promise of their young country slipping away.
More importantly, they see their children's futures
being lost to chaos and hate. These mothers' desire for
their children to have a better life should motivate us
to act. It should make us intolerant of more promises
and impatient for results, because these mothers know
better than any of us ever could that time is running out
for the children of South Sudan.

