Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We,
too, thank the Secretary-General's Chef de Cabinet,
Mr. Malloch Brown, for his very insightful report to
the Council.

The United Republic of Tanzania associates itself
with the statements to be made by the Permanent
Representative of South Africa on behalf of the Group
77 and China, and by the Permanent Representative of
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Security Council's interest in the
procurement practices of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), triggered by the
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS), has created some disquiet among the wider
membership of the United Nations, regarding both
substance and the manner in which the issue should be
handled. The premature leakage of the report to the
press was unhelpful and misleading. All of the relevant
organs should have a shared interest and concerns
about the integrity and credibility of the procurement
practices of peacekeeping operations. We believe,
therefore, that there is room for balance and latitude
for cooperation between and among all the principal
organs of our Organization, which can work to promote
their respective mandates and objectives in pursuit of
our common goals.

We share the belief in the importance of having
each organ concentrate on the scope of its mandate in
its day-to-day activities. We also recognize the
importance of establishing close collaboration,
cooperation and complementarity among the various
organs as a way of strengthening the Organization. It is
in our mutual interest to avert misunderstanding,
mistrust and a sense of rivalry. That approach should
underlie the reform process to bring about system-wide
coherence and rationalization.

Much of the work of the United Nations system
does not appear in the headline news; we rarely see any
mention of the numerous day-to-day examples of
fruitful and constructive activities under the auspices
of the United Nations. There is, however, extensive
coverage when we fail or are perceived as having
failed. It is in this context that the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services must be seen.

Indeed, the OIOS report on the management
review of DPKO procurement reveals gross
mismanagement and fraud. Preventing procurement
fraud is good governance. It is in the interests of the
Organization and of the entire membership.
It is, however, noteworthy that the OIOS report
that triggered the current round of concerns was
initiated by the General Assembly. The report itself
makes that clear. It is the General Assembly that
requested the OIOS to conduct a management audit of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and its
procurement practices. It is only fair that the organ that
mandated the report should experience a sense of
dispossession when it is not the first in line to examine
and pronounce itself on the report. The initiatives of
the Security Council and the General Assembly on this
issue should be complementary in addressing the
problems raised by the OIOS report.

The OIOS report and the briefing that we have
heard today raise disturbing issues. They are,
nonetheless, issues that we must face and overcome.
Regrettably, the Organization is too often maligned for
being overly unresponsive to reform and insensitive to
waste, inefficiency and abuse.

Nothing could be further from the truth. The
report of the Office of International Oversight Services
reveals an Organization grappling with overcoming
challenges that face every organization, every
Government and every country, everywhere.

At this critical time when the resources available
to the Organization are so crucial to the
accomplishment of missions and objectives,
individuals who cheat must be identified, stopped and
punished. It is imperative that action be taken to
prevent, deter and prosecute unscrupulous employees,
as well as their collaborators, whose actions rob all of
us of the resources needed to fulfil the various
mandates we set for the Organization and for
ourselves.

The OIOS report calls for urgent action in a
number of specific areas, namely, increased education
of procurement staff on issues relating to conflict of
interest and procurement fraud and enhanced efforts to
detect ethics violations and conflict of interest by
current and former personnel.

We appreciate the issuance of the report at a time
when major reforms are being undertaken within the
Organization. We especially appreciate the fact that the
General Assembly has already started to adopt
measures in response to some of the queries raised in
the report, such as efforts to detect ethics violations
and conflicts of interest on the part of United Nations
personnel.

We believe that in the report on management
reforms to be issued at the end of this month, the
Secretary-General will propose to the General
Assembly further measures for improving the existing
system of procurement in the United Nations. It is in
this regard that the United Republic of Tanzania, in
collaboration with other members of the Group of 77
and China and other Members, will pursue
management reform issues in the United Nations in
order to realize our collective objective to enhance the
effectiveness, efficiency and credibility of the
Organization.

