As we mark 75 years since the founding of the United Nations, we celebrate what has been achieved while reflecting on what we have learned. With the intersecting global crises of the coronavirus disease and climate change impacting in myriad ways our societies, we are once again reminded that our nations and our lives are deeply interlinked, and of the need for coherent and concerted multilateral action to tackle our common problems. The challenges we are facing today are great and complex, driven by unsustainable growth and development, or the devastating interaction of virology and globalization. We must respond to those challenges in a holistic way, taking full account of the complex interconnected reality of our contemporary world. With this in mind, we believe that the Security Council must not simply apply twentieth-century definitions and parameters when addressing threats to peace and security in the twenty-first century. Such an approach, which fails to take account of the wider picture, leads to partial responses and subpar outcomes. The Security Council has a clear mandate under Chapter VII to decide on action with respect to threats to peace. Unfortunately, too often we fail to agree on a common understanding of what constitutes a threat, and this can undermine the Council's ability to take meaningful action. The vicious cycle of conflict is both a driver and result of poverty, food insecurity, inequality and displacement. It is no coincidence that the biggest humanitarian emergencies of our time - in Yemen, the Sahel and Syria - are also home to some of the most protracted conflicts. Responses under Article 39 must take account of these key drivers of conflict. Addressing these drivers, supporting gender equality, promoting and protecting human rights and building resilience in our communities and countries to the impacts of climate change can prevent conflict, including, Mr. President, in Caribbean island communities like your own. By taking full account of these issues, the Council can more effectively contribute to building sustainable peace, using a comprehensive approach to preventing and resolving conflict. We are not suggesting that the Security Council should reinvent itself as a body that focuses on sustainable development or climate change. The United Nations is a complex system, and different parts must rightly lead on different aspects as mandated under the Charter of the United Nations, but, as with any complex system, it is how the different elements function in unison that makes it effective. When the Council meets to consider specific situations or thematic concerns, it cannot do so in a vacuum. Too often, the three pillars of the United Nations work - peace and security, human rights, and development - are portrayed as parallel tracks with no intersection, rather than three columns that together bear the weight of the world's aspirations. Thankfully there are notable examples of when we have collectively overcome this false narrative. The Peacebuilding Commission's success in bridging the gaps between the organs and entities of the United Nations and other international and regional actors is to be commended. The agreement in 2016 of the symbiotic Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262, on sustaining peace "at all stages of conflict and in all its dimensions", was a landmark moment, although its potential has yet to be fully realized. And the agreement in 2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, under Irish and Kenyan stewardship, charts a complex course towards a world transformed through the Sustainable Development Goals, predicated not on a narrow understanding of progress, but on the three dimensions of sustainable development and an acknowledgement of the interplay among our economies, societies and environment. People-centred and responsive action by the Security Council, and by the United Nations system more broadly, can support Governments in their efforts to build social cohesion and address inequality, which can help build and sustain peace. Those efforts can and should contribute to addressing the contemporary challenges we face, be it climate change, a global health pandemic, conflict or humanitarian need, and, vitally, the connections linking them. Ireland, as an incoming member of the Security Council, will not lose sight of this understanding as we seek to support the United Nations collective efforts towards building and sustaining peace.
