Mr. Apakan (Turkey): First of all, let me join my
colleagues in extending our condolences to China after
today's deadly earthquake.

I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing. We fully support the Under-Secretary-
General's efforts. His recent visit to Israel and
Palestine was important in terms of highlighting the
current issues. As Mr. Pascoe stated, efforts to put the
peace process back on track are still under way. The
Quartet statement of 19 March deserves our full
attention and outlines what should be done in the
period ahead. We look forward to the actual start of the
proximity talks and continue to support United States
efforts towards this end. The talks should start as soon
as possible, since the absence of a functioning peace
process is leading to an increasingly precarious
environment in the region.

The negotiations should lead to a comprehensive
peace based on two States, agreed borders based on
those of 1967, Jerusalem as the capital for both States,
and a just settlement for refugees. Relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road
Map and the Arab Peace Initiative provide the required
basis for such an end result. We hope that this time
there will be a chance for peace along these basic lines.

The climate in the region will inevitably have a
direct impact on the success of the talks. Attempting to
change the facts on the ground in order to prejudice the
outcome of the negotiations would yield no result, but
would undermine trust. Therefore, we believe that
Israel must fully and permanently stop its illegal
settlement activities in the occupied territories and
refrain from any unilateral or provocative action,
particularly in East Jerusalem.

Jerusalem is a deeply important issue, not only
for Israelis and Palestinians, but also for Muslims,
Jews and Christians throughout the world. Any attempt
to change the fabric and status of Jerusalem or to take
steps to perpetuate the occupation in defiance of the
relevant Security Council resolutions would pose a
serious threat to stability and peace.

The historical and universal heritage of
Jerusalem, which we are bound to protect and preserve,
represents in itself the values of unity, peace and
harmony. Therefore, instead of being pushed to the
centre of the Middle East conflict, the issue of
Jerusalem should be the inspiration leading the way
towards lasting settlement and cooperation.

The military escalation in the West Bank is also a
cause for serious concern and places the progress made
by the Palestinian Authority in State-building in
jeopardy. At this stage, the focus should be on
empowering the Palestinian Authority. Palestinians
should be able to use more of their land and to enjoy
their fundamental rights. However, restrictions
continue to delay Palestinian economic and social
development. In particular, the new military order
enabling the occupying forces to detain, imprison and
deport Palestinians from the West Bank cannot
contribute to Palestinian State-building and mutual
trust, let alone lasting peace in the region. We call on
Israel to revise these policies, which contradict the
relevant Security Council decisions.

Disunity on the Palestinian side also continues to
be of major concern. It not only hinders the
maintenance of a functional socio-political system in
Palestine, but impedes the resumption of the peace
process. We will continue to urge the Palestinian
factions to resolve their differences.

Despite certain steps by the Israeli side, the
situation in Gaza remains mostly unchanged. The siege
continues, with Palestinians inside continuing to suffer
without proper housing, education, infrastructure, job
opportunities or health services. The situation is neither
acceptable nor sustainable. The recent escalation along
the borders of Gaza showed once again that, so long as
the wounds of this humanitarian tragedy are left open,
there can be no mutual confidence or sense of stability
in the area. The full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) holds the key to security and stability in the
region. A return to normal life in Gaza and the onset of
reconstruction and regular economic activity would
have a very positive impact on the overall climate in
the region.

We agree with the Secretary-General that there is
no alternative to negotiations for a comprehensive and
just settlement, and no alternative to addressing all of
the core issues necessary to a two-State solution. At
this critical stage, there is also no alternative but to
focus on the political process, build trust, renounce
violence and push forward with determination and
good will for a comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.

