Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Mr. President, we would like to thank you
and your delegation for organizing this open debate
and to congratulate you on the way in which you are
leading the Security Council's debates during the
month of February. We would also like to welcome
Mr. Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the Palestinian Authority.

As we all know, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
at the core of the Middle East peace process today.
That is why, now more than ever before, we must
attach priority to this subject before it is too late. Over
the past few years, the Quartet, through the Road Map
has been leading this process, defining what the final
objective of the peace process should be and what road
the parties should take to reach it. In spite of the efforts
made since 2002, the objective of two States living
side by side in peace and security continues to be as
elusive as before.

The process has stalled in its first phase. We
believe that if the Quartet does not involve itself more
actively in the evaluation and the implementation of
the revised Road Map and does not play a more
proactive role in the peace process, it will become a
dispensable mechanism, and the United Nations will
have failed once more in the Middle East peace
process.

However, we would like to stress that the parties
directly involved bear the main responsibility for the
stalemate in the peace process. They cannot blame the
United Nations. It is the responsibility of the
Palestinian Authority to maintain peace and order in
Gaza, to prevent rocket attacks against Israel,
immediately free the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit,
reform their institutions, eradicate corruption and
combat extremism.

Although we support the recent agreement
between President Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas leader
Khaled Mashal to create a unity government - and we
wish them success in its administration - we believe
that their authorities must recognize the right of Israel
to exist, accept previous agreements signed by the
Palestinian Authority and renounce violence.

As for the Israelis, the practices of expansion of
settlements, the construction of the separation wall on
the West Bank, the policy of closures and restriction of
movement, extrajudicial assassinations, excessive use
of force and arbitrary arrest of Palestinian officials and
legislators do not contribute to generating hope in the
Palestinian population for the future. As a consequence
of such practices, the humanitarian crisis in Gaza has
deepened, worsening the precarious living conditions
of the Palestinian population.

Argentina would like to reiterate that the only
path is that of peace negotiations on the basis of
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of
reference and the principle of land for peace. The
international community, and especially the Quartet
and the Security Council, must assume a more active
role in helping the parties resume negotiations and put
an end to the vicious circle of death and retaliation that
has beset the Middle East. In this regard, we welcome
the next conference, planned for later in February.

With regard to Lebanon, we would like first of all
to condemn today's attacks north of Beirut and to
express our condolences to the families of the victims.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), we cannot but express our concern at the
recent violence along the Blue Line between Lebanon
and Israel. Both the detonation of explosives along the
Blue Line by the Israel Defense Force at the beginning
of February - explosives suspected to have been
recently placed there by Hizbollah - and the exchange
of fire between the Lebanese Armed Forces and the
Israel Defense Force on 8 February in the vicinity of
Maroun al-Ras demonstrate the fragility of peace in
that country. We repeat that the arms embargo
established in resolution 1701 (2006) must be
respected not only by the parties but also by all States,
be they neighbours or not. We also consider it essential
that the two Israeli soldiers captured by Hizbollah in
July 2006 be freed.

Finally, we believe that another fundamental
ingredient in the search for peace is the end of the
Israeli occupation of the Golan Heights and the return
of that territory to Syria in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as through Syria's
adoption of policies that demonstrate its commitment
to peace and stability in the region.

Although this debate has historically focused on
trying to give momentum to the peace process between
Palestinians, Lebanese, Syrians and Israelis, the
gloomy prospects for the Middle East as a whole as
well as for neighbouring and nearby countries such as
Iraq and Iran mean that the Arab-Israeli conflict now
has an additional dimension that facilitates,
unfortunately, international terrorist activity, for
example that of Al-Qaida, and endangers peace in all
countries of the region.

We believe that all these conflicts are interrelated
and reinforce each other. That is why we call for
greater Security Council activity and courage on the
part of all parties involved to sit down at the
negotiating table, bearing in mind that only a just peace
that reflects all the interests of all the parties will be
sustainable in the future. That should be objective of
the Security Council and of our Organization.

