Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-
Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs for her briefing.

Early yesterday morning, Israel, the occupying
Power, began demolishing buildings in Wadi
Al-Hummus in the village of Sur Bahir in East
Jerusalem, which contain numerous apartments,
displacing many Palestinian families. The operations
remain ongoing under the protection of Israeli soldiers.
Ajoint statement was issued by Mr. Jamie McGoldrick,
United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator for the
occupied Palestinian territory, Ms. Gwyn Lewis,
Director of Operations of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and Mr. James Heenan, Head of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in the occupied Palestinian territory, in which they
stressed the dramatic consequences of these illegal
actions, but begged the question as to what makes
Israel, the occupying Power, adopt policies that violate
international law and Security Council resolutions.
The answer is the absence of accountability and the
fact that Israel disregards the United Nations and the
international community's response. The absence of
Israel's accountability for its actions is the underlying
cause of the deterioration of the situation in the
occupied territories. I will therefore focus on the issue
of the absence of Israel's accountability.

First, the absence of accountability has led the
occupying Power to continue its expansionist settlement
activities and practices, including the seizure of land by
force, the confiscation of Palestinian homes and forcible
displacements, which have reached their highest level
in recent years, in blatant Violation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016).

Second, in the absence of an effective and robust
accountability mechanism, such Israeli practices are
leading to increased Violence and posing a threat to
civilian lives. Raids and illegal detentions continue,
as well as the indefinite imprisonment of detainees
without formal charges.

Third, the absence of accountability is emboldening
Israel and causing it to continue its illegal practices in the
occupied territories, in particular in occupied Al-Quds
Al Sharif, where the goal is to erase its religious and
historic identity and end the Palestinian presence there
by means of Israeli activities and repeated raids on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, guarded by the Israeli army, as well
as court-authorized practices such as the demolition
of buildings and forced evictions, as in the case of the
village of Sur Baher.

Fourth, the absence of accountability has made
it easy for Israel to enjoy impunity and continue its
violations of international law by means of the relentless
use of military measures. We therefore reject such
unprecedented, premeditated and provocative behaviour
by Israel, which aims to prolong the occupation and
undermine the prospects for a two-State solution.

Fifth, the absence of accountability and Israel's
refusal to implement resolution 1860 (2009) have led to
a 13-year blockade on Gaza. The humanitarian situation
in Gaza is precarious. Its economy is undergoing
profound stagnation. Levels of unemployment have
reached 50 per cent and higher, while restrictions
are preventing the people of Gaza from earning their
livelihoods and undermining opportunities for them
to receive adequate health care, in particular those
wounded in the peaceful Great March of Return.

Sixth, under international humanitarian law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, the Israeli authorities
have an ongoing obligation to implement measures
that best serve the people under occupation. Israel,
however, violates those obligations and is exploiting
an environment of impunity, riding roughshod over its
responsibilities as an occupying Power. It continues
to take unilateral measures, the most recent of which
were the rejection of the renewal of the Temporary
International Presence in Hebron and its decision to
withhold a portion of Palestinian customs revenues.
We therefore call on Israel to respect its obligations and
bilateral agreements with the Palestinian Authority.

Seventh, with regard to the financial challenges
facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), we call
for enabling UNRWA to continue its role in providing
services to refugees in the areas of education, health
and social services. It is also important to continue to
provide the necessary financial support to UNRWA.
The State of Kuwait will remain among the Agency's
main partners. Our voluntary contributions over the
past four years have amounted to $113 million.

In the absence of accountability for daily and
systematic Israeli violations within the occupied
Palestinian territories and in the light of Israel's
manipulation of that situation so that it can deny the
Palestinians their legitimate rights and usurp and pillage
their land and assets, the prospects for achieving a just
and lasting peace in the region are being undermined.
It is therefore urgent to stop acting as if the rights of
the Palestinian people are not covered by international
laws and norms.

As members of the Council, we have a particular
responsibility to implement its resolutions and end
the violations of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations perpetrated by Israel, the
occupying Power.

In conclusion, we are committed to the Arab, Islamic
and international positions, according to which peace is
the strategic choice and a lasting and comprehensive
solution is underpinned by parameters such as relevant
Security Council resolutions, the principle of land

for peace, the Quartet road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and should be implemented in a manner that
will allow Palestinians to enjoy their legitimate political
rights and establish their independent State within their
own territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

