The President: The Security Council has agreed
in prior consultations to extend invitations, under
rule 37 of its provisional rules of procedure, to the
representatives of Algeria, Angola, Botswana, Burundi,
Central African Republic, C6te d'Ivoire, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Japan, Liberia, Nigeria,
Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovenia,
Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Uganda, United Republic
of Tanzania and Zambia, and, under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure, to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union and the Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. Members of
the Council have before them the following documents:
a letter dated 8 April 2008 from South Africa
transmitting a concept paper for this meeting
(5/2008/229); a report of the Secretary-General on the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security
(8/2008/ 186), and the report of the Secretary-General
on conflict prevention, particularly in Africa
(8/2008/18).

I shall now make some opening remarks and a
statement in my national capacity.
When we assumed the presidency of the Security
Council last year, we initiated discussions on the need
to examine the best possible ways of strengthening the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international peace
and security. We especially focused on the African
Union, given that most of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations are in Africa.

We have therefore convened this debate of the
Security Council to discuss this matter once more and
to give a further opportunity, especially to African
countries, to share their experiences in regard to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Your high-level
attendance of this meeting confirms our shared view of
the timeliness of this engagement. We do hope that at
the end of this debate we will be able to adopt concrete
measures to strengthen the relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in
particular, the African Union.

The African Union has shown its commitment to
resolving African conflicts. The operationalization of
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
continental early warning systems, post-conflict
reconstruction and development, the Panel of the Wise
and the African Standby Force are clear indications of
this commitment and the basic architecture for
addressing peace and security issues on the continent.

However, the availability of the necessary and
predictable resources remains the most important
constraint that limits Africa's capacity to give effect to
these commitments and help resolve its own conflicts.

The issue of the funding of regional peacekeeping
operations is central to defining and streamlining the
relationship between the United Nations and African
Union. We therefore welcome the proposal of the
Secretary-General to establish an African Union/United
Nations panel of distinguished persons to consider in
depth the modalities of financing and supporting in
other ways the peacekeeping operations undertaken by
regional organizations.

After all, when the African Union addresses
peace and security matters, it does so on behalf of the
wider international community. Therefore, today's
debate should give a clear indication as to the kind of
mechanisms and processes that should be put in place
to achieve this objective.
08-30672
Similar attention has to be paid to establishing an
effective partnership between the United Nations,
especially the Security Council, and the African Union
Peace and Security Council. In fact, the presence in
this Chamber of the ambassadors of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, who will have a joint
meeting with their United Nations counterparts, is a
significant step towards strengthening the relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations.

At the same time, we need a comprehensive
review of the experience of both the United Nations
and the host countries with respect to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. Clearly, this is necessary if we
are to improve the effectiveness of these missions. The
surge in peacekeeping operations over the years and
the increasing role of regional organizations in both
conflict resolution and managing post-conflict
situations has necessitated such a dialogue.

The challenges of Africa are multidimensional
and cannot be addressed in isolation, one from the
other. Matters of conflict prevention, conflict
resolution and peacekeeping are inextricably linked to
the achievement of sustainable social and economic
development.

Over the past decade, there has been discernible
progress with respect to peace, security, democracy and
development in Africa. To consolidate these
achievements, it is critical that we make an additional
effort, effectively and urgently, to address the conflict
or post-conflict situations already on the shared agenda
of the United Nations and the African Union.

Our peacemaking efforts on the African continent
have shown us that the resolution of conflicts requires
an approach that places the views and efforts of the
affected country and its people at the centre of the
search for a peaceful solution, thus obliging the
international community to intervene as a partner in
support of the national effort.

I sincerely hope that our deliberations will assist
us to achieve the objectives of this debate.

I shall now resume my duties as President of the
Council. I now give the floor to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who will
introduce the two reports before the Council.

