Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia - and the associated country Cyprus, as well as
the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) country
member of the European Economic Area, Norway, align
themselves with this statement.

The International Tribunal for Rwanda was established
by the Security Council in resolution 955 (1994) with the
aim of putting an end to the impunity of persons
responsible for genocide and other serious violations of
humanitarian law committed in Rwanda in 1994. The
establishment of the Tribunal reflected the will of the
international community that, by the prosecution of the
perpetrators of these grave crimes, their repetition should
be prevented and that justice should be seen to prevail.

The European Union has cooperated closely with the
Tribunal through the arrest and transfer of suspects to the
Tribunal, through voluntary contributions to the Trust
Fund in surplus of assessed contributions and through the
provision of staff to the Tribunal. The European Union
reiterates its strong support for the Rwanda Tribunal as it
discharges its difficult and important mandate, which is
essential for national reconciliation and the prevention of
future conflicts.

In paragraph 7 of resolution 955 (1994), the Council
agreed that it would consider increasing the number of
judges and Trial Chambers of the Tribunal if it became
necessary. In this context, the European Union
emphasizes the importance of respecting the human rights
of the individual and the need to try those accused of
crimes within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal without
undue delay. Justice delayed is justice denied. We have
therefore noted with great concern the current situation
with regard to the number of accused persons in pre-trial
detention in the Tribunal's prison quarters in Arusha. Of
the 25 accused persons currently detained, 21 are in pre-
trial detention and five have been detained awaiting their
trial for almost three years. We also note that it is
possible that other accused persons, and that still others
against whom charges have not yet been filed, may in the
future join those currently detained in Arusha. In these
circumstances, the European Union believes that it is now
important to create a third Trial Chamber for the
International Tribunal for Rwanda, consisting of three
judges, in order that the administration of justice by the
Tribunal can be accelerated and so that those in custody
can be brought swiftly to trial.

At the same time, the European Union reiterates its
position that, in order to administer justice promptly and
fairly, the Tribunal must be able to function efficiently.
We are pleased to recall that the Office of Internal
Oversight Services has recently reported significant
improvements in the functioning of the Tribunal. We do,
however, note that a number of problems remain, not
least in the areas of financial and administrative control,
recruitment of personnel and the establishment of an
effective witness-protection programme. The European
Union stresses the importance of a continued
improvement in practical arrangements in these areas in
order that the expanded Tribunal can function effectively.

 

