Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing and
Foreign Minister McCully for presiding over this
meeting.

Allow me also, on behalf of the United States, to
wish former Israeli President Shimon Peres a speedy
recovery. I last had the chance to meet President Peres
at his office in Israel in February, and greatly admire
his ongoing work to promote peace and closer ties
between Israelis and Palestinians.

The United States shares the Secretary-General's
views about rising tensions on ground, and we continue
to condemn all terrorist attacks. All sides must exercise
restraint and refrain from provocative actions and
rhetoric. In the Golan Heights, we are alarmed by the
increasing number of rockets and shells fired from
Syria, as well as rockets launched from Gaza. In
addition, there have been recent reports of incitement
on social media, including on accounts allegedly linked
to Fatah.

We are also deeply concerned about allegations
of the use of excessive force by Israeli security forces
against Palestinian civilians. This includes the killing
and wounding of two Palestinian men inside their car
in the Shuafat refugee camp near East Jerusalem on
5 September. The Israeli Ministry of Justice has opened
an investigation, and we look forward to seeing the full
results. At the same time, we remain deeply concerned
about attacks on the Israel Defense Forces, including the
stabbing of an Israeli soldier near Jenin on 24 August.

The international community can make a tangible
investment in that region's stability. Both reconstruction
efforts in Gaza and programmes run by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) are facing critical
funding shortfalls. For Gaza, out of $3.5 billion pledged
for reconstruction at the 2014 Cairo conference, just
$1.6 billion have been disbursed so far.

Even with limited funding, there has been some
progress. Fifty per cent of damaged homes have been
repaired and more than 30 per cent of fully destroyed
homes have been rebuilt. But Gaza needs more support.
For an economy with 41 per cent unemployment, further
disbursements of aid to Gaza will have a significant
impact. The UNRWA financial shortfall of $74 million
could leave more than 500,000 students out of school
and 30,000 employees without paychecks next month.
A suspension of UNRWA core services could further
destabilize an already volatile region. The United
States has contributed an additional $12 million to
fund UNRWA, bringing our total this year to nearly
$329 million. Sweden and Switzerland have also
stepped up with new contributions and pledges. We
urge other Governments to join this effort to avert a
potential humanitarian crisis, which would have long-
term effects.

The United States strongly opposes continued Israeli
settlement activity, which is corrosive to the cause of
peace. As we have said repeatedly, such actions are not
consistent with Israel's stated desire to achieve a two-
State solution. We share the deep concern expressed
by the Secretary-General and other Council members
about reports in July that the Israeli Government
published tenders for hundreds of settlement units in
East Jerusalem and advanced other settlement plans. We
also share concerns regarding the Israeli Government's
attempts to retroactively legalize outposts that are
illegal under Israeli law. Most recently, Ministry of
Justice officials questioned the 1 September order from
the High Court of Justice to demolish 17 houses in the
Netiv Ha'avot settlement outpost within 18 months. The
Court determined that these settlements were built on
private Palestinian lands. There are also reports that
the Israeli Government has begun the process to take
over or lease land privately owned by Palestinians so
as to relocate the illegal Amona outpost, as well as to
consider building homes for Israeli settlers in a military
compound in Hebron.

These cases represent unprecedented and troubling
steps that are inconsistent with prior Israeli legal
opinions. The cases also run counter to longstanding
Israeli official policy not to seize privately owned land
or use land originally seized for military purposes for
settlements. The situation in Susiya, which remains
under threat of demolition, is also troubling. If the
Israeli Government proceeds with demolitions,it would
have a very damaging impact on the lives of the area's
Palestinian inhabitants, who were already displaced on
other, previous occasions.

Those actions appear to be the latest examples
of a steady acceleration of settlement activity and
demolitions, which is systematically undermining
prospects for a two-State solution. Those concerns
were addressed specifically in the Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex), and have been raised repeatedly
by the other Quartet members and the international
community. We call on the parties to take significant
steps urgently to stabilize the situation and to reverse
current trends. We will continue to urge both sides to
demonstrate, through policies and actions, a genuine
commitment to preserving prospects for the two-State
solution. As a member of the Quartet, the United States
co-authored the Quartet report, and we stand behind
its recommendations in their entirety. Furthermore, we
support the efforts of Special Coordinator Mladenov
and his team, who continue to work tirelessly to
promote peace and to keep us apprised of developments
on issues that reflect the concerns of all members of the
Security Council.

Turning to Syria, as all members are aware, after
months of negotiations, the United States and Russia
reached an agreement on a series of steps aimed at
reducing the violence and alleviating the suffering
of the Syrian people. The goal is also to create an
environment conducive to negotiations on a political
transition for Syria, which is the only way to end this
horrific conflict. That agreement is not one based
on trust and promises. It is an agreement based on
reciprocal actions, halting attacks and allowing for
deliveries of assistance. We therefore look to Russia to
deliver on its commitment to use its leverage to stop the
Al-Assad regime from employing the barbaric tactics it
has long used in the conflict. That means a halt to the
barrel bombs, a halt to the chemical-weapon attacks, a
halt to indiscriminate assaults on civilian areas and a
halt to the starve-get-bombed-or-surrender tactics that
have characterized the Al-Assad regime's approach to
conflict.

The plan starts with a nationwide cessation of
hostilities that excludes Jabhat Al-Nusra and the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We urge
all parties, regime and opposition, to adhere to the
cessation ofhostilities by stopping aerial bombardments
and stopping attempts to take new territory. So far,
early reports indicate that violence has decreased
significantly, which is encouraging. But violence has
not completely stopped. Progress towards a political
solution will depend upon all parties adhering to the
cessation of hostilities and all relevant Governments
using their influence to promote sustained calm.

I want to stress that the cessation of hostilities is
only one part of the agreement. Humanitarian assistance
also needs to flow. That ought to be straightforward,
but the Al-Assad regime has employed every possible
tactic to disrupt aid deliveries. Those include the
regime removing medical supplies from convoys and
withholding approvals for the United Nations to reach
certain areas. As we all know, the consequences are
direct and immediate. Blocking aid kills people. Those
tactics have to stop. United Nations convoys have to
be able to reach the nearly 600,000 Syrians living
in besieged areas, where people are almost entirely
dependent upon aid deliveries to survive - not in a few
weeks or months. The convoys need to roll today. That
means Damascus must grant swift, final approvals and
provide facilitation letters for assistance to reach all
besieged and hard-to-reach locations. It also means that
the opposition must provide assurances that assistance
will not be impeded in the areas that it controls.

Only after we have seen improved humanitarian
access and a sustained period of reduced violence will
the United States and Russia take steps to establish
a joint centre to facilitate the targeting of Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida's affiliate in Syria, and ISIL.
Those are terrorist groups that pose a direct threat
to our collective security and whose toxic ideologies
are incompatible with the moderate opposition and
the aspirations of the Syrian people. Any party to the
conflict that seeks to maintain its legitimacy should
distance itself in every way possible from terrorist
organizations. Targeting Jabhat Al-Nusra and ISIL,
however, cannot be a pretext for the Al-Assad regime's
indiscriminate attacks and besiegement tactics, which
only increase the suffering of innocents and generates
new recruits for these violent extremist groups.

That is why the United States insisted in our
negotiation with Russia that two things had to happen
in parallel if we are to achieve our goals. We all must
intensify our actions against terrorists, and Russia must
ensure that Al-Assad's forces are no longer in bombing
in any opposition or Al-Nusra areas - meaning that
the regime would no longer be able to use the excuse
that it is targeting Al-Nusra in order to go after its own
people. To stress: if and when the joint centre is stood
up and sets into motion action against terrorist targets,
Al-Assad's military aircraft must simultaneously stop
flying any combat missions over eastern Aleppo, the
Damascus suburbs, Latakia, Idlib, Dar'a and any other
areas where opposition forces or Jabhat Al-Nusra are
present. It is noteworthy and important that Russia
agreed to that, as well as to the role of the joint centre
in monitoring the Syrian regime's compliance. That
contributed significantly to our pursuit of the deal.

Yet we are clear-eyed about the many challenges
still to be tackled before we can reach that phase of the
deal. And many new challenges will arise to implement
it successfully, given the regime's track record of
breaking its commitments and flouting its obligations,
including obligations determined by the Security
Council. If all parties live up to their obligations, we
have a chance - a chance to make progress towards a
political solution.

A civil defence volunteer in eastern Aleppo,
Mohammed Omar, told a reporter that, for the first time
in far too long,

"people are going about their business and children
are even playing in the street".

Children playing outside should not be an aberration,
should not be worthy of comment in the Council. All
of us must do everything possible to ensure that this
relative calm can be sustained.

