Mr. Regis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Security Council for
having kindly invited the Government of Republic
of Haiti to today's meeting to share its views and
observations about the Secretary-General's important
report (S/2017/604) on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), on which the Special
Representative has just briefed us.

On behalf of the Government of Haiti, I would
also like to sincerely thank the Secretary-General for
his commitment to the people of Haiti, as his report
eloquently attests. As usual, it is an objective, detailed,
professional and balanced document. Our Government
took careful note of and meticulously studied his
observations and detailed recommendations. We are
deeply grateful to him.

Members of the Security Council visited Haiti from
22 to 24 June, demonstrating their readiness to assist
the Haitian people at this decisive juncture, replete with
new prospects for stability, growth and development.
The Government of Haiti warmly welcomed the mission.

At this pivotal time in the country's life, the
Haitian Government welcomes the Secretary-General's
overall assessment of the situation in Haiti. The
country is indeed deeply committed to consolidating its
democracy and to political and institutional stability.
Much progress has been made at the security, political
and institutional levels and in the areas of human rights
and the building of the rule of law, as underscored by
the Secretary-General. Mr. J ovenel Moise's assumption
of the presidency on 7 February to end a transparent
and credible electoral process has indisputably marked
a turning point in Haiti's political trajectory.

Whether it is the return to constitutional order,
the establishment of a fully functional Parliament, the
assumption ofduties by all publicly elected officials at all
levels of the governance system, consultations between
the legislative and executive branches with regard to
the implementation of critical reform programmes
needed to modernize the State, launched by the Head
of State, all observers agree that recent developments
demonstrate ongoing progress towards establishing the
rule of law and consolidating democracy in Haiti. The
same is true of the Government's focus on security,
justice, education, decentralization, transparency,
accountability and the need to combat corruption.
Those developments were highlighted by the Secretary-
General and duly illustrate the new climate prevailing
in Haiti. Without a doubt, the goal of creating a secure
and stable environment, one of the major thrusts
of MINUSTAH's mandate, has been achieved. The
capacities of the Haitian National Police (HNP) have
been significantly strengthened, as well as its ability to
ensure law and order throughout the country.

In that regard, the Government welcomes the fact
that the overall security situation has not been affected
by the current withdrawal of MINUSTAH staff. This is
proof, if further proofwere needed, ofthe assumption of
security functions by the Haitian National Police. The
HNP has become a cornerstone of the national security
architecture. This is a remarkable accomplishment by
the Mission in all respects.

Also, at a time when the mandate of MINUSTAH
draws to an end, the Haitian Government wishes to
extend its gratitude to all countries that have, over the
past 13 years, generously contributed and participated
in its various military, police and civilian components.
Notwithstanding the progress achieved at almost
every level, the Government of Haiti is well aware
of the myriad ongoing challenges and the magnitude
of the obstacles hampering economic development
and slowing down certain necessary reforms, which
create genuine obstacles to the rule of law and the full
enjoyment ofhuman rights, including in their economic,
social and cultural dimensions.

The Government has taken note of what the
Secretary-General describes as limited progress in the
functioning of the judiciary and the administration of
justice and the residual shortcomings that have been
noted, in particular in the judicial and corrections
systems. In that regard, the views of the Haitian
Government and those of Secretary-General are aligned
with regard to the crucial importance of the judiciary's
independence for building and consolidating democracy
in Haiti and the continued development of the country.

In line with its general policy declaration, the
Government, under the authority of Prime Minister
Jacques Guy Lafontant, is working to strengthen
the rule of law, which ensures stability and creates
conditions conducive to private investment, which is
so necessary.
Along the same lines, the Government of Haiti
has noted the human rights concerns indicated in the
report, including the often tragic consequences of
prolonged pre-trial detention and prison overcrowding.
Aware of the gravity of the problem and of the urgency
of rectifying it, the Head of State set up a commission
tasked with fully taking stock of the situation in order
to find a prompt solution. The work of the commission
continues and its conclusions and recommendations are
expected soon.

In general, the Government wishes to reiterate
its commitment to respecting, defending and
promoting human rights without any discrimination,
in accordance with its commitments and obligations
under international and regional human rights treaties
to which the Republic of Haiti is party.

The report also highlights a wide range of social
and humanitarian challenges - the fragile economic
situation, a gross 20-per-cent decrease in public
investment, a slowdown in private investment, the
vulnerable situation of repatriated individuals from
the Dominican Republic and the growing vulnerability
of Haitian households, which is reflected in the food
insecurity that affects more than 2 million people. At
the same time, the cholera epidemic is far from being
contained, despite some significant recent advances in
the fight against the scourge. In short, Haiti faces an
urgent situation, which recent United Nations missions,
including those of the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, had had an opportunity to
take stock of. Such a situation obviously calls for the
adoption of urgent measures.

The Government of Haiti wishes to reiterate its call
to all its cooperation partners to quickly and sustainably
resume official development assistance flows, based on
flexible financing programmes and mechanisms that
not only respond to situations that have been observed,
but also to establish the conditions to enable Haiti to
transition from a state of economic fragility to that of
sustained, robust and sustainable growth, in accordance
with the wish expressed by the Secretary-General in his
latest report.

With regard to the conclusion of the operations
of MINUSTAH, the Government of Haiti welcomes
the successful conduct of the plan for the complete
and orderly withdrawal of the 2,370 troops from the
military component of the Mission and the progressive
reduction of its civilian and police components to
authorized levels. At the same time, my Government
attaches the utmost importance to the consolidation of
the gains, especially in the priority areas that have been
targeted, including strengthening the rule of law and
the justice system, promoting and defending human
rights and support for the development of the police.

Haiti will continue to work, in accordance with its
needs and priorities and in the best spirit of consultation
and cooperation, with United Nations bodies in
defining the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), its scope
of intervention and the establishment of its strategic
objectives. We are confident that the lessons learned
from the 13 years of the mandate of MINUSTAH
will be judiciously harnessed by MINUJUSTH. The
search for solutions to the serious problems that have
undermined the political, social and economic stability
of Haiti for so long is critical. Our ardent hope is that
MINUJUSTH will achieve the desired result by the end
of its mandate, namely, on the one hand, significantly
improve the trust of all sectors of society in the rule
of law and in the checks and balances of democracy
and, on the other hand, contribute to the country's long-
term stability and economic development, to echo the
words of the Secretary-General. Rest assured that the
Government of Haiti will spare no effort to achieve this
goal and to enable the initiatives of MINUJUSTH to
meet our shared expectations.

In conclusion, let me take this opportunity to
reiterate to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore Braithwaite, the warm
congratulations of the Haitian Government - to which
Ijoin my voice - on her commitment and work in Haiti.

