Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in French): We
think this discussion is extremely important first
because of the gravity of the problem of Somalia and
because it is an opportunity for us to hear the views of
Mr. Ali Khalif Galaydh, Prime Minister of Somalia,
whom I welcome.

I would also like to thank Mr. David Stephen,
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
instructive and thorough introduction to the Secretary-
General's report and for having briefed us on recent
developments in Somalia. I wish once again to express
my Government's support for the ongoing tireless
efforts made by Mr. Stephen in support of the cause of
peace and national reconciliation in Somalia. I would
also like to take this opportunity to stress once again
the need to keep the Security Council informed at
regular frequent intervals about developments in
Somalia.

In Somalia we are facing one of the most
complex and alarming situations. My delegation has
constantly drawn the urgent attention of the Council to
this. As a guarantor, under the Charter, of the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the Council can no longer continue
to be a passive bystander in the face of a tragedy that
had gone on too long and the result of which has been
the de facto dismemberment of the Somali State and
almost total marginalization of a nation that has been
abandoned to its fate, riven by a struggle whose finer
points escape it and bereft of the dignity to which it is
entitled, like any other nation.

Today the world has finally become aware -
unfortunately, at the heaviest price - of the multitude
of threats to international peace and security. This
awareness will have served no purpose if we continue
to turn a blind eye to the real risks inherent in the
situation that prevails in Somalia.

The Secretary-General has given a sombre
account of the situation and has concluded, because of
security considerations, that it was impossible for him
at this stage to recommend the dispatch of a peace-
building mission to Somalia.

We appreciate the reasons adduced by the
Secretary-General. We are also aware of the unique
nature of the situation in Somalia compared to other
situations where the United Nations has intervened
without demanding ahead of time full security
guarantees.

But maintaining the status quo in Somalia is
not an option, and the Secretary-General's
recommendations are not sufficient to advance a
solution to the crisis in Somalia. It is time now to
define the roles of the various external actors and, in
particular, the role of the Security Council in the
Somali problem. I wish to state here that we are in no
way suggesting that it is up to these actors to decide on
the future of Somalia, because this is the responsibility
of the Somalis themselves. What I mean is that it is the
duty of these actors to help Somalia resolve the

deadlock in which it has found itself for almost 10
years.
The Arta process provides us the most viable
context in which to act in order to bring about peace
and national reconciliation in Somalia. The
Transitional National Government has acted diligently
to draw up concrete programmes to that end and has
sought the support of the international community and
the United Nations to implement those programmes.
The Government has managed - although its appeal
for financial assistance has not elicited the desired
response from the international community - to start
to implement these projects in the urgent areas of
security and recovery. It continues to make efforts to
involve the recalcitrant parties in the peace process,
which, I stress, has been endorsed by the entire people
of Somalia.

The success of the Transitional National
Government is certainly limited, but any Government
would have been in the same situation had it not been
given the necessary support and had its efforts met with
such fierce resistance, which has prevented an
international presence in the country.

The future of Somalia is a great unknown, and we
need urgently to try to define it. This discussion should
be used to produce a common specific vision of the
role of the United Nations and the Security Council.

Tunisia believes that this role should be based on
the following main elements: first, specific action
should be taken in order to preserve the independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Somalia,
all of which should be non-negotiable. Secondly, we
must prevent and put an end to any attempts to
interfere, whatever form they may take, in the internal
affairs of Somalia, in keeping with the provisions of
the United Nations Charter. Thirdly, we must prevent
and discourage the proliferation of initiatives and
processes parallel to the Arta process, which remains
the only viable process for achieving lasting peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia.

Fourthly, we must mobilize the necessary
assistance for the Transitional National Government so
that it can establish and implement its plans to rebuild
the country. Fifthly, we must continue to discuss the
matter of the United Nations presence in the field in
Somalia, and we need to start to study in depth the
mandate of the Political Office for Somalia with a view
to expanding it so that it can duly support the process
towards peace and national reconciliation in the
country.

The problem of Somalia can no longer be
addressed without placing it in the context of the world
today a a world that cannot and must not tolerate the
existence of forgotten areas of tension. We must all act
without delay to prevent such a situation, thus
guaranteeing the restoration of the Somali State and its
rehabilitation within the international community.

The challenge is clear, and the need to meet that
challenge is obvious. The time for action is now. The
Security Council must act robustly and play its role.
This is our conclusion, and it is the appeal we make
today.

