Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I thank Judge Meron
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive
updates this morning.

Sweden welcomes the developments and progress
made by the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals since the last briefing (see S/PV.8278) and the extension of the mandate in June.
We are pleased to see that the Mechanism has been
working on implementing the recommendations that
were presented in the evaluation report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services earlier this year. We
particularly welcome the implementation of the
recommendation regarding gender-related matters.

It is important that the Registry is now reviewing
how the policies related to the support and protection
of victims and witnesses can better reflect gender-
sensitive and gender-appropriate approaches. We also
reiterate our satisfaction with the achieved gender
parity among the professional staff. It is evident that
the Mechanism has done its share in ensuring gender
parity. However, we, the Member States, have failed
in doing our part. The continued lack of gender parity
among the judges of the Mechanism is disappointing,
and we regret the absence of female candidates in the
upcoming election ofjudges. Let us do better ahead of
possible future elections.

The strained budgetary situation also remains a
concern, not least because it risks contributing to the
loss of institutional memory, as highlighted in the
report (see S/2018/1033). We note that the biennial
budget approved by the General Assembly in July did
not even amount to half of the budget proposed by the
Mechanism. To avoid any delays in the implementation
of the mandate and ensure sufficient quality of the
work conducted, the Mechanism must be given the
required resources. We note that, according to the
report, it remains unclear how long the function for
the protection of victims and witnesses would need to
remain operational, and we again stress how important
this work is.

To achieve results, cooperation with the
Mechanism remains of the utmost importance. Sweden
is one of the countries that has received convicted
individuals for the enforcement of their sentences. We
reiterate our call on Member States to also assist the
Mechanism in the arrest of the fugitives who remain
at large. We welcome the continued efforts made to
promote communication and cooperation between
the Mechanism and the Governments of Rwanda and
the States of the former Yugoslavia. The continued
challenges in the reconciliation process in the Western
Balkans, as noted in the Prosecutor's report, are
concerning. The Mechanism must continue to address
this situation in the communication with the States of
the former Yugoslavia.

During our two years on the Council, Sweden has
followed the work of the Mechanism very closely. As
this is our last meeting on this topic before leaving the
Council, let me just briefly share some reflections.

Over these past two years, we have not only worked
on the extension of the mandate of the Mechanism, but
have also witnessed the closure of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which
was indeed a historic event. The ICTY, as well as
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
represented concrete advancements of the international
criminal justice system. We cannot overestimate the
role that these and other international criminal tribunals
have played in the fight against impunity for the most
horrendous crimes, such as genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

At the same time, during our time on the Council
we have also witnessed an international criminal
justice system under increased pressure. Considering
the hostile rhetoric against international courts and
tribunals, one could wonder if accomplishments such
as the establishment of the Tribunals for the Former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda in the 1990s, the creation
of the International Criminal Court in the beginning
of the 2000s, and the establishment of the Residual
Mechanism eight years ago would have been achievable
today. As regrettable as this situation is, what it also
tells us is that the courts and tribunals are having
a real impact. The courts and the tribunals were not
established to serve or depend on any one country's
interests. They were set up to serve justice for victims
and ensure accountability for the perpetrators of the
worst crimes known to humankind. For this reason, it
is only natural that they are uncomfortable for those
who violate international law.

In this light, we want to once again commend the
staff of the Mechanism for their high ethics and morale,
their independence and their unwavering commitment
to justice. Since this is Judge Meron's last briefing to
the Council, we would especially like to thank him for
all his contributions to the international justice system
throughout his career, including as President of both
the ICTY and the Mechanism.

His presence here and his personal words serve as
an important reminder of our joint commitment and
responsibility to ensure the "never again".

Finally, Sweden's commitment to an international
rules-based order and justice system remains
unwavering. The principles of seeking justice for
Victims and ensuring accountability for perpetrators
will be cornerstones of our international engagement
also in the future. As part of that engagement, the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals can count on our continued support.

