Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2006. We have taken
note with satisfaction of the important work done by
the Council under your able and skilful stewardship.
We thank the Council for allowing NAM. to participate
in the deliberations on this crucial agenda item. Let me
take this opportunity also to express appreciation to
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. John Bolton of
the United States, for the manner in which he
conducted the important work of the Council last
month.

The Non-Aligned Movement has in the past
clearly stated its positions concerning the question of
Palestine, including in this Chamber; I do not wish to
repeat them here. It will suffice for me to briefly
underscore six fundamental points that we think are
relevant to the Council's deliberations today.

First, the question of Palestine should be resolved
through negotiations between Israel and Palestine and
on the basis of international law, the principle of land
for peace, the Arab peace initiative, the illegality of
any territorial acquisition resulting from the threat or
use of force, the road map and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council.
Fulfilment of the provisions contained in those
instruments could lead towards the achievement of the
two-State solution of Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security within recognized borders
based on the pre-1967 borders. Israel should withdraw
from all territories it has occupied since the 1967 war:
the occupied Palestinian territory, the occupied Syrian
Golan and the remaining occupied lands in southern
Lebanon.

Secondly, it is incumbent upon both Israel and
Palestine, with the assistance of the international
community, particularly the Quartet, to create the
necessary conditions that could lead to the resumption
of negotiations. These entail, in particular, denouncing
violent measures or acts of terrorism, which have led to
the unnecessary loss of lives and casualties on both
sides, and non-resort by Israel to unilateral actions or
settlements that could further undermine peace and
stability in the region. We condemn all acts of
violence, terrorism and destruction. We commend all
efforts by the Quartet and encourage its members to
redouble their efforts in seeking a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution.

Thirdly, Israel should comply with its legal
obligations as mentioned in the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) advisory opinion concerning the
separation wall and its associated regime, as called for
by the General Assembly through resolution ES-10/ 15.
The complete cessation of the construction of the wall
and all settlement activities is essential for the survival
of the road map. In this regard also, we urge the
Secretary-General to expedite establishing the register
of damage caused to all natural or legal persons
concerned in connection with the construction of the
wall as called for also in that resolution.

Fourthly, Israel should disburse without further
delay to the Palestinian National Authority the full
amount of the monthly tax and customs revenue that
rightfully belongs to the Palestinians, in accordance
with an Israeli-Palestinian protocol signed in Paris in
1994. The much-needed revenue could greatly alleviate
the dire humanitarian conditions and sufferings of the
Palestinian people, who are in need, inter alia, of food
and water, medicine and medical treatment and
education for their children.

Fifthly, the Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
support for the establishment in the Middle East of a
zone free of all weapons of mass destruction. To this
end, the Movement reaffirms the need for the speedy
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East in accordance with the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. Pending
its establishment, the Non-Aligned Movement urges
Israel, the only country in the region that has not joined
the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) nor has declared its intention to do so,
to renounce possession of nuclear weapons, to accede
to the NPT without delay, to place promptly all its
nuclear facilities under the full-scope safeguards of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
according to Security Council resolution 487 (1981),
and to conduct its nuclear activities in conformity with
the non-proliferation regime. Stability could not be
achieved in a region where massive imbalances in
military capabilities are maintained, particularly
through the possession of nuclear weapons, which
allow one party to threaten its neighbour and the
region.

Finally, the Non-Aligned Movement
congratulates the Palestinian people for exercising their
democratic right, the right to freely choose and
determine, without fear or favour, their representatives
in the Palestinian Legislative Council during the
elections last January. We share the assessment of the
international community, including the Quartet, that
the elections were conducted in a free, fair and secure
manner. We certainly hope that the newly elected
representatives would faithfully serve and pursue the
interests and aspirations of the Palestinian people.

The Non-Aligned Movement remains supportive
of the Palestinian people in their struggle for self-
determination, for independence and Statehood, for
human rights and the rule of law, for freedom and
dignity. We are all too familiar with their plight and
their sufferings. In this regard, we stress that the
outcome of the free and fair elections in Palestine
should not be used as a pretext for the international
community to cease extending economic and financial
assistance and other forms of aid to the Palestinian
people. It would indeed be completely unfair in the
event that the international community were to punish
them for exercising their right to choose and determine
their leaders through the ballot box.

The Non-Aligned Movement recalls that the
International Court of Justice in its advisory opinion
stated that "in the Court's view, this tragic situation can
be brought to an end only through implementation in
good faith of all relevant Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973)."
The Council is in a position to prevail upon Israel and
Palestine to achieve their long-held desire for a just,
lasting and comprehensive final settlement. The
Council shoulders the primary responsibility for
ensuring that they do so. The Council must act - and
the time to act is now - for the sake of the
Palestinians and the Israelis, for the sake of the people
in the region, and in order to serve and meet the
collective interest and desire of all our global family of
nations. We hope that our collective interest and desire
will materialize sooner than later.

