Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Russia does not accept the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's claim to become a
nuclear State and has supported all Security Council
resolutions demanding an end to the nuclear and
missile programmes of Pyongyang, with a view to the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. We have
therefore supported and are supporting the sanctions
contained in the resolutions aimed at compelling the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to meet the
demands of the Security Council.

This applies fully also to the demands contained
in resolution 2371 (2017), even though when it was
adopted we underscored that the measures involving
financial and economic pressure on the leadership of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea had basically
been exhausted and that any further restrictions would
be tantamount to attempts to suffocate its economy,
including the placing of a total embargo on the country
and provoking a deep humanitarian crisis. In other
words, what we are talking about here is not just cutting
off the channels that allow for banned nuclear and
missile activities, but, rather, inflicting unacceptable
damage on innocent civilians.

At the same time, we proposed a reasonable and
realistic alternative to the ultimatum logic of the
sanctions, which has proved unworkable time and again.
The alternative consisted of the following: beginning
implementation of not just the sanctions-related parts of
the aforementioned resolutions of the Security Council,
but also those of the provisions calling for a peaceful
political and diplomatic settlement of the nuclear
issue on the Korean peninsula through dialogue and
negotiation. Such provisions are contained in all of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Ignoring them
would represent a direct violation of the consensus
agreements reached in the Council.
Furthermore, the authors" unwillingness to include
in the resolution the idea of using the good offices and
mediation potential of the Secretary-General, as well
as the refusal to reaffirm the statement made by the
United States Secretary of State, Mr. Tillerson, on the
"Four Nos" - that there are no plans to start a war,
effect regime change, force the reunification ofthe two
Koreas or violate the 38th parallel - all give rise to
very serious questions in our minds to which we have
not yet received answers.

Russia, as was underscored by President Putin on
5 December in China, firmly denounces the recent
provocative step taken by Pyongyang, that is, the
test carried out on 3 September. We are convinced,
however, that dissipating the threat looming from the
Korean Peninsula could be done not through additional
sanctions but exclusively through political means. That
is exactly the approach that was proposed by Russia
and China in the joint statement dated 4 July, which
set out a joint roadmap on a step-by-step move towards
a settlement, starting with de-escalation, a bilateral
lowering of tensions and then the implementation
of confidence-building measures and the creation
of conditions for the resumption of negotiations.
We believe that it would be a serious mistake to
underestimate this Russia-China initiative. It remains
on the table at the Security Council, and we will insist
on its consideration.

We supported resolution 2375 (2017) today because
despite our belief that there is no future in endless
pressure and refusals to talk, it would be wrong not to
react strongly to nuclear tests.

At the same time, we underscored immediately that
the reaction ofthe Security Council needed to be thought
through and had to take into account the humanitarian
aspects of the situation in North Korea, the legitimate
interests of its civilians and the specific aspects of
the bilateral relationships between Pyongyang and its
foreign partners that have nothing to do with nuclear
or missile tests but would meet the needs of civilians.

In the course of working on the draft resolution,
many of our colleagues stated that it was a prologue
to efforts to achieve a political settlement. We would
like to see proof of that in the very near future. We call
upon all Council members and United Nations Member
States to undertake specific efforts - not in word but
in deed - to find a political and diplomatic settlement
of the issue of the Korean Peninsula.
