Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): For the third time in a
row, Turkey has aligned itself with the statements made
on behalf of the European Union by the distinguished
representative of Spain. These three statements
constitute a righteous stance while reflecting a deeply
worried state of mind. Indeed, the developments we
have seen within the last 48 hours have only confirmed
the seriousness of the situation. As a matter of fact,
Security Council resolutions 1397 (2002), 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002) have all spoken clearly on the ways of
bringing the tragic situation in the Middle East to an
end.

We are deeply disturbed at seeing the failure of
Israel to implement these resolutions. Even after
having heard the sentiments of the members of the
Security Council and others who spoke yesterday, the
Israeli Government is not taking the necessary action,
while very disturbing news of what has taken place in
Jenin and other refugee camps continues to reach the
international community. The tanks should turn back
from all Palestinian cities now.

The economic and social life of the Palestinians
has been violently upset. We are very much concerned
with the resultant humanitarian situation. We have to
repeat that the human rights of the Palestinian people
are being violated. The sight of blood in Palestinian
cities and the refugee camps is unbearable. Even the
needs of the sick and injured cannot be met as they
wait for a healing hand. Such restrictions should be
lifted.

That Chairman Arafat is robbed of his legitimate
capacities worsens the plight of the Palestinian people.
Under the circumstances, the Israeli action seems to
have been exactly what the radical elements in the
region have been looking for. We must not let them
succeed. This is another reason why we cannot accept
the ferocity of the Israeli action: with its radicalism, it
breeds the same.

In this Chamber, Turkey has urged the
international community, and in particular the United
States, to intervene at the earliest possible moment. It
goes without saying that we continue to hope for
Secretary of State Colin Powell's success in addressing
the urgent need of a credible and constructive
intervention that will lead the parties out of this
quagmire. But the parties should also be led beyond
that urgent need.

What has happened, and what is right now
happening, must not happen again. Simply, the terrain
must be cleared for a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution in the Middle East where all the parties can
live side by side and in assured security.

They know how to transcend this sterile fight.
They should not waste this chance. They must be more
forthcoming than they have been on issues that remain
vital concerns for the other side. After all, the problem
is not that each side is baffled as to what the other side
wants. It is not a lack of knowledge about the
legitimate concerns of the other side.

They must do more than pay lip service to peace.
We have seen what paying lip service does. It enflames
mistrust. It leads to outright conflict. It silences those
who speak for peace. It puts those yet to be born under
perennial danger.

The overarching objective remains the same.
Soon, the Israelis and the Palestinians must start living
side by side in their own respective States, in peace and
security, within their internationally recognized
borders. There must be no return to this despicable
state of affairs in the region.

For this, Israel should address the heightened
grievances of the Palestinian people and choose to
become a more forthcoming partner of the Palestinians
in fulfilling and attaining their legitimate rights.

The Palestinian side must respond positively and
fully to the calls for a ceasefire. This it should do
credibly, and show its determination to fight resolutely
with terrorist elements. Terrorism cannot be glorified.

Security is the absolute right of Israel. Those who
deny this right are the enemies of both the Israelis and
the Palestinians, because they play for and bid for
lasting enmity between these two peoples. They think
they will gain when these two lose. They are radicals
of every sort and creed.

Attacks from the Lebanese territories on Israel
that violate the Blue Line are aimed at widening the
area of conflict, and they are in breach of the relevant
Security Council resolutions as well. This cowardly
tactic cannot be allowed to function. The "quartet", as
well as other facilitators, should remain seized of the
matter, especially at a time when the ideas for some
form of international presence are moving to the
forefront of the agenda.

Clearly, the situation is dangerous and we need
more than a thaw. We need efforts that bring the future
of the region as a whole into perspective.

Turkey is ready to contribute to all efforts geared
to working to the benefit of a brighter, more promising
future in the region, and will continue to strive for this
noble end.

Before I conclude, let me say this. We pray for
those innocent souls from both sides that have lost their
lives.

