Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes the
fact that the Security Council is considering piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea after
some time, and we hope that today's meeting will
provide additional impetus to the effective eradication
of that problem. The insight provided by the Assistant
Secretary-General is indeed very helpful in that regard.
The subject of our discussion has a multifaceted
nature, and it deserves our full attention, considering
its social and economic implications, as well as
legal complexities, coupled with safety and security
impacts. There is no doubt that maritime piracy poses
a threat to the international peace and security in West
Africa. Therefore, the Security Council's addressing
it constitutes an integral part of a comprehensive,
cohesive and broad-based approach by the United
Nations in dealing with this challenge.

While we fully align ourselves with the statement
to be made later on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to make the following points.

According to the International Maritime Bureau,
West African waters are among the world's areas most
affected by piracy and armed robbery at sea. Even if the
recent official statistical data point to a decrease in the
number of attacks in the area, this problem should not
be underestimated, in particular considering that, given
the information from the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, ship owners tend to withhold reports
on such accidents, owing to the risk of an increase in
insurance policy premiums.

To elaborate credible mechanisms to curb the
phenomenon, it is critical to differentiate between the
forms that the threat takes off ofthe East and West coasts
of the African continent. Unlike in the Gulf of Aden,
the tactics ofpirates in the Gulf of Guinea have evolved
from attacking vessels on the high seas to relocating
their activities to internal and territorial waters. Under
those circumstances, international naval forces face a
legal limitation on responding to such pirate attacks.
At the same time, the authorities of coastal States are
often unable, or unwilling, to effectively prosecute
those responsible. It is in that unsettling context that for
over a decade, pirates in the Gulf of Guinea have turned
into well-armed and sophisticated criminal gangs with
floating bases for their attacks.

Moreover, piracy and armed robbery at sea in
the Gulf of Guinea have close ties with other perils
threatening the region. The current situation of virtually
uncontrolled crossings of maritime borders can be
exploited by terrorist groups, as demonstrated by recent
terrorist attacks in the West African region. Piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea is, above all, an international
problem that requires a coherent national approach on
the part of each West African country.

We strongly believe that only consolidated efforts

can put an end to piracy. In that regard, Ukraine calls
upon the United Nations Member States to ensure
full compliance with the Security Council resolutions
and other documents related to the implementation
of regional strategies for ensuring maritime security.
Assistance to countries in the region in implementing
an integrated strategy for maritime security, based on
existing regional mechanisms for combating piracy and
armed robbery at sea, should also be strongly promoted
by both the Security Council and the competent United
Nations bodies and agencies.

Since all coastal States of the Gulf of Guinea are
members of the International Maritime Organization
(IMO), we see particular value in the further fulfilment
by the IMO of its strategy for implementing sustainable
maritime security measures in West and Central Africa.
We also consider it necessary to expand the scope of
international assistance programmes to strengthen the
capacity of countries in the region to ensure maritime
security, improve infrastructure and carry out effective
joint actions to monitor the situation and conduct joint
patrols at sea. That requires improved coordination
among the United Nations, regional countries and
regional and subregional organizations such as the
African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission in
combating piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has a direct bearing
on Ukraine. In 2015, pirates abducted two Ukrainian
citizens and demanded ransom for their release. Just
a month ago, on 26 March, pirates captured two other
citizens of Ukraine, the captain and assistant captain of
the vessel Sampatiki. Unfortunately, negotiations with
pirates on their release are still under way, and they
continue to suffer in captivity.

In the light of the outbreak of piracy, the issues
of crew protection in the shipping industry and post-
accident treatment for piracy survivors continue to
be a matter of most serious concern to us. In order to
mitigate the impact of modern piracy, it is important
that Governments, ship owners, insurers and all other
stakeholders in maritime commerce treat seafarers as
their true and genuine social partners. That requires
a fresh look into the problems related to post-conflict
rehabilitation and compensation for moral damage and
material loses, as well as the recovery of physical and
mental strength and health. In many cases, seafarers
released after being held captive by pirates are left
to deal with their problems on their own. A solution
depends on different factors, such as the quality of the
seafarers' employment agreements, the modalities of
justice with regard to protecting the rights of labourers,
and the accessibility and quality of medical and
social assistance.

In that regard, Ukraine would like to call on United
Nations States Members to expedite the universalization
of the amendments to the Maritime Labour Convention,
2006, approved by the International Labour Conference
in 2014. The proper implementation of that instrument
will allow for the further elaboration of possible
solutions for seafarers and fishers who are victims of
piracy. We also believe that the primary responsibility
of flag States for ensuring the effective implementation
and enforcement of international instruments related to
maritime security and safety, in particular the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as well as for
bringing those guilty of acts ofpiracy or armed robbery
of ships to account, should be further strengthened.

When a person responsible for acts of piracy or
armed robbery at sea enjoys impunity, the anti-piracy
efforts of the international community are undermined.
Ensuring the prosecution and incarceration of captured
pirates must remain a priority if we are truly committed
to eradicating this evil. Effective international
mechanisms for bringing perpetrators to justice and
enhanced national criminal prosecution procedures
are needed. In that regard, Ukraine would like to recall
its initiative of 2010, which was circulated as General
Assembly document A/65/489 under agenda item 74,
entitled "Oceans and the law of the sea", namely, the
draft comprehensive convention on the suppression of
acts of piracy at sea. We invite all Member States to
look afresh at that proposal in the light of our debate.

Combating piracy and armed robbery at sea by
military means is an effective, but not the only, tool
in fighting this scourge. Developing a comprehensive
strategy of appropriate assistance to the countries of the
region to eliminate the root causes of maritime crimes
in West Africa - such as poverty, high unemployment,
a lack of rule of law, poor law enforcement and a lack of
the capabilities to effectively govern territorial waters
and promote economic development - could make a
substantial contribution to the global efforts to solve
the problem of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea.

All the relevant United Nations bodies must be
actively involved in shaping a comprehensive approach
to address the issue of piracy. In our view, the division
of tasks could take the following form. The General
Assembly could address the social and economic aspects
of piracy, while the Security Council could address its
security and military aspects, thereby making full use
of the tools available to the United Nations.

