Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): My delegation
welcomes the initiative, Madam President, to hold this
open briefing on Yemen. 1 thank all of the briefers for
their valuable contributions, which once again remind
us of the deep and abysmal crisis that Yemen is in. To
expect a military solution or a surrender of the other
side is to court a self-defeating illusion. One may win
a war but lose a country while doing so. If the conflict
continues, the consequences will be devastating for
generations to come - for Yemenis and for the entire
region and beyond.

Let me express our full support to the mediation
efforts of Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed. There needs to be viable
follow-up to the meetings in Switzerland. We welcome
in particular the commitment of t+he parties to continue
the work of the Coordination and De-escalation
Committee. The three key pillars - the cessation of
hostilities, unhindered humanitarian access and a
political process that puts Yemen's transition back
on track - must be unconditionally supported and
sustained. The transition framework is well-known,
based on resolution 2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and the National Dialogue outcomes.

The onus is on all of the parties to break the cycle
ofviolence and restore respect for human life. If Yemen
and the Yemenis are to have a viable future, a durable
solution leading to transition and peace must be found
now. Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham will not wait. They are
already making themselves very comfortable on the
ground, and we know what happens where they settle
in. We cannot afford another terrorist black hole in the
region.

We are well aware of how difficult the process is.
We pay tribute to the Special Envoy's perseverance
and tenacity in keeping the hope of negotiations
alive. Having the date for the next meeting is a small
but important signal. We hope that the talks will
increasingly be based on substance and the agenda set
forth by the Special Envoy, ideally all in one package.
We would like to thank the Special Envoy for reaching
out to Yemen's women in particular. Their voices must
continue to be part and parcel of all the talks and the
efforts aimed at restoring peace in that much-suffering
country.

Confidence-building measures, including a
prisoner release, are key to making sure peace happens.
We welcome the fact that more than 100 United
Nations food trucks managed to reach Taiz, and that
both sides have agreed to make humanitarian access
to the city permanent. However, more deliveries of
that kind are most urgently needed across the country.
Malnourishment, starvation, the stunted growth of
children - all of that will negatively impact the future
of the country and should not be allowed to continue.
It is disappointing that the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism is not yet operational. Given
the level of delivery shortages, including the delivery
of commercial goods and fuel in particular, any further
delays are unacceptable, including considering the fact
that the coalition has acknowledged that the approach
offered by the United Nations would substantially
alleviate their concerns regarding possible breaches
of the arms embargo. A lot of figures have been
mentioned. I will refer to only one that speaks for itself
and underlines the urgency. The prices of fuel and
cooking gas have gone up by 300 per cent over pre-war
levels, in a country that was already very poor before
the crisis struck.

We regret that ceasefire violations continue to
occur on both sides. It is crucial to observe and to
extend the ceasefire, with an effective ceasefire
coordination mechanism in place and operating. In that
context, let me also stress, as many delegations have
before me, the critical need for all parties to the conflict
to observe international humanitarian and human
rights law. Schools, health facilities and humanitarian
and medical workers must be protected and safe from
attacks. Violations against them may amount to war
crimes. Those who violate international humanitarian
law and human rights law must sooner or later be held
to account.

Let me move now to the issue of sanctions. When
the sanctions regime was set up, the prevalent thinking
was that the threat of sanctions alone was sufficient to
deter spoilers. That proved erroneous. Empty shells
do not deter spoilers. When the first individuals were
finally designated in November 2014, it was already
too late, since by that time arms were flowing freely
into the Houthis' hands, and they were well advanced
in their march against the legitimate Government of
Yemen.

A lot more needs to be done with regard to former
President Ali Abdullah Saleh, his son Mr. Ahmed Ali
Saleh and the inner circle, who have played a huge role
in stoking the conflict. Some countries have already
started identifying and freezing their assets. We
encourage all countries that may have information on
their assets to step up their cooperation with the Panel
of Experts as they prepare their final report to the
Committee, which is due in January.

The need to stop uncontrolled arms flows into
Yemen and to deal with the massive saturation of the
country with arms was evident even before the conflict
flared. Lithuania has consistently supported the idea
of an arms embargo that could have given a United
Nations-supported disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration effort a better chance of success. The
targeted arms embargo has finally been imposed. Yet we
need to admit that, as currently structured and applied,
its impact is yet to be assessed. For that we need better
reporting on the implementation of the arms embargo.
It is important to also ensure that reported cases of
arms-embargo violations, such as the one concerning
the attempted weapons transfer from Iran, should be
seriously examined by the Panel and the Committee.

