Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes
to thank New Zealand, in its capacity as President
of the Security Council, for convening this quarterly
open debate in connection with the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. I would also like to extend our appreciation
to the Special Coordinator for his briefing and his
dedicated efforts aimed at finding a solution to the
conflicts in the Middle East.

Peace will never be achieved through violence and
bloodshed. This July marks one year since the most
recent round of escalated conflict between Palestine and
Israel and the launch of the Israeli military operation in
Gaza, which was the worst escalation ofhostilities since
1967. Gaza remains a city in ruins. With the conflict is
unresolved, along the breakdown of talks since 2014,
lasting peace remains a distant dream.

While hope is dim, we reiterate our call for a two-
State solution, which remains the one and only viable
solution to enduring peace in the region. The Maldives
therefore reiterates its call for the full realization of the
right to self-determination of the Palestinian people,
the right of Palestinian people to establish their own
State, alongside Israel, on the basis of a two-State
solution, within pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We also call on the Security Council to
reinvigorate its efforts to find new ways of moving
forward.

The human cost of the conflict in Syria weighs
heavily upon all of us and compels us to explore all our
options in finding solutions. A political solution must
be found to end the bloodshed in line with the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We would like to
underscore the importance of achieving an inclusive
political solution in Syria based on the Geneva talks.
Accordingly, we call on the United Nations membership
to actively contribute ideas to the body in the hope of
finding the way to peace.

The Maldives remains deeply concerned over
the impact of the situation in Yemen on the stability
of the entire region. Similarly, we must ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches the more than 80 per
cent of the population of Yemen that is now in need of
aid. Peace must win in Yemen.

The Maldives condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and believes that terrorism should
not be associated with any religion, race, culture or
society. Islam promotes peace and the protection and
preservation of life and unity. Islam also condemns
violence, and the Maldives does not condone the use
of the veil of religion as a pretext for inflicting terror.
Religion is not a means to a political end.

While there are numerous violent hot spots in the
region, we are heartened to see progress as well. In that
regard, the Maldives welcomes the historic framework
agreement reached in Lausanne on 2 April between
Iran and the P5+1, which represents an opportunity
to resolve more than the nuclear issue alone. That is
a clear example of how political will and unrelenting
effort can help bring solutions.

We need leadership. We need political will. But
above all, we need courage 4 courage from the leaders
of the region, courage from the leaders of members
of the Security Council and from the members of the
international community. We need the courage to do
the right thing, to take the right step forward, towards
lasting peace in the Middle East.

