Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the
opportunity to reflect on our collective efforts regarding
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan, which Senegal has
had the honour to chair for the past two years. I would
also like to thank the troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council Affairs Division,
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support for their generous and
efficient support of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. My thanks also go to the Panel of Experts
on South Sudan, the staff ofthe United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and the sanctions secretariat for their
commendable efforts to ensure the effectiveness of the
Security Council sanctions regime for South Sudan.

With regard to the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to share with the Council some
lessons that we have learned during the two years of
Senegal's chairship. The main point to be made is the
renewed interest in dialogue with the Security Council
and the Secretariat, particularly on the part of the
troop- and police-contributing countries, which has
been demonstrated by major active participation in
the work of the Working Group. The Working Group
agreed ahead of time on its programme of work for
both 2016 and 2017, since it was essential to arrive at a
consensus on the various issues, most of them complex,
to be put on its agenda. The major issues included
the role of technology in peacekeeping operations;
the partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations and how to strengthen regional
stakeholders during peacekeeping operations; the issue
of complementarity between United Nations counter-
terrorism entities and peacekeeping missions; the
political frameworks for intelligence in peacekeeping
operations and the issue of strengthening the links with
political strategies for the protection of civilians. That
was the programme for 2016.

In 2017, the Working Group considered the subject
of developing synergies in consolidating and sustaining
peace in Africa and addressing ways in which the United
Nations, the African Union and regional mechanisms
could continue to build on their strategic partnership.
The second major issue for 2017 was that of compiling
and analysing information for updating and getting
feedback from the Secretariat about developments
regarding policies on intelligence in peacekeeping.
The third major issue was the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the challenges and
prospects involved. The fourth was the special meeting
with the troop- and police-contributing countries on
the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

It will be important to capitalize on this positive
dynamic with a view to further strengthening the
strategic dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing States,
especially in the context of the feelings of trust and
frustration shared by all parties. Needless to say, we
need a more substantial dialogue between the various
stakeholders if we are to improve our impact on the
ground. That is the point of reflecting on ways and
means ofimproving this triangular dialogue, in synergy
with the ongoing initiatives in the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), with a View to
combining our efforts and taking better account of the
views of the troop- and police-contributing countries.

The meeting of the Working Group on
10 November - on this issue of improving the
triangular dialogue, which was held in partnership
with the United Kingdom and Pakistan, the facilitators
of the C-34 consultative process - and the Group's
3 October meeting with the United States on the reform
of United Nations peacekeeping operations helped to
initiate a push for greater cooperation between the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries
and the Secretariat. In our View, we must maintain that
dynamic if we are to lay the foundations for renewed
trust, which is crucial to ensuring a more productive
dialogue that meets the various stakeholders'
expectations. The Security Council, the C-34 and the
Secretariat should work to strengthen that triangular
cooperation in order to ensure frank and permanent
dialogue between the various actors and to promote
productive discussion based on in-depth and objective
analysis of situations on the ground and the capacities
needed to deal with them.

As the conclusions of the most recent meeting of the
Working Group made clear, the challenges to achieving
a more inclusive and substantial triangular dialogue
include a lack of timely information, insufficient
time for stakeholders to prepare for meetings, and the
frequently perfunctory nature of the informal meetings.
In our View, therefore, it will be important to ensure that
the following procedures are observed for triangular
dialogue discussions. Enough notice should be given
for the consultations so that there is time to consult with
the relevant stakeholders and gather information from
them prior to the meeting. The purpose of the meeting
and the documents to be discussed should be agreed
and clear to all parties before the meeting. Whether
formal or informal, meetings should be conducted in
the most effective format possible. Lastly, meetings
should be announced early enough to enable all the
parties concerned to prepare to participate actively.
Regarding the format for meetings, it was suggested
that triangular consultations be held in the format of
regular informal and private meetings between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the major troop-
contributing countries.

Those are the recommendations and proposals
that we have focused on with regard to improving the
triangular dialogue, in addition to those contained
in the revised note on the working methods of the
Security Council (S/2017/507) formulated under Japan's
efficient presidency. But what matters most, in my
humble opinion, is that troop- and police-contributing
countries should be able to express their concerns and
that they should receive the welcome and attention
they need. Finally, better use should be made of
the work of the Working Group by ensuring that its
recommendations and conclusions are better reflected
in the decisions of the Council.

As Council members know, Cote d'Ivoire will
chair this Working Group starting on 1 January, and I
therefore wish its delegation every success in leading it.

With regard to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan ,
I would like to note first of all that Senegal assumed
the chairmanship of the Committee six months after
the first and only designation of sanctions by the six-
person Committee and several months after the Panel
of Experts first recommended that the Security Council
impose an arms embargo on South Sudan.

We have all seen that, between 2016 and 2017, the
conflict in South Sudan deteriorated dramatically.
There is no need to return to this in detail at this
time, since briefings and consultations have already
allowed us to take the full measure of the gravity
of the situation. In December 2016, I visited Juba,
Malakal and the countries of the region so as to better
understand the situation there and to have a better idea
of developments on the ground.

In 2017, we have witnessed a resurgence of fighting
in many parts of South Sudan. On several occasions,
the Security Council has turned to the region for advice
on the possible impact of an arms embargo and new
sanctions on South Sudan. We should consider whether
the Council should gather and take into account
the views of the region before considering further
measures. This discussion led to the preparation of a
draft resolution submitted to the Security Council on
23 December 2016, which proposed the establishment
of an arms embargo with an annex containing a list of
four additional names to be designated for immediate
sanctions. As this text did not receive the necessary
nine votes, it was not adopted.

During 2017, I briefed the Committee, in particular
on 18 January, on my visit to South Sudan and the
region, and on 21 March the Committee heard briefings
by Special Representatives on children and armed
conflict and sexual violence. On 10 November, the
Committee held a joint meeting with the Committees
on Libya and on the Sudan on the activities of armed
groups from Darfur in the region.

I would like to note that in my 2017 interim report,
which the Committee recently considered, the Panel of
Experts reiterated its August 2015 recommendation to
impose a general arms embargo on South Sudan and to
mandate the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
to monitor the implementation of such an embargo, if
adopted, and allocate the means to do so effectively.
In this document, the Panel also recommended that
the Committee identify those responsible for actions
and policies that threaten peace, security and stability
in South Sudan. In addition to the confidential annex
submitted by the Panel to the Committee in 2016, the
experts indicated in their interim report and previous
reports that they had provided evidence of several
individuals responsible for or complicit in the actions
and policies described in paragraph 9 of resolution
2290 (2016).

As you know, Mr. President, Poland will chair the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) starting on 1 January 2018. The delegation of
Senegal wishes the Polish delegation every success in
this endeavour.

