Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I, too, want to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Moussa for his briefing.

Let me first refer to the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) and, secondly, comment on the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

The LRA continues to pose a serious threat to
civilians, mainly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and South Sudan,
and of course children continue to bear the brunt of
LRA attacks and atrocities. The conceptual tools are
in place, namely, the African Union (AU) Regional
Cooperation Initiative against the Lord's Resistance
Army and the United Nations regional strategy. It is
now critical to swiftly implement and follow up on the
Regional Cooperation Initiative.

We welcome the progress made so far. We reiterate
our call on the countries in the region to take the lead
in resolving the LRA problem, to fully commit to the
AU-led Regional Cooperation Initiative, to strengthen
their cooperation at all levels, and to observe their
primary responsibility to protect civilians. We call upon
all States to cooperate with the Ugandan authorities in
the International Criminal Court in order to implement
the arrest warrants for LRA leaders.

We welcome the AU's leadership role in
coordinating efforts against the LRA, and commend
the close cooperation between Special Representative
Moussa and the Special Envoy of the African Union
for the LRA issue. Strengthening coordination,
information-sharing and trust among the security and
defence forces of the LRA-affected countries remains
important. The African Union should also continue
to persuade Khartoum to participate in the efforts to
address the LRA threat.

We reiterate our encouragement to share the concept
of the military planning of the African Union Initiative
and to agree on a realistic concept of operations for the
AU Regional Task Force. That is important in order to
enable the United Nations and international partners to
consider providing additional support, Where feasible.
In every military action, the protection of civilians
needs to be a priority, well monitored and reviewed.

We appreciate UNOCA's leading role in
coordinating the implementation of the United Nations
regional strategy to address the LRA theat. We commend
all United Nations actors for their contributions and
welcome the progress achieved, notably in inter-mission
and cross-border cooperation. But further efforts are
needed. The successful implementation of the strategy
requires the full commitment of all United Nations
actors and external partners. We encourage focusing on
the protection of civilians; disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration; and disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement
(DDRRR) efforts for former LRA members, ensuring
humanitarian assistance and fostering peacebuilding
and development activities in LRA-affected areas.

Germany remains committed to contributing to the
implementation of the regional strategy. We provide
continuous humanitarian assistance and have supported
the expansion of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo's standard operating procedures for DDRRR
across the region.

In order to enhance the protection of civilians,
we have recently allocated $1.3 million to a UNICEF
project. The project aims at responding to the specific
protection concerns ofwomen and children arising from
LRA operations. We encourage Special Representative
Moussa and UNOCA to ensure close monitoring of the
implementation process of the United Nations regional
strategy, its elaboration and flexible adaptation of all
actions to needs and developments on the ground.

Turning finally to UNOCA's overall mandate and
activities, we commend UNOCA for prioritoritizing its
work programme and for its focus on specific activities.
We welcome UNOCA's contribution to strengthening
the mediation capacities of the Economic Community
of Central African States in the field. Enhancing early
warning and early political action in the region should
also be pursued. We encourage the development of the
integrated counter-terrorism and small arms and light
weapons control strategy for Central Africa, and hail
UNOCA's assistance provided to the States members
of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee
on Security Questions in Central Africa in that
context. We also commend UNOCA's contribution to
implementing the recommendations of resolutions 2018
(2011) and 2039 (2012) on maritime security in the Gulf
of Guinea, and encourage continued close cooperation
with the United Nations Office for West Africa and
regional organizations for the purpose of developing
a regional strategy against piracy and other forms of
maritime crime.

Allow me to conclude, Sir, by expressing our
support for the work of Special Representative Moussa
and the Regional Office. Their contribution to conflict
prevention in Central Africa is important and much
appreciated.

