Mr. Choi (Republic of Korea): By dint of the
concerted and unstinting efforts of the international
community, including United Nations agencies, the
Implementation Force (IFOR) and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), significant
progress has been made during the past year towards peace
and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The guns have fallen silent. The terrible bloodshed
that has plagued the Balkan region for four years has
finally stopped, and life is slowly returning to normal. The
long and difficult healing process of reconciliation among
the warring parties and ethnic reintegration can at last get
under way. On the basis of the Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, elections were held, and common
institutions are taking shape. Furthermore, relations among
all the successor States to the former Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia have greatly improved.

What has been achieved thus far must not be
squandered, but rather consolidated. To that end, we firmly
believe that the support of the international community
must continue. In this context, my delegation welcomes
the decisions taken at the recent Paris and London
Conferences designed to strengthen the peace process by
encouraging reconciliation and economic, political and
social rehabilitation.

In the same vein, we fully support the establishment
of the multinational Stabilization Force (SFOR) for a
period of 18 months, the extension of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) mandate
for another year and the continued coordinating role of
the High Representative.

However, these international commitments and
burden-sharing are contingent upon the active
participation and full cooperation of all the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in rebuilding a unified and
harmonious multi-ethnic society. This linkage must be
clearly understood.

On the eve of the next stage of the peace process,
my delegation urges all the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to intensify efforts to match the resolve and
commitment of the international community. That having
been said, we wish to underscore two critical problems
calling for immediate and resolute action by the parties
directly concerned.

One is the disturbing trend of ethnic separation,
manifested in the ever-worsening conditions surrounding
freedom of movement and the return of refugees and
displaced persons, as well as the ongoing harassment of
minorities. The other is the lack of progress in bringing
indicted war criminals to justice. In our View, these
lamentable facts are perhaps the greatest obstacles to far-
reaching peace and social stability for the war-weary
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and can only be
overcome through the demonstrated will and
determination of their leaders. With these remarks, my
delegation supports the draft resolution before the Council
today, and will vote in favour of its adoption.

In closing, my delegation would like to pay high
tribute to the dedicated men and women of IFOR,
UNMIBH and all the other international agencies
operating in the region whose commendable dedication
has paid off through the burgeoning peace and stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

