Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
the report (S/2009/277) and to Mr. Holmes for the
updated information on the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.
The Council has now been considering the topic
for 10 years. In that time, we have managed to make
considerable progress in the humanitarian sphere, but,
unfortunately, as was noted in the report, the civilian
population still suffers the majority of the casualties in
conflicts, and that fact remains a burning issue for the
international community. We are convinced that, to
correct the situation, we need in particular to refrain
from selective approaches to violations of international
humanitarian law and to adhere to a strict observance
of the lawful norms of protection.

We fully agree with the conclusions of the
Secretary-General on the increased danger for the
civilian population of the violation of the requirements
of selective and proportionate use of force and on the
need to condemn such breaches without exception. A
sad example in that regard, was the death of some 150
civilians, most of whom were women and children, in
Afghanistan as a result of air strikes by foreign forces
on a populated area in May this year. Clearly, the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
did not learn its lesson from the sad statistics on the
death of more than 800 Afghan civilians in 2008. We
support a careful investigation of such incidents and
punishment of the perpetrators. We call on the interested
parties to inform the Security Council of their efforts.

We emphasize the responsibility of all parties,
including foreign forces, to ensure the security of
civilians and the strict observance of the norms of
international humanitarian law. Like the Secretary-
General, we express our concern about the death of
civilians owing to the actions of private military and
security companies. Their share of the responsibility
must be borne by the people who recruit them.

We believe that the contact of humanitarian
organizations with non-State armed groups can be
established only with the consent of the Government of
the relevant States. Moreover, the practice of such
contacts must be approached with great caution so as
not to legitimize existing outlawed units. We believe
that it is unacceptable to consider terrorist organizations,
especially the Taliban and Al-Qaida, as some sort of
armed opposition groups with which one could
allegedly conduct a dialogue on humanitarian matters.

For additional clarification, we need a
recommendation vesting investigation committees with
the mandate to study specific situations. In our View,
the status and competence of such committees would
need to be specified.

We vigorously condemn attacks on humanitarian
personnel. We support the need to ensure unimpeded
humanitarian access to the affected population. At the
same time, we emphasize that humanitarian work must
be conducted on the basis of the principles of
impartiality, neutrality and humanity.

In that regard, we have noted that, in the annex to
the report, we find the example of the situation in the
Caucasus after the events of August 2008. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for the positive
assessment of Russia's actions to provide humanitarian
assistance in the region. We express our concern that
the Georgian legislation on the so-called occupied
territories is, in fact, hindering international
humanitarian work in South Ossetia.

Early-warning and war- and conflict-prevention
systems provide the basis for protecting civilian
populations. In that regard, the international community
must seek scrupulous observance by all parties of
international law and the relevant decisions of the
Security Council.

