I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 120 States members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). I would like to congratulate Russia on its successful presidency of the Security Council this month and express our thanks for the opportunity for the Non-Aligned Movement to present its position on the question of Palestine - an issue that has historically been one of vital concern and importance to the Movement. During the Online Ministerial Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement, held on 9 October on the theme "Bandung+65: More Relevant, United and Effective NAM against Emerging Global Challenges, including COVID-19", the Ministers adopted a political declaration that stressed that a just, lasting solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects must remain both a priority on the Movement's agenda and a permanent responsibility of the United Nations, until it is satisfactorily resolved in accordance with international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions. The States members of the Movement therefore seize this opportunity to reaffirm once again that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with the Israeli occupation at its core, continues to pose a serious threat to regional and international peace and security and requires urgent attention and action, in accordance with international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the United Nations itself, using tools of multilateral diplomacy for the peaceful resolution of conflicts. The Security Council has a clear responsibility in ensuring the maintenance of international peace and security. It must uphold its Charter duties and act to implement its own resolutions, which not only constitute the foundation for a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the conflict, but are legally binding on all States Members of the United Nations. The question of Palestine cannot be an exception. We therefore remain deeply concerned that this body has for too long been unable to fulfil its mandate on this important question owing to the use of the veto by a permanent member of the Council. NAM members call upon the Security Council to overcome its paralysis and fulfil its Charter duties with respect to the question of Palestine, thereby restoring credibility to this body and upholding its obligations in the achievement of a just and peaceful solution to this protracted conflict and tragic injustice. The Non-Aligned Movement continues to believe that resolution 2334 (2016), which reaffirmed the Security Council's many relevant resolutions on the matter, provides the only viable path to peace, setting forth the essential requirements and parameters for the achievement of a just outcome on the basis of the two- State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, in accordance with the long-standing terms of reference of peace endorsed by the international community, namely, the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and ensuring the fulfilment of the Palestinian people's inalienable rights, including to self- determination and an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Accordingly, we call for the full respect of resolution 2334 (2016) and for the effective implementation of its provisions and obligations, particularly by the occupying Power, including its obligations as a State to respect distinction, which is a matter central to accountability. We also underscore the need for the intensification of international efforts aimed at bringing an end to the Israeli occupation that began in 1967 and at achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive solution, which is also called for under resolution 2334 (2016). Similarly, the States members of the NAM continue to call for the full respect and implementation of all other relevant resolutions, including with regard to the complete cessation of all Israeli settlement activities and with regard to the status of the occupied East Jerusalem, for resolving these issues would create the conditions necessary for bringing an end to the occupation, justly resolving the conflict in all its aspects, and making Palestinian-Israeli peace and security a reality, for the benefit of both peoples, for the region and for the international community as a whole. It is imperative that action be taken immediately, in line with international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, to redress the situation on the ground, de-escalate tensions and foster an appropriate environment for the pursuit of peace, including by averting unilateral, provocative or arbitrary measures that serve only to embolden Israel to further pursue its illegal policies and practices in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. Actions that violate resolutions of the Security Council and the historic status quo of Jerusalem and its holy sites are provocative and dangerous, destroy the prospects for peace and should not be supported or celebrated by any country. Threats of annexation by Israeli officials must be condemned unequivocally, and any measures taken in this regard must be rejected forthwith as null and void and without any legal effect and must be met with firm measures of accountability for such grave breaches, including by lawful countermeasures. In relation to the Gaza Strip, the situation remains of great concern to the Movement, in particular the grave humanitarian situation, which regrettably continues to deteriorate day by day. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its call for the complete lifting of the Israeli blockade, which continues to impose untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering on more than 2 million Palestinian children, women and men in Gaza. This crisis must be comprehensively addressed, in accordance with international law, including humanitarian and human rights law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and in the context of the overall situation of the continuation of the illegitimate, belligerent, Israeli foreign occupation since 1967 of the Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and in the context of the unequivocal calls for an end to such occupation. In the absence of a solution, the States members of the NAM reiterate their call for the continued provision of needed humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the Palestinian people, including Palestinian refugees. The Movement therefore stresses the importance of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), along with other United Nations agencies and international organizations, in alleviating the plight of the Palestinians and calls for full support for the renewal of the Agency's mandate to ensure the continuity of its vital programmes and its contribution to regional stability. In the light of the continuing financial shortfalls, we urge the international community to provide UNRWA with the necessary funding to ensure the continuity of its indispensable operations. As Israel has clearly abdicated its obligations as the occupying Power to protect the Palestinian civilian population, as prescribed by the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, we also reiterate our long-standing call for international protection for the Palestinian people. This is urgent for alleviating the dire state of insecurity of the occupied population and for preventing more losses of innocent human lives. Failure to do so can lead only to further escalations and the tragic deaths of civilians. In this regard, we reiterate our grave concern about the lack of accountability for all the violations committed by Israel, many of which may amount to war crimes. The absence of justice only fosters greater impunity, leads to the recurrence of crimes and destabilizes the situation on the ground, thereby further diminishing the prospects for peace. We continue to call for international action, particularly by the Security Council, to ensure a cessation of and accountability for the violations that are being systematically committed by Israel against the Palestinian civilian population under its occupation. We reiterate that Israel must comply with its duties and responsibilities under international law. Should it continue its blatant contempt of the Security Council and of its international legal obligations, it must be held to account. With regard to the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, such as its illegal decision of 14 December 1981 that purports to alter the legal, physical and demographic status of this territory and its institutional structure, as well as the Israeli measures to apply its jurisdiction and administration there, are null and void and have no legal effect. Accordingly, and in line with our principled position, we demand once again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to its 4 June 1967 borders, pursuant to resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). In addition, we reiterate our condemnation of the unilateral and arbitrary proclamation of the United States of America on recognizing the Golan Heights as part of Israel and renew our call on the Security Council to unequivocally condemn this provocative act. Moreover, the States members of the NAM emphasize the necessity of having Israel withdraw from all Lebanese territories, including the Sheba'a farms, the hills of Kfar Shouba and the Lebanese part of Al-Ghajar village up to the Blue line, in accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions and in particular resolution 1701 (2006). In conclusion, we take this opportunity to reiterate our call for the international community to act collectively and responsibly to uphold international law and to exert and intensify all necessary efforts in support of the just Palestinian cause, the ultimate goal of which is to bring an end to this historic and grave injustice. We reaffirm our commitment to promoting a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects, including for the plight of the Palestine refugees, and reaffirm our support to the Palestinian people in their struggle to achieve justice and fulfil their inalienable rights and legitimate national aspirations, including to self-determination, freedom and independence in their sovereign and independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
