Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this regular briefing by the Chairs of
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council related to
counter-terrorism. Our gratitude goes also to the
Permanent Representatives of Turkey, Mexico and
Austria for their comprehensive briefings on the work
of the committees they chair during this reporting
period. The Russian Federation views the committees'
stepped up efforts as an important Security Council
contribution to countering the global threat of
terrorism.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) has
made substantial efforts to make its work more
transparent. It has launched a more substantive
dialogue with a broad spectrum of Member States and
specialized entities of the United Nations, and it has
enhanced its contacts with international and regional
organizations. In our view, this will help bring about
fuller implementation by all Governments of the
provisions of the relevant resolutions.

With respect to the development of cooperation
with partner organizations, we attach particular
importance to regular meetings of the CTC with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
We support the Committee's intention to focus on the
more topical aspects of resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005) and to continue its practice of holding
meetings on specific priority themes and regions.
Among these themes is extradition and mutual legal
assistance with respect to terrorism, pursuant to the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that
the guiding principles under preparation and the
possible recommendations emerging from past and
future thematic and regional discussions will prove to
be balanced and carefully verified.

We attach great importance to the Committee's
discussions on resolution 1624 (2005). We have all
seen the consequences of incitement to terrorism.
Suicide bombers continue to perpetrate bloody acts of
violence, of which the terrorist attacks in the Moscow
metro at the end of March were yet another horrific
example. Resolution 1624 (2005) has an important role
to play in countering the ideology of terrorism. The
work of the CTC in that area must be strengthened,
with the incorporation of issues related to that
resolution into the Committee's programme of country
visits aimed at analysing and broadly disseminating
accumulated good practices.

We endorse the Committee's intention to begin an
exercise of considering regional aspects, on the basis
of conclusions of the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which the
Security Council approved in late 2009.

In terms of improving the Committee's working
methods, the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
regarding resolution 1373 (2001) continue to be of
fundamental importance; they serve as basic
documents for regular dialogue with States and as an
objective, non-discriminatory and systemic foundation
for monitoring the counter-terrorism efforts of States.

We highly appreciate the assistance that the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) provides to the CTC. We support the
Directorate's participation in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force as part of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We expect
that, working within the framework of its existing
mandate and in line with the decisions of the CTC,
CTED will continue to place its rich expertise at the
disposal of the Task Force.

Turning an issue raised during today's briefings,
it would be remiss of me not to recall the resumption of
the work of the Security Council Working Group
established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004) on the
initiative of the Russian Federation. We support the
active endeavours of the Turkish chairmanship to
breathe new life into the Group's work and to make use
of the potential offered by its mandate.

One of the Council's effective counter-terrorism
mechanisms remains the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al
Qaeda and the Taliban and associated individuals and
entities. One cannot fail to be alarmed by the Taliban's
increasing activity, both within and outside
Afghanistan. The existence of strong links and
cooperation between the Taliban and Al-Qaida cannot
be disputed. We view as dangerous attempts to
establish political contacts with extremist leaders,
especially in breach of the sanctions regime. We urge
all States to act unswervingly against individuals on
the sanctions list, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions and the guiding principles of the
1267 Committee's work. We participate in the
Committee's work to keep the list up to date and a
reflection of the true nature of today's terrorist threat.
Here, we believe that de-listing should take place in
strict compliance with established procedures.

In our view, the steps taken to enhance the
transparency of the Committee's procedures are timely.
That is the thrust of resolution 1904 (2009), which
established the position of a de-listing Ombudsperson,
whom we expect to operate in strict compliance with
his or her mandate. We urge States, pursuant to
resolution 1735 (2006), to submit requests for the
listing of individuals or organizations associated with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban, including those financing
their terrorist activities using proceeds derived from
illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs. We are convinced
that full, good-faith implementation by all States of
their commitments in that sphere is required for success
in our common effort to counter the very real threat to
international peace and security posed by Al-Qaida and
the Taliban.

The Russian Federation attaches great importance
to the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and to the unswerving
implementation by all States of that resolution and the
follow-up resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008).
The actions they prescribe to prevent weapons of mass
destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials from falling into the hands of non-State
actors, principally terrorists, remain timely. Many
participants in last year's comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) spoke of the
gravity of the threat posed by terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.

The 1540 Committee plays a key role in
strengthening and enhancing the effectiveness of
international efforts to suppress the black market in
weapons of mass destruction. We note that the
Committee and its Expert Group have done a great deal
of work during the reporting period. They worked hard
on the proposal voiced during the review meetings and
on analysing the outcome of the comprehensive review.
The programme of work for this year, based on that
document, sets out practical steps to further strengthen
the international community's efforts to counter the
proliferation of risks and threats, with the 1540
Committee playing a coordinating role. We urge the
Committee to give priority to assisting States in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004) and to
coordinating broad international cooperation to that
end.

We stand ready to back such measures, including
in the framework of our ongoing cooperation, along
with fellow members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, on issues related to the mandate of
the 1540 Committee.

The Russian Federation will continue its focused
efforts to achieve the goals set in Security Council
resolutions 1540 (2004), 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008)
and to establish, under United Nations auspices, a
dependable system for countering the illicit trade in
weapons of mass destruction.

