Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Madam President, for
convening this meeting.

First, let me begin by saying that in the current
situation, I believe that there is full agreement among all
members of the Security Council that we must support
the efforts being made Mr. De Mistura and his team
with regard to such a sensitive issue and the work of the
Secretary-General. Given that grim scenario, there may
be a glimmer of hope at the end of this long, dark tunnel
of war that is ravaging the brotherly country of Syria.

Three meetings took place during the Astana
process, and there was unanimous agreement in the
Security Council pertaining to decisions that were
reflected in the longest-lasting ceasefire during the
conflict as a result of the efforts of Russia, Turkey, Iran
and Kazakhstan. The peace talks under the auspices
of the United Nations through the Special Envoy have
already enjoyed their fifth round of talks in Geneva
on the four baskets, which Mr. De Mistura mentioned,
including governance issues, constitutional process
issues, election issues and counter-terrorism, among
others. Bolivia expresses its most fervent support
for the work of Mr. De Mistura and the Geneva and
Kazakhstan process, which are both complementary.

Another area of convergence - and I hope that
this is not just talk - is that we have all said that the
only option for resolving the conflict is through a
political process. We therefore call for the joint work
of the parties involved to ensure that the peace process
be taken forward for and by the Syrian people based
on candid, inclusive and constructive dialogue. We
urge the parties involved in the crisis to abandon once
and for all any provocative action, and ensure, as the
Secretary-General said, that they ensure that there is no
further escalatory intentions in the crisis. Peace talks
must continue without delays and must proceed in a
manner that strengthens and consolidates the mandates
of resolution 2254 (2015). That is a clear example that
it is possible for us to take coordinated and unanimous
action together.

As we have said, we believe that any type of
unilateral action will only undermine a dialogue
process and block the way to peacebuilding in Syria
at the expense of millions of lives in that country. We
acknowledge the efforts made by the Government
and the people of Syria in combating terrorism. We
vigorously condemn all terrorist acts as criminal and
unjustifiable, whatever their motivation, wherever
and whenever they take place, and by whomever they
are committed. We reiterate the need to ensure that
all States combat terrorism in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant obligations
in accordance with international law.

Once again, Bolivia calls on the Council to ensure
that we defend mulitilateralism in line with the Charter.
We must say that the opposite of multilateralism is
unilateralism. Unilateral actions only undermine the
dialogue process being taken forward by Mr. De Mistura
and the Secretary-General. By the same token, it also
prejudices the outcome. We call for an independent,
impartial, comprehensive and conclusive investigation
of the atrocious chemical weapons attack. Of course,
we do not understand the logic behind the chronology
of the condemnation following the attack, before an
investigation. I do not really understand the rational
behind that attitude unless the intention is to bring
some sort of pressure to bear on the Moscow talks
taking place between Russia and the United States.

I fail to understand the intentions behind
introducing a draft resolution that, as we already know,
will be vetoed. We have spoken about resolution 2254
(2015), which was unanimously adopted by the Council,
and we believe that the international community is
calling on the 15 members of the Security Council to
remain unified and work together towards achieving
peace. Who benefits from war? Who benefits from the
fact that the Security Council is not working as one
voice? The answer is, first and foremost, the terrorists.
My understanding is that we have a common enemy
with a name: Da'esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra, Al-Qaida and
Boko Haram. Those are our common enemies, and the
international community is demanding that the Security
Council act jointly, in unison and unanimously to
combat that threat to international peace and security.

Who else benefits from the failure of the peace
processes to advance and the Security Council's failure
to work as one? The answer is the industrial military
complex and those who benefit economically from
war. They are the ones receiving the best economic
guarantees that result from the Syrian and other wars.
I read an editorial in the New York Times by Charles
Blow, who wrote that war is also a very lucrative
business from which many people enjoy the benefits.

We hope that the Security Council will assume its
responsibility not only under the Charter of the United
Nations, but also in accordance with the tenets of
humanity, and work as one to free humankind from the
nightmare of war and avoid an impasse from which, as
we know from the lessons of history, it is very difficult
to exit.

