Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to express to you, Sir, our
appreciation of your efforts to convene this meeting.

We also wish to offer Ambassador Dumisani
Shadrack Kumalo, Permanent Representative of South
Africa to the United Nations and Chairman of the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
our deep thanks for his call on the Security Council to
convene this general debate on the question of Iraq. We
believe that this debate is timely, especially given the
increased talk of grave developments in Iraq in
particular and the region in general.

We have listened carefully yesterday and today to
all the statements made before the Council. In their
entirety, they have conveyed the urgency of settling the
Iraqi question by peaceful means and in accordance
with the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter and with international law. In this regard, we
are pleased to express our satisfaction at the assertion
by most delegations of the need to preserve Iraq's
territorial integrity and the unity of its people.

In his statement to the General Assembly on 15
September, Mr. Farouk Al-Shara', Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian
Arab Republic, defined Syria's clear position on
developments in the Iraqi situation. He stated:

"The international community is committed to the
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
We cannot recall anyone doubting that
commitment. We also stress that it is the right of
the Iraqi people alone to decide their future
without any interference in their internal affairs.
It is the duty of all Members of our Organization
to commit themselves to the implementation of
United Nations resolutions. In keeping with that
commitment, Syria supports the resumption of
dialogue between Iraq and the Secretary-General
with the objective of reaching a political solution
that meets the requirements of the Security
Council and that grants Iraq hope of peace,
security and the lifting of the sanctions imposed
on it, especially as Iraq has officially recognized
the State of Kuwait and its international borders."
(A/57/PV.8, p. 13)

The Arab Summit convened in Beirut and the
Ministerial Meeting held in Cairo a few weeks ago
affirmed their rejection of any military attack on Iraq.
Syria is pleased whenever certain States declare their
commitment to resorting to international legitimacy to
solve pending problems between the United Nations
and Iraq. Syria encourages and supports this approach,
because it is the real guarantee of maintaining
international peace and security in spite of our bitter
feeling at the double standard used in dealing with
Security Council resolutions. However, we continue to
call on Iraq to comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including those relevant to the
return of inspectors to Iraq.

At the same time, we must recall the need to
implement the provisions of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991), especially its paragraph 14,
which calls for the establishment of a zone free of
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Serious developments in recent weeks have attracted
the interest of the international community as they may
be conducive to reaching the required solution
guaranteeing the implementation of Security Council
resolutions on Iraq.

In Vienna on 30 September and 1 October,
Mr. Hans Blix, the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC,
and Mr. Mohammed ElBaradei, the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), met
with an Iraqi delegation. A constructive and successful
debate was held on the practical arrangements for the
return of United Nations inspectors to Iraq.

Reports and statements by Messrs. Blix and
ElBaradei describe this meeting as successful, since it
proved possible to achieve a mutual understanding on
the practical arrangements for the work of the
inspectors in Iraq.

Furthermore, the Iraqi side displayed the
necessary flexibility and consented to the facilities
requested by the representatives of the United Nations.
The letters exchanged between Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei on the one hand, and Iraqi officials on
the other hand, made it clear that the Iraqi side has
endorsed all the understandings achieved.

Iraq displayed its readiness to accept the
inspectors as of 19 October. Syria and other States have
affirmed, during all the debates held in the Security
Council, the utmost importance of benefiting
immediately from such positive developments, calling
for the dispatch of inspectors to Iraq promptly so that
they can resume their work without delay, especially
since the Council has been calling, for the last four
years, for the return of inspectors to Iraq.

If we take into account the accomplishments
achieved during the previous phases of inspection and
the conclusions of the Arab Summit in Beirut and
Iraq's expression of its will to return the Kuwaiti
national archives and to find a mechanism that is now
under discussion to solve the question of Kuwaiti
prisoners, through the efforts to be undertaken by
Mr. Yuli Vorontsov, the High-level Coordinator, we
could say that the goal of closing the entire Iraq file in
the Security Council is now within reach.
The Security Council during this period has
witnessed consultations and discussions on the next
step in the work of the Council as regards Iraq. In the
context of our understanding of the developments we
referred to, Syria believes that the basic task now is to
preserve as much as possible unity of action in the
Council and unity of position in support of the task of
the inspectors.

We have declared on more than one occasion that
there is no justification to sacrifice the unity of action
in the Council, especially since Iraq has fulfilled all the
requirements of the practical arrangements needed by
the inspectors. Also, the questions raised by Mr. Blix in
his meeting with the Security Council and the
consultations last Tuesday can be solved in the context
of the great flexibility displayed by the Iraqi side and
in the context of the mutual wish of all sides to
scrupulously implement relevant Security Council
resolutions on Iraq. We must recall that escalating the
tone of military aggression against Iraq and beating the
drums of war do not serve the principles and purposes
to which we have agreed in the United Nations Charter.

The founding of the United Nations in the wake
of the Second World War aimed at establishing a world
of peace and security. In no way can we accept an
unwarranted war whose victims will be mainly
innocent civilians.

Also, the repercussions of such wars will be
devastating to Iraq in particular and will increase
extremism and its grave consequences in a turbulent
area because of events in the occupied territories and
Israel's flagrant defiance of relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We would like to affirm the need for goodwill in
dealing with the Iraq issue, especially since the
Security Council has not taken any action to mitigate
the severe effects of the sanctions imposed on Iraq, in
spite of the progress in the destruction of weapons of
mass destruction in Iraq in the previous inspection
phases.

Most delegations that have addressed this
meeting have affirmed the need to implement Security
Council resolutions without double standard, in
particular not excluding Israel from the implementation
of Security Council resolutions. Unlike the distortion
practised by the representative of Israel, who spoke just
a little while ago, in his attempt to distort the Charter,
we affirm that Article 25 of the Charter calls on all
States to implement Security Council resolutions and
that all Council resolutions are binding and must be
implemented. For the first time we hear about
resolutions adopted by the Council that are mere
recommendations or resolutions of a different nature.
This is distortion. All Security Council resolutions are
binding on all Members.

As for Israel, which has attempted to avoid the
implementation of these resolutions for more than five
decades, it must not be allowed to shirk its
responsibility to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions. What is truly strange about the Israeli logic
is the talk about democracy while Israel is practising
various kinds of murder and destruction in the
occupied Arab territories. Is there a new concept called
the democracy of occupation? Or is there a new logic
regarding democratic occupation? This is a distortion.
And this is clowning before this Council. It is
unacceptable clowning. The representative of Israel
spoke about South Lebanon. However, he forgot to
mention Israel's twenty-year occupation of South
Lebanon in flagrant defiance of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978). Had it not been for the sacrifices
of the Lebanese national resistance, Israel would not
have withdrawn. The other fact the Israeli
representative failed to mention is the existence of
scores of Lebanese prisoners, kidnapped by Israel from
their homes and families, their mosques and from the
streets and villages of South Lebanon. Obfuscation of
facts will not serve the representative of Israel, because
the facts are known to all members of the Council.
Israel should recommit itself to the peace process and
put an end to its occupation of the occupied Arab
territories. That is the only solution that will achieve a
just and comprehensive peace in the region.

Finally, we must affirm that the Iraqi people have
suffered long enough from the effects of the embargoes
and sanctions imposed upon Iraq for more than eleven
years. These people have not seen any light at the end
of this long dark tunnel of suffering, death and
destruction. Will our current open debates in the
Council over the next few days define the next step
needed to embark on a phase of peace, hope and
security for the Iraqi people, the region and the entire
world? This is the challenge for us all. Let us work
towards achieving peace instead of waging war, and let
us work towards the implementation of all Security
Council resolutions in order to achieve peace and
security for all.

