Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller for their briefings on the latest
situation in eastern Ukraine.

We note the recent status report and the daily
reports of the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), which indicate that there is a volatile
security situation on the ground and an increase in the
levels of violence and civilian casualties. In the recent
thematic report of the Special Monitoring Mission we
also noted the impact of the ongoing situation on efforts
to improve the humanitarian situation. We understand
the effects of the deteriorating security situation
on civilians and infrastructure and the resulting
importance of responding to humanitarian needs on
the ground. We believe that the implementation of
the ceasefire regime agreed to by the parties is vital
to de-escalating the increasing tensions and helping
to address the needs of the civilian population. In that
regard, we should note the recent call for restraint by
Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine, who also urged
all sides to protect the population and deliver on their
commitments to ending the violence, and especially
to withdrawing weapons, disengaging, demining and
adhering to the ceasefire.

There is no doubt that only a peaceful settlement
can resolve the situation in eastern Ukraine. That is
why it is absolutely imperative that the parties remain
fully committed to the implementation of the Minsk
agreements and strictly adhere to resolution 2202
(2015), which endorsed the package of measures for
their implementation. We can only hope that the parties
will be able to make progress within the framework
of the Normandy format and other relevant formats in
order to tackle outstanding issues in the implementation
of the Minsk agreements. As some of my colleagues
have said, that is the only way to find a lasting political
solution to the situation in Ukraine.

