Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China is deeply saddened at the major loss of life and
property suffered by Turkey during the earthquake that
struck its eastern region. My Prime Minister, Mr. Wen
Jiabao, has already conveyed our condolences to the
Prime Minister of Turkey, and China is ready to extend
a helping hand.

I should like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing.
I also listened very carefully to the statement made by
the representatives of Palestine and Israel.

The Middle East peace process is currently at an
impasse, which is a source of great concern to China.
We hope that all of the parties concerned will
demonstrate political will, and, on the basis of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Road Map, settle disputes between Palestine
and Israel by political and diplomatic means, so that
the two countries can coexist in peace.

The issue of Israel's settlements is the direct
cause of the current impasse in the peace talks and a
major obstacle to their resumption. China deeply
regrets the recent decision of Israel in connection with
new settlements in East Jerusalem, to which we are
opposed. We urge Israel to put an end to that project, to
cooperate actively with international peace efforts so as
to create conditions for building confidence between
the two sides and break the present impasse.

China welcomes the recent agreement between
the two sides on the exchange of prisoners, and we
appreciate the mediation efforts made by countries
such as Egypt and Germany in that respect. China
hopes that both sides will seize this opportunity to
continue to take constructive steps to ease tensions and
minimize differences in order to restart the peace talks.

Efforts to solve the Middle East problem require
the strong support and help of the international
community. China welcomes and supports all efforts
aimed at minimizing differences and promoting the
relaunching of dialogue and negotiations.

On 26 October, the Quartet will hold talks with
Palestine and Israel separately on the resumption of
direct talks. We hope that all parties concerned will
work together for the early resumption of talks and the
achievement of substantive results in that context.
China is in favour of the Council's playing a greater
role in connection with the question of the Middle
East.

China was among the first to recognize the State
of Palestine. We have always been supportive of
Palestine's just cause to establish an independent State.
We support the vision of two States realized through
political negotiations and the establishment of a fully
sovereign, independent State of Palestine based on the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
China supports Palestine's membership in the United
Nations.

To achieve a comprehensive, lasting and just
peace in the Middle East, there must be progress on all
tracks of the peace process, including the talks between
Lebanon and Israel and between Israel and Syria. All
parties concerned should create conditions for
diplomatic negotiations with a view to ending the
confrontations and tensions that have plagued this
region for too long.

