The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
representative of the United States for his kind words
addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Argentina.

There is very little to add to this very exhaustive and
informative debate, but first of all, I cannot fail to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report and to
thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for the very broad and useful
information he has provided us. I would also like to
express my delegation's thanks to the United Nations
Transitional Administrator for the excellent work he is
accomplishing in East Timor, and I would like to extend
our congratulations to all the personnel of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) for their brilliant performance under
extremely difficult conditions.

Secondly, now that the transfer from the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) to the
military component of UNTAET is under way, the
countries that participated in the International Force
should be thanked. It is especially necessary to pay tribute
to Major General Peter Cosgrove for his consummate
professionalism and his courageous leadership of
INTERFET.

The United Nations has taken up a very important
challenge in shouldering the burden for the administration
and preparation of East Timor for independence. In the
first three months, in close consultation with the Timorese
represented in the National Consultative Council (NCC),
UNTAET has managed to make progress in some key

 

areas, but, as we see from the Secretary-General's report
and from Mr. Vieira de Mello, much remains to be done to
create a foundation for an independent, stable and
prosperous East Timor.

Along these lines, I would like to indicate my
delegation's concern for the still-unresolved question of the
refugees in West Timor and our concern about the conduct
of some elements in the militias who continue to harass
Timorese, particularly in the Oecussi enclave. Similarly, I
would like to say that the growing social tensions in the
cities of East Timor and the growth in the rate of
delinquency are negative factors that could jeopardize social
stability in the Territory. We agree with the Secretary-
General and with other comments made today that these
questions are intimately linked to the serious economic
situation, the high rate of unemployment and the abysmal
condition of public services. We hope that the highest
priority will be attached to solving these problems.

Finally, I would like to point out the importance for
East Timor of normalizing its relationship with Indonesia
and the need to promote genuine reconciliation between the
peoples and the authorities of both countries. We trust that
the exchange of bilateral visits will contribute to solving
some of the pending issues and make it possible to find a
solution to the problem of refugees and border control
between East and West Timor.

As regards the human rights questions raised several
times during today's discussion, I agree with the idea that
at some point the Security Council will have to examine in
informal consultations the letter dated 31 January 2000
from the Secretary-General to the Council and to other
bodies of the United Nations. I think that will also be an
appropriate occasion to look at the letter of the Secretary-
General to the Security Council also dated 31 January 2000
in which he transmits to us the letter addressed to him by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Indonesia on this subject.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Vieira de Mello to respond
to the observations and questions addressed to him and to
make any other statement that he may wish to make.

