Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First

and foremost, we would like to thank Mr. Holmes for

his briefing on his visit to Ethiopia, the Sudan and

Somalia. We would also like to congratulate the Office

for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
for its efforts to help those that need it the most.

Mr. Holmes's visit to the region of Ogaden in
Ethiopia has uncovered the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, which is a result of conflict
between the Ethiopian military and the Ogaden
National Liberation Front. We call on the Ethiopian
Government to investigate the violations of human
rights, which presumably have been committed by
Ethiopian soldiers, in conformity with the instruments
of applicable humanitarian rights. We also call on the
parties to the conflict to promptly reinitiate the process
of dialogue.

Having said that, we are very hopeful that the
Ethiopian Government will soon allow the presence of
humanitarian assistance organizations in that area. That
decision, together with operations on the ground to
provide medicines, water and sanitation, will help to
meet many of the needs of the affected populations.

Also noteworthy is the progress made in the
consultations with the regional and national
Governments to find alternatives for solving the
humanitarian crisis in the region. This is critical if we
are to prevent the situation from deteriorating into the
kind of disaster indicated by Mr. Holmes, which must
be avoided.

In Darfur, Mr. Holmes's visit confirms the
growing danger and difficulties that are being faced by
the inhabitants of the region. The number of internally
displaced persons continues to increase. Aid
organizations are not able to provide an effective
response to the humanitarian needs because of
bureaucratic and security obstacles. All of this makes
the deployment of the Hybrid Force even more urgent.
We must do everything within our power to overcome
these administrative difficulties. Of equal or even
greater importance, is the ongoing process in Sirte.
That process, if it is to be genuinely effective, will
require the participation of all parties to the conflict.

In Somalia, the humanitarian situation is probably
the most devastating situation that we currently have
before us with more than 1 million displaced persons.

Reports indicate - and Mr. Holmes confirmed this
today - that the international community and relief
07-62908

organizations have made important progress in
humanitarian coverage, but a lot still remains to be
done.

We are encouraged at the information provided
by Mr. Holmes that the Prime Minister, Nur Hassan
Hussein, assures us that he will treat as a matter of
priority the critical humanitarian, political and security
situation. On a more strategic level, the complexity and
the magnitude of the situation in Somalia sometimes
seems to go beyond the capacity of this Organization to
deal with effectively. However, that is no reason for the
international community to stop trying to find a
solution to this difficult situation, which necessarily
requires strengthening the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

In those three conflicts, our failure to take action,
could affect the credibility of the Organization and, in
particular, that of this Council. Therefore, we must act
energetically to face those challenges.

