Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is concerned by the
continuing complex political and humanitarian
situation in the Sudanese province of Darfur.
Unfortunately, both sides - the Government of the
Sudan and the rebels - so far have not fully complied
with the demands of the United Nations, and that is the
major reason for the continuation of the Darfur
conflict.

During the difficult work on drafting the
resolution just adopted by the Security Council, the
position of the Russian delegation, as well as that of
our partners in the Council, was intend to promote the
speedy righting of this negative situation and to make
the parties aware of their responsibility to the people of
the Sudan and to the international community. The
question, however, is how to achieve that objective and
ensure a cessation of this humanitarian tragedy without
simultaneously doing anything detrimental to the
process of peacefully settling the situation in the
Sudan, which is so difficult to achieve.

We are convinced that the potential of political
and diplomatic measures to defuse the conflict in
Darfur has by no means been exhausted. Implementing
those measures is particularly relevant right now, at the
beginning of the deployment of the United Nations
peacekeeping operation in the south of Sudan, which
has been authorized by the Security Council - an
operation designed to create favourable conditions for
an intra-Sudan settlement and reconciliation, including
in Darfur.

It is important to give time to the united
Government of the Sudan, which was created in
accordance with the Nairobi Agreement, so that it can
show itself in a positive light, including with regard to
Darfur. The imposition of sanctions against that
Government is hardly likely to create a constructive
atmosphere for its efforts. This, naturally, does not
negate the justification for targeted pressure on those
who in fact are creating obstacles to normalizing the
situation in Darfur.

On numerous occasions we have noted the
need - that is the need - to draw up an effective
mechanism to assist the parties to quickly resume the
negotiating process in Abuja and to achieve positive
results in moving it forward. Sanctions against the
Sudanese Government are hardly likely to promote
that. In addition, serious doubts arise as to the practical
ability to implement the sanctions regime imposed by
the Security Council, and that does not help to
strengthen the effectiveness of the important
instrument of sanctions.

In that context to which I have referred, we have
taken note of what was expressed during the discussion
of this resolution before its adoption, namely, the
possibility of reviewing the sanctions regime. We
consider that the Council should, if the situation
allows, as quickly as possible review the decision to
impose an arms embargo, particularly in the light of
the formation of the coalition Government of the
Sudan. In addition, it should be taken into account that
both the African Union and the League of Arab States
have unequivocally opposed the unfounded
strengthening of sanctions pressure in the Darfur
context. We share the fundamental approaches
formulated by those authoritative organizations
concerning the settlement in the Sudan.

Unfortunately, the authors of the draft resolution
did not fully take into account the concerns I have
referred to. In such circumstances, the Russian
delegation unfortunately was not able to support this
draft. At the same time, Russia will continue to
actively promote - inter alia within the Security
Council, and taking into account its earlier decisions -
the speediest possible stabilization of the situation and
a political settlement in Darfur and in the Sudan as a
whole.

