Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): In
unanimously adopting resolution 2351 (2017), which
extends for an additional 12 months the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO), which expired on 30 April, the
Security Council continues the constructive role played
by the United Nations in the search for a definitive
solution to the question of Western Sahara.

We would therefore once again like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara and Head of MINURSO, as well as the
outgoing Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara. My delegation would also like to hail
the leadership demonstrated yet again by the United
States delegation in the conduct of the Council's work.
We welcome the constructive spirit demonstrated
by members of the Council, which ensured that we
arrived at a text that nurtures hope for the ongoing
political process.

The concerns reiterated in the resolution just
adopted are proof of the widely shared determination to
tackle challenges in the region and to assist the parties
to reach a fair, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution. Furthermore, I would like to highlight and
welcome efforts made by the Kingdom of Morocco and
by the Secretariat in an ongoing and intense dialogue
that facilitated progress on several crucial issues,
creating an appropriate framework for negotiations
between parties. It is our hope therefore that this
cooperation will produce the necessary progress on
other key matters, and that cooperation between the
Secretariat and other parties concerned could be guided
by the same spirit of practicality and reconciliation.

I would also like to welcome the intention
expressed by Secretary-General Guterres to relaunch
the negotiating process, breathing new dynamism into
it. In that context, Senegal would like to reiterate its
belief that the initiative for autonomy proposed by
Morocco in 2007 is a serious, credible and realistic
matter for negotiation. We think that initiative should
be taken into account as negotiations resume between
the parties, with a view to reaching a fair, lasting and
mutually acceptable political solution, as I said earlier,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

