Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the Security Council for
taking the time to take up an issue that deserves the
attention of the United Nations, namely the aggression
against Venezuela.

Ijust wanted to restate a few points very briefly.

First, as has been repeated here from a permanent
script on humanitarian assistance, the Government of
President Maduro has been working with the United
Nations for several years now, most recently in the face
of the economic crisis provoked by the criminal blockade
against the Venezuelan economy. In September last
year, President Maduro was here at the United Nations
and met with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres,
agreeing with him a mechanism to increase cooperation
and receive technical humanitarian assistance through
the United Nations. As noted by the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation and other countries ofthe region, we
have been receiving assistance through this mechanism
from the United Nations.

I also wish to emphasize that we agreed with the
European Union that this mechanism, which is already
in place and operational, could not only manage the
delivery of assistance to Venezuela but also, for an
economy that has been blockaded like ours, it could
facilitate procurement 4 purchases 4 because of
the problem of over-compliance, as the experts call
it, of international banks with the so-called sanctions
imposed by the United States blockade, so that they are
afraid of dealing with Venezuelan institutions and also
with the suppliers, who are imposing special terms,
such as insurance against acts of war and very high
prices, and very often these transactions do not even
go through.

For that reason, we have been receiving help from
friendly countries and from the United Nations through
this mechanism, which we designed in cooperation
with the most beautiful multilateral institutions that
exists, the best creation of humanity in the twentieth
and twenty-first centuries, which is the United Nations

Secondly, in the light of today's meeting, I would
like to note that Venezuela insists that the Security
Council the other organs of the United Nations should
dedicate themselves to preventing a war against my
people, against Venezuela. We know that they have the
capacity to do so and also to lift the blockade against
my country. Those sanctions have affected the key
businesses at the heart of the Venezuelan economy.
They have affected the capacity of our country to trade
its own bonds and to seek financing as a State from
multilateral institutions.

They have blocked billions of dollars of
Venezuelan money 4 $30 billion, as I noted in my
previous statement. That is the cost of the blockade, but
in terms of assets that have been frozen, that figure is
doubled, and if we were to make an actuarial analysis of
the loss ofproduction, the loss of exports and the loss of
sales resulting from the sanctions, we are talking about
billions and billions of dollars.
The Security Council should also call on the
parties to sit down at the table together. We are sitting
at the table and have always been there, as we have
said. There is no way of doing political business in a
democracy, a democratic revolution or a revolutionary
democracy without sitting down at the table, especially
with our political adversaries who have different
positions from ours 4 that is exactly where dialogue
should take place.

We must work for peace. We must reject any
threat of the use of force. Unfortunately, the delegation
of the United States is not ruling out that option.
Neither its President 4 the chain of command that we
mentioned before 4 President Trump, Vice-President
Pence, Secretary of State Pompeo, National Security
Adviser Bolton, members of Congress, such as Senator
Marco Rubio, Mr. Elliott Abrams nor others who
fall within that chain of command, has ruled out war
against Venezuela.

I would like the Security Council to ensure that the
United States, if it is a Member of the United Nations
and if it respects the Charter of the United Nations,
rules out the use of force and the threat of the use
of force - or why else is it a Member of the United
Nations? Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter is very
clear and anybody who fails to abide by them - of
course, there are other articles that the United States is
violating, such as that on non-interference. But this is
very dangerous - the use of force 4 and that is why
we are emphasizing this point - it is the obligation of
the United States.

We have been informed that the Russian Federation
informally proposed a very simple draft resolution
calling on parties in Venezuela to sit down for a
dialogue and the United States delegation rejected it. I
would like to bring to the attention of the Council the
evident lack of will of that delegation and to remind
the Council that all of us, as States Members of the
United Nations, should see dialogue as an obligation
and oppose the use of force, in particular the members
of the Security Council and especially the permanent
members of the Security Council. We therefore now
have a very irregular model of behaviour 4 contrary
to the principles of United Nations - within the five
permanent members of the Security Council. We call
for the situation to be corrected. It is important that it
be corrected.

Lastly, I thank my region, Latin America and the
Caribbean, and all countries therein without exception,
including those that have differences with Venezuela,
for participating today and, despite the United States
opposition, for having ruled out the use of force and the
military threat as a solution for the institutional situation
in my country. This is a victory for our region, which,
through its regional body the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, has been proclaimed a
zone of peace since 2014.

By way of summary, we can say that we must avoid
war and blockades against peoples. We have to protect
peace. We believe that today's meeting, regardless of
who convened it, will prove to be a great victory for
peace and we must continue to work in that direction.

