Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to I congratulate the Republic
of Peru on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. We also thank and express
our appreciation to the State of Kuwait for its able
leadership of the Council last month. As well, we thank
all Council members for their successful visit to Iraq at
the end of last month.

I thank Mr. Karim Khan, Special Adviser and Head

of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote

Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ Islamic

State in Iraq and the Levant, for his valuable briefing. I

commend him for his personal commitment to carrying

out his functions with diligence and determination,

including his intensive efforts in line with resolution
2379 (2017), the relevant terms of reference and the
highest international standards. I also commend the
high level of coordination between the Government of
Iraq and the Investigative Team in the appointment of
Deputy Head Al-Khafaji, who will provide legal and
judicial advice on Iraqi laws and legislation.

We look forward to completing the appointment
of Iraqi experts to strengthen the work of the Team
under domestic laws and legislation to guarantee
accountability and justice. The Government of Iraq
is committed to facilitating the work of the Team
by calling on all competent Government bodies to
cooperate with it and support its mandate to collect and
store evidence, while fully respecting Iraq's sovereignty
and jurisdiction over crimes committed on its territory.

We emphasize that the work of the Investigative
Team must fully respect the sovereignty of Iraq and
its jurisdiction over its territory and people. Evidence
must be used in independent and fair legal criminal
proceedings conducted by Iraqi national courts, in line
with applicable international law. Iraqi authorities are
the main party in receipt of such evidence. Any other
use of such evidence must be in coordination with the
Iraqi Government and on a case-by-case basis.

In addition, the Iraqi Government seeks to
strengthen coordination with the Iraqi Kurdistan
Regional Government on the use of forensic evidence
collected from the scenes of crimes committed by
the Da'esh terrorist organization. We stress the need
to implement the mandate of the Investigative Team
related to the strengthening of Iraqi capacity. That is one
of the goals of the Iraqi Government - to consolidate
specialized national capacity in that regard. We also call
for efforts to be redoubled in order to provide technical
and substantive assistance to Iraq.

The implementation of the Team's mandate
requires strong partnerships with survivors and local
communities. We commend the Team's engagement
with a large number of survivors of Violent acts, such as
the survivors of the violence perpetrated by the Da'esh
terrorist organization/Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), as well as the witnesses of such violence
from all segments of Iraqi society, in areas overrun,
occupied and controlled by that terrorist organization.
We welcome the field visits conducted by Mr. Khan to
those areas, as well as his meetings with religious and
tribal leaders and Government officials.

Juveniles' Law No. 11 was enacted in 1962, based
on the best and most modern practices in the care,
protection and treatment of minors. The law was
updated and adapted to respond to Iraq's societal needs
in the current circumstances, in order to build a modern
society and remove any gaps and inconsistencies in
the law. Iraq has also established juvenile courts in
all parts of the country. The law is flexible and allows
those courts to take the necessary decisions in line with
the needs of juvenile delinquents, including alternative
decisions based on their situation.

In in conclusion, we stress the importance of full
coordination and cooperation between the Government
of Iraq and the Investigative Team, full respect for
the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Iraq and the use of
evidence to complement the investigations conducted
by the competent Iraqi authorities into crimes
committed by the ISIL/Da'esh terrorist organization.
Such evidence must be used as part of independent
and fair legal criminal proceedings conducted by
competent Iraqi courts. We urge the international
community to fully support the Investigative Team and
promote accountability for the crimes against humanity
committed by ISIL/Da'esh terrorists.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.
