Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me first thank
Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing. While not a
State party to the Rome Statute, Turkey fully shares the
ideals and principles that gave rise to the International
Criminal Court. The need to fight impunity and
promote justice, especially in countries emerging from
conflict, is as evident today as it ever was.

Turkey believes that in the years to come the ICC
will have an important and complementary role to play
in efforts to fight impunity with regard to the most
serious of crimes. On the other hand, it is a relatively
new feature of international law. In the light of recent
experiences, it is also clear that the Court will continue
to face some serious challenges.

Over the course of the past 12 months, the
process initiated by resolution 1593 (2005) reached
critical mass. Starting in January, we witnessed a series
of negative events based on causes that inadvertently
had an impact on the lives of countless innocent people
and further complicated an already difficult situation.
As we approach 2010, we are glad to see that the
turbulence of 2009 is behind us.

As we have stated before, Turkey continues to
believe that the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005) cannot, and must not, be decoupled or pursued

in isolation from the wider framework of the search for
lasting peace and stability in Darfur. The
implementation of that resolution is not an end in
itself. In order to have meaning, it must be part of a
broader framework that combines all the necessary
elements for peace to take root. In that context, finding
a sustainable political settlement that takes into
account the root causes of the conflict, addressing the
humanitarian situation in a forward-looking and
results-oriented manner and promoting broad-based
reconciliation and meaningful justice for Darfuris are
all vital and mutually reinforcing goals that need to be
pursued together in Darfur.

Turkey believes that progress in all those areas is
possible, given time and provided that the right
framework is in place. On the other hand, placing
undue emphasis on just one of those goals risks
undermining progress in others. As experiences
elsewhere in Africa have clearly shown, there can be
no real justice or reconciliation without peace and an
enabling political framework.

With regard to Darfur, Turkey also places
importance on building and maintaining a regional
approach that considers the many sensitive dynamics at
play. The African Union, the Arab League and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as
neighbouring countries, all have different yet crucial
roles to play, as does the Doha process, where tangible
progress in the near term is going to be absolutely
vital.

Turkey welcomes the report of the African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I), led
by His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki. The report
contains some important insights on and critical
analyses of the challenges not only in Darfur but in the
Sudan in general. It also has some stern warnings that
must be taken very seriously. Turkey also welcomes
the report's concrete recommendations, which we
believe are well thought out and specifically tailored to
the problems at hand.

In moving forward, we call on all parties
involved to take those recommendations as a point of
reference and to make best use of this report. Turkey
continues to believe that a peaceful settlement in
Darfur through political dialogue is possible. The
alternative and its potential fallout carry enormous
risks, not only for the region but also for international
peace and security.

09-6333]

While there can be no quick fixes, a just and
viable political settlement that addresses all of the
rational grievances and expectations of the legitimate
parties involved can also open a path to meaningful
reconciliation and justice for all Sudanese people,
including the people of Darfur. In working towards that
goal, it will be crucial to keep the bigger picture in
focus and refrain from steps that could further
aggravate the already complex situation.

