Mr. Almansoor (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, my
sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We are
sure that with your experience and skills you will be
able to successfully conclude this month's work of the
Council. On behalf of the Arab Group, I would also
like to express our thanks to you, Mr. President, for
holding this important meeting dedicated to discussing
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question.

I would also like to express my warm thanks and
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of
Greece for his distinguished presidency and for the
efforts undertaken during his presidency of the Council
last month. I also thank Mr. De Soto for the
comprehensive briefing he has given us on the matter.

The Security Council held an important and
historic meeting at the foreign ministers' levels last
month that represented an important precedent with
regard to the situation in the Middle East. It was
convened at the initiative of the Foreign Affairs
Council of the Arab States to review the deteriorating
situation in the region. Bahrain presided over the Arab
States' meeting and spoke on behalf of all members of
the League of Arab States.

The Arab League feels that we have reached a
very dangerous stage, because of the effects not only
on the States of the region, but also on the rest of the
world. The Arab-Israeli conflict is the core of the
region's problems, and this has negative effects on the
international community, because stability in that
region means stability for the rest of the world.
Without a comprehensive, just and lasting solution, the
situation will only get worse for all.

When this matter was dealt with in the Security
Council last month, the Council of Arab Foreign
Affairs Ministers asked the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and to play the role assigned to it by
the United Nations Charter in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Arab-Israeli
conflict is unlike other conflicts, because it involves an
occupation that has lasted for too long. Rights have
been denied and threats continue to stoke the conflict.
We fear that this will endanger the stability of the
region and of the world as a whole.

Israel's occupation of Arab territories has sequels
in all areas of life and has had disastrous consequences
in the region, including human tragedy for millions of
people. The occupation has also had negative effects on
the development and stability of the region. The
situation for the Palestinians has become extremely
difficult, whether in the West Bank or in the Gaza
Strip, which has witnessed ongoing conflict and
blockades. Hospitals, Government ministries and
institutions, and schools have all experienced difficult
situations. If the deterioration worsens, it is hard to
even imagine the repercussions of the situation and
how we could ever possibly deal with them.

The Arab States have spoken before the Council
several times and asked it to assume its
responsibilities. We should not have to repeat our
words at each Security Council meeting. It is no good
if the Council merely listens but does not act to bring
about practical measures that can improve the situation
in the region. We need radical solutions to this conflict
that has lasted for far too long. It is inadmissible that
this conflict should last all these years despite the
adoption of so many resolutions by the Security
Council. If those resolutions had been implemented,
the situation would not have negatively evolved as it
has. The Arab States have said on several occasions
that we must put an end to this conflict, using peaceful
means, in order to bring peace and stability to the
region. The peace process has stagnated, and this state
of tension and frustration has given rise to Violent
conflict and has been a disaster for everyone.

It is high time to put an end to the stagnating
situation and to move the peace process forward by
implementing the relevant Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as the
principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative that was adopted at the Beirut Summit in
2002.

It is high time that the Security Council play its
role in solving the Arab-Israeli conflict, as it has done
in solving other international problems. A solution
should be based on the creation of a sovereign
independent Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, and on an end to the Israeli occupation of
all Arab territories, going back to the 1967 borders,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, and withdrawal
from the Lebanese Sheba'a Farms and other areas that
have recently been occupied. All this should be done in
conformity with relevant Security Council resolutions
and according to the terms of reference of the peace
process. The infringements on Lebanese air space
should also cease.

The years of conflict have shown that there is no
military solution and that the excessive use of force has
not brought peace to the Israelis. The solution involves
negotiations among all parties to the conflict, an end to
the Israeli occupation of the occupied Arab territories,
and courageous initiatives to bring about a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace that is in
everyone's interests.

Unilateral and isolated measures will be in vain.
Peace based on justice and giving people their rights,
however, is what would bring about stability and
security for everyone. It is time for the Security
Council to put an end to this conflict and to build
genuine peace in the region so that prosperity and well-
being will flourish in the region and the world. The
time is ripe for us all to work together for the good of
our peoples.

