Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I should like to
express the satisfaction of my delegation in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. As the
Permanent Representative of the sister nation of Argentina,
you have been conducting the Council's work with
admirable competence and paying special attention to
transparency - a feature which has been meeting with
widespread appreciation among non-members and deserves
public recognition.

I also wish to express to Ambassador Manzi
Bakuramutsa of Rwanda words of great respect for the
wisdom and professional integrity with which he most ably
discharged his duties last month.

I take this opportunity to greet the five new
non-permanent members who have joined in the Council in
its deliberations for what will undoubtedly be a busy and
challenging term.

We welcome the opportunity offered to the United
Nations membership at large to react to the "Supplement to
An Agenda for Peace", which the Secretary-General has
placed before the Security Council and the General
Assembly on the occasion of the Organization's fiftieth
anniversary. This exchange of ideas and observations,
although of a preliminary nature, will provide delegations
and the Secretariat with a useful input for an in-depth
reflection on the Organization's capacity to maintain
peace and security at a moment of new, historic
opportunities for the overall role of the United Nations.

I must preface my comments on more specific
aspects of the document by recalling that Brazil remains
convinced that peace and security cannot be dissociated
from social and economic well-being. Having felt the
need to become actively involved in the promotion of a
renewed international effort in favour of development, we
strongly believe that a new Agenda for Development is
essential for the success of any Agenda for Peace. We
should therefore like to stress the importance of
advancing in the creation of a true partnership between
the less developed and the more developed, at an
appropriate pace, as a crucial step in fostering an
equitable and peaceful international system at the
threshold of the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations.

The Secretary-General's Supplement contains a
number of ideas and proposals which will require careful
study and examination. The fact that it is addressed to the
General Assembly at its fiftieth session - in addition to
having been presented to the Security Council - will
thus call for a prolonged debate, allowing delegations to
dwell on the interesting thoughts and suggestions included
in the report and to focus on action that may realistically
be taken thereon.

The analysis of the changes in the international
environment presented by the Secretary-General in the
Supplement before us bears the authority of experience
acquired through first-hand contact with a number of
difficult situations, some of which remain unresolved and
continue to defy contemporary diplomatic resourcefulness.
While acknowledging the complexities of dealing with
inter-State conflicts or internal ones that have exposed the
United Nations to criticism, the Secretary-General retains
a cautious approach to the problems encountered and
refrains from redefining the accepted tenets under which
efforts at peacemaking and peace-keeping must continue
to be carried out.

In this context, we agree with the relevance
attributed by the Secretary-General to Article 2, paragraph
7, of the Charter and with his assertion that

"consent of the parties, impartiality and the non-use
of force except in self-defence" (S/1995/1, para. 33)

are essential to the success of United Nations endeavours.

 

We also welcome the clear recognition of the need to
keep troop-contributing Governments fully informed on the
evolution of peace-keeping operations. There have been
some significant recent improvements in increasing
transparency, and there appears to be an emerging
consensus on the desirability of further progress in this
direction.

It is doubtful, however, whether agreement could
easily be reached on the proposal for the creation of a rapid
reaction force or similar arrangements for dealing with
emergencies. Although Brazil has been taking a number of
steps in order to facilitate the availability of troops to the
United Nations, through streamlined legislative approval
procedures for deployment and the organization of special
military training courses, we would not be in favour of
hastening into the creation of a reaction force before a
thorough consideration of financial and other related
implications.

Likewise, any modification of the essentially
economic, social and humanitarian role of United Nations
resident coordinators to include a wider political mandate
in the context of post-conflict peace-building would require
previous careful examination.

As a general comment, my delegation would contend
that in looking at ways to improve or speed up the response
of the Organization to situations that threaten international
peace and security, we must not lose sight of the inherent
difficulty in prescribing general solutions to problems that
are specific by their very nature. Whether focusing on
preventive diplomacy, peace-keeping or national
reconciliation and economic reconstruction within a
post-conflict scenario, case by case sensitivity and expertise
will continue to be necessary, with due regard given to the
concerns of the affected civilians, if we are adequately to
meet the challenges of the post-cold-war era. The
experience of the past years has indeed taught us that there
are no ready-made formulas for promoting peace, nor can
any individual player in the concert of nations claim a
monopoly over wisdom.

At this stage, my delegation wishes to reiterate the
importance of the United Nations counting on the means to
implement all Charter-mandated activities in a stable and
predictable manner. In particular, in the case of peace-
keeping operations, perhaps the most valuable tool at the
disposal of the Organization to deal with situations that
threaten international peace and security, the
institutionalization of the ad hoc scale for the apportionment
of peace-keeping expenditures, inaugurated by General
Assembly resolution 3101 (XXVIII) of 1973 and
repeatedly endorsed since then, is a goal to be sought.

The special scale embodies a number of fundamental
political and economic considerations. The continuing
adherence to it for more than 30 years provided stability
to the financial foundations of this Organization. First and
foremost, the principle of the special responsibility of the
permanent members of the Security Council, as
recognized by General Assembly resolution 1874 (S-IV),
is the acknowledgement that peace-keeping expenses,
which nowadays constitute the bulk of the Organization's
costs, are a collective but differentiated responsibility of
Member States. The special scale is a reminder that when
the Security Council exercises the exceptional powers
conferred upon it by the Charter, it should act in a
financially responsible way.

The other principles of the special scale have also
been consistently upheld by Member States in all General
Assembly resolutions devoted to the financing of
peace-keeping expenditures. Developed countries are in a
position to make more substantial contributions than
developing ones to the financing of expenditures, since
the maintenance of international peace and security is a
solidary task that should be performed through mustering
resources from States according to their capacity to pay
and in accordance with the necessities of the maintenance
of international peace and security.

I shall concentrate my additional comments
essentially on the sections of the Secretary-General's
document devoted to sanctions and to disarmament.

The Chapter on disarmament seems to focus on a
questionable perspective, in so far as it places on the
same level both the process of limiting the spread of
small arms among individuals and factions within a
society and the task of pursuing, establishing and
verifying disarmament among States. The process termed
"micro-disarmament" relating to small arms should
preferably not be addressed as a sub-section of
disarmament, and would seem to fit more adequately into
the context of measures designed to reverse the
breakdown of law and order after a conflict.

Furthermore, this section of the document fails to
portray the role that can be played by disarmament, arms
control and non-proliferation in the present security
context. We recall that there has been widespread
agreement in recent years on the increased importance of
preventing the spread of, and gradually eliminating, all

 

weapons of mass destruction - nuclear, chemical and
biological. It is worth noting, on the other hand, that efforts
regarding transparency and confidence building, in the field
of conventional weapons and military budgets, have been
meeting with some success.
May I note with satisfaction that the chapter on
sanctions tackles in a candid and creative manner an issue
that has been raising increasing concern among Member
States. Indeed, the problems and contradictions mentioned
by the Secretary-General reflect the disquiet of a growing
number of delegations with regard to what is often
perceived as a precipitate resort to sanctions or their
implementation beyond what would seem to be a fair or
adequate span of time. I would also recall that Brazil has
continuously expressed the View that the Security Council
resolutions imposing sanctions must be abided by by those
to whom they are directed as well as by the Council itself.

The proposal for the creation of a mechanism to
monitor the application of sanctions, as described in
paragraph 75, has merit, although its establishment and
functioning would have to be widely debated, and the
precise role of the Secretariat would need to be discussed
among delegations.

In concluding, the Brazilian delegation expresses
thanks to the Secretary-General for providing us with
interesting material on which to focus our attention, and
declares its readiness to participate in further deliberations
on the topics raised in the document before us. As a last
word, I would like to lend our support to suggestions that
a list be drawn up in response to the difficulty encountered
by the Secretariat in finding senior persons with diplomatic
skills who are willing to serve as Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, and our willingness to provide some
names to be included in that list.

