Regular debates on the working methods of the Security Council are both necessary and useful to make progress towards achieving the most needed improvements in this area. The emergence of the coronavirus pandemic has also brought additional elements into the existing discussion, particularly on how to safeguard the transparency and effectiveness of the Security Council during extraordinary circumstances. We are encouraged to observe that we have achieved some progress on the working methods over the past years. Yet we are far from ensuring the transparency, accountability and efficiency of the Council. To achieve that, we must start with increasing the interaction between the Council and the wider membership. Closed meetings and informal consultations should be kept to a minimum, meaningful participation of States with a legitimate stake in the Council's deliberations should be ensured throughout the decision-making process and civil society and humanitarian experts should be given more opportunities to brief the Council. Transparency is especially important wih regard to peacekeeping operations. The Council must cooperate more closely with troop- and police-contributing countries. The success of sanctions regimes depends on the cooperation of all Member States. Ensuring transparency in the working methods of subsidiary organs, keeping regular channels of communication open and making the relevant documentation accessible to the entire United Nations membership remain crucial. We must also ensure that the elected members are on the same footing as the permanent five. Among other things, the responsibility of penholdership should be distributed evenly among permanent and elected members, and the penholders should engage in timely consultations with all relevant United Nations members with openness and flexibility. There is also a need to increase coordination and cooperation between the Council and other main bodies of the United Nations. Better coordination by the Security Council with the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat, as well as with the Peacebuilding Commission, is crucial. More interaction with regional organizations would also contribute to the Council's effectiveness. Another improvement would be to better incorporate conflict prevention into the Security Council agenda. The current experience indicates that the Council often finds itself responding to crises in an incremental manner, making more use of the tools at its disposal only as situations deteriorate. There is broad consensus among Member States on the need to enhance our efforts for prevention, including through mediation efforts. The use of the veto has also proved to hamper the most needed role that the Council has to play in a given situation. Better outcomes can be achieved, and more humanitarian tragedies can be prevented, if the Council's tools are utilized much earlier, without resorting to the veto as a tool to advance national interests. Finally, I would also like to emphasize that we consider the topic of working methods as one of the crucial components of the broader Security Council reform agenda. Updating the methods of work cannot be a substitute for engaging in more substantive talks on Security Council reform. We must continue to search for a constructive solution to make the Security Council more representative, accountable and transparent by identifying a common denominator that can garner the widest possible political acceptance by Member States.
