Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased to provide members
of the Security Council with an update on the
developments in Kosovo since the last briefing, which
was made by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Haekkerup on 16 March. I am also pleased
indeed to be able to provide Council members with
some personal insights since, as the President
remarked, I paid a visit to Kosovo last week.

I will comment on the progress in the priority
areas outlined by Mr. Haekkerup at the beginning of
his tenure as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as well as on recent developments in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia that have had
a negative impact on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
Kosovo as a whole over the past couple of weeks.

The first priority set by Special Representative
Haekkerup was the development of a Kosovo legal
framework as a precondition for Kosovo-wide
elections. UNMIK continues to be engaged in an
intensive exercise to elaborate the legal framework for
provisional self-government. The joint Working Group
constituted for this purpose is discussing areas of
responsibility to be transferred under a provisional self-
government, the composition of an assembly and the
electoral system to be used. To date, a skeleton
structure for a legal framework for provisional self-
government has been elaborated. It includes headings
on powers and responsibilities, the legislature, the
executive, human rights, community rights and an
ombudsperson. General agreement has been reached on
elements to be included in the framework's preamble,
as well as on the chapters on basic provisions and the
principles to be observed by the provisional institutions
of self-government.

The Kosovo Albanian members of the Working
Group have, predictably, advocated the fullest possible
transfer of authority to local control following Kosovo-
wide elections, and they persist in their demand to
name the document an interim constitution. It has been
made very clear that crucial areas of responsibility will
remain under the direct authority of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General - areas such
as law enforcement, external relations, community
rights protection and ultimate budgetary control.
Throughout the consultations, UNMIK has staunchly
advocated the protection of the rights and interests of
all communities and the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1244
(1999).

As the Council is aware, there is still no Kosovo
Serb representation in the Working Group. UNMIK
continues to encourage the Kosovo Serb community to
resume participation. That was one of the issues
discussed between Special Representative Haekkerup
and President Kostunica in their meeting on Thursday,
5 April. During that meeting, President Kostunica
indicated his support for the participation of a Kosovo
Serb expert, as long as such representation can be
backed up by expert support. The Special
Representative supported that and indicated that
UNMIK would take specific steps to ensure that the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are
also informed directly about the work on the legal
framework, as requested in the Council's presidential
statement of 16 March 2001.

Kosovo's other communities are actively engaged
in the consultation process. To ensure inclusiveness, a
consultation mechanism has been created for those
representatives of minority communities not directly
represented in the Working Group. To date,
representatives of the Kosovo Bosniac, Turkish, Roma,
Ashkalija and Gorani communities have met twice with
the Kosovo Bosniac member of the Working Group to
discuss their input into the process. To facilitate that
input, representatives of all the communities have
received the documentation forming the basis of the
Working Group's deliberations. The Working Group is
scheduled to complete its work in the very near future.
In that respect, I would indeed hope that the Kosovo
Serb representation, as it was agreed in Belgrade last
Thursday, materializes in the very near future.

Once the Working Group has finished its work,
the Special Representative will conduct consultations
with the international community, countries of the
region - including Belgrade - and, first and
foremost, the representatives of the communities of
Kosovo. Only then will he take the final decision on
the legal framework. As I told the Kosovars during my
visit, I believe that the progress made so far will make
elections possible this year.

Alongside the elaboration of the legal framework,
a key aspect is the establishment of democratically
functioning municipal assemblies, an area in which
further progress has been made. As UNMIK continues
to devolve competencies to the municipalities in line
with regulation 45, on self-government of
municipalities, the majority of the Municipal
Assemblies are ready to begin formulating strategic
policy through the establishment of policy and finance
committees. That will be the first real test of the
capability to self-govern at the municipal level. A
lingering concern in that regard, however, is the
continuing polarization of the Democratic League of
Kosovo (LDK) and the Democratic Party of Kosovo
(PDK), and the apparent politicization of municipal
civil administration.

There has been mixed progress in the assumption
of reserved seats by the communities. For the most
part, representatives of Kosovo Turks, Bosniacs,
Romas, Ashkalijas and Egyptians have accepted their
appointments as co-opted members and are also
represented as additional Deputy Presidents in three
Assemblies. Progress has been slower with the Kosovo
Serb community, where participation is limited to five
municipalities. There have been very recent signs that
more Kosovo Serbs are now willing to participate,
however, and UNMIK will make every effort to build
on those Visible signs of cooperation. I think that if we
want to move forward on the Kosovo-wide level, it is
essential that concrete progress be made at the
municipal level. I think the two processes should help
each other.

As far as election preparations are concerned, in
parallel with the work on the legal framework, the
institution-building pillar - namely, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) - has
begun preparatory work for Kosovo-wide elections on
the basis of a "2+6" timeline. That is to say, a two-
month build-up and six months for registration and
election operations. One of the first priorities is to
update and integrate the civil and voter registry. To that
end, United Nations civil administration and the
institution-building pillar have agreed to conduct
simultaneous registration.

Another priority in that respect is out-of-Kosovo
registration and election operations to enable those
who left Kosovo after 1 January 1998 to register and
participate in the elections. UNMIK is sending out
signals on all fronts that it is essential for Kosovo
Serbs to register, participate in the elections and stake
their claim in Kosovo. The Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for institution
building recently met with Foreign Minister Svilanovic
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, who undertook
to cooperate in the registration of ethnic communities
and of internally displaced persons in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. I think that this represents a
major step forward and sends a strong signal that we
see the ability of Kosovo Serbs to return to Kosovo as
a future goal.

(Spoke in French)

Let me refer now to the second priority of which
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General has
spoken: to consolidate law enforcement and the judicial
system. Law and order and developing the rule of law
in Kosovo are top priorities for UNMIK. With a view
to enhancing UNMIK's ability to combat organized
crime, there has been a great effort to streamline police
and judicial institutions into a new single UNMIK
pillar. Our objective with this new mission structure is
to enable the police and the judiciary to respond more
effectively to crime in Kosovo. It is a way to act more
effectively to establish an unbiased and completely fair
judicial system, initially with international
participation and with reform of the judicial system.
That new pillar will help make possible the planned
expansion of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) from
the present target of 4,000 police officers to 6,000 by
the end of 2002. It will also be necessary to expand
prison and detention facilities in Kosovo to ensure
continuity from detention through trial and to make
sure that the accused are held in adequate conditions
and that they are duly tried.

UNMIK's continued efforts to break the cycle of
the criminal impunity that is enjoyed by some
criminals and to tackle organized crime have met with
some success in recent weeks. Let me highlight a joint
arrest operation carried out by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and UNMIK, which recently resulted in the
arrest and detention of four suspects in connection with
the tragic mid-February Merdare bus bombing, in
which 10 Kosovo Serbs were killed. The swift and
resolute action undertaken by the police, by UNMIK
and by KFOR and our joint efforts to fight crime in
Kosovo are an essential confidence-building measure
to restore trust among the various communities.
Additionally, in the context of recent action to fight
organized crime and the consolidation of peace in
Kosovo, the trial of a high-profile suspect accused of
organized criminal activity is scheduled to be
completed soon. Hence, there is progress in this field.
In that context, let me remind the Council that
UNMIK needs more international judges and
prosecutors to deal with the increase in sensitive cases,
such as those relating to ethnic crime and organized
crime. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General mentioned this in his briefing to the Council
on 16 March; I know that some members of the
Security Council are prepared to provide additional
judicial personnel. After studying the question,
UNMIK estimates that the current figure - ll
international judges and five international
prosecutors - could easily be at least doubled.

(spoke in English)

I would like now to turn to the third priority:
economic reconstruction. A key element of provisional
self-government is financial responsibility, for which
Kosovo's public finances need to be developed. In a
move to safeguard public finances and the Kosovo
consolidated budget from lost revenue, tax collection
points are being established along the boundary line
with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Customs duty
is not charged on goods originating or produced in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. So far, customs
officers have been placed at Gate 3 - Podujevo in the
Pristina region - and a tax collection office has been
opened in Mitrovica, where Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo
Albanians will work together under international
supervision. Kosovo Albanian officers under
international supervision are deployed at one collection
point, and an effort is under way to recruit Kosovo
Serb customs officers. The establishment of tax
collection points along the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia boundary is in full conformity with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and will
contribute key funding to the Kosovo consolidated
budget at a vital time in the run-up to provisional self-
government. During my visit to Kosovo, I met with the
head of the economic reconstruction pillar; I had a
feeling from that meeting that quite substantive
progress has been made there, with major financial
support from the financial community, and the
European Union in particular, and that the
infrastructures of Kosovo are now in significantly
better shape than they were 18 months ago.

The fourth priority of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General is the development of
relations with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the opening of an UNMIK office in Belgrade. This is
an important element in trying to move forward with
the other three priorities I have just outlined. Engaging
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities in
substantial and constructive cooperation on issues of
common concern will help bring peace to Kosovo. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr
Haekkerup, met with President Kostunica in Belgrade
on 5 April to discuss many of these issues, and we
were very pleased with the way the meeting developed.
This was the second time the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General had met with President
Kostunica, and the meeting was indeed very
constructive.

As I have already mentioned, agreement was
reached on President Kostunica's support for Kosovo
Serb participation in the Working Group on the legal
framework. However, I just checked with the Mission
before coming to the Council Chamber, and no contact
has yet been made with the Kosovo Serb
representative. I think it would be important for such
contact to be made very soon, so as not to delay the
process. The discussion also focused on modes of
cooperation between UNMIK and the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. In that context, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
emphasized the opening of the UNMIK Belgrade office
as a crucial step forward. The office currently has three
UNMIK staff members: one from the office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, one
from pillar Ill and one from pillar IV. Negotiations
continue with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
authorities on the Status of Mission Agreement.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and President Kostunica also discussed the
continuing negotiations on detainees and missing
persons from Kosovo. As a result of amnesty bills
passed by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the
Serbia parliaments last month, approximately 218 of
662 Kosovo Albanian detainees held in prisons in
Serbia proper have been released. UNMIK continues to
work for the release of all political prisoners and for a
judicial review of those cases that are not covered by
the amnesty laws. This was again raised with President
Kostunica, who assured the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General that all outstanding cases would
soon be resolved.

On the issue of the missing, the Special
Representative pointed out the potential that now exists
to begin to build lines of communication between
families from all communities. Agreement was reached
that a joint committee to ensure cooperation on the
resolution of the issue of missing persons would be
mutually beneficial. I think that such a joint committee
can be a very important confidence-building measure
to begin to re-establish a measure of trust between the
communities.

On the important issue of returns, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and President
Kostunica agreed to identify those areas where Kosovo
Serb returns can realistically be accomplished. Finally,
on Mitrovica, it was agreed that there should be further
discussion between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and UNMIK on rendering the necessary safeguards to
the Kosovo Serb population, including the
identification of common security structures.

I would like now, before concluding, to say a few
words on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
since it has a direct impact on the way the communities
relate to each other in Kosovo.

As the Council knows, progress in UNMIK's key
priorities has taken place against the backdrop of
violence along the Kosovo border with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and continuing
instability in southern Serbia, both of which have had
an adverse effect on UNMIK and Kosovo in general.
The most serious consequence for UNMIK of the
violence in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia was the interruption of the supply of fuel,
food and essential medical supplies, with severe delays
affecting the importation of goods. The border
restrictions naturally also had an adverse effect on the
Kosovo economy: the Kosovo Consolidated Budget
suffered an estimated daily loss of DM. 500,000 in
excise tax revenues. The border was re-opened to all on
3 April and remains open.

Kosovo's penal system has also been subject to
additional strain because of the detention of a number
of Albanian armed troop suspects illegally crossing
from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
KFOR's response to the escalating conflict in the
northern part of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia has involved the redeployment and the
reorientation of several military units. Actually, a week
ago, on the Sunday before last, I visited the border with
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with the
KFOR Commander at the time, Lieutenant General
Cabigiosu, and I could see how KFOR units had been
deployed at various points. At the same time, you could
see from the nature of the terrain that it is indeed quite
a difficult border to control.

UNMIK continues to assist KFOR through the
redeployment of special police units to back up the
security presence in those areas where military units
have been redeployed. In view of the increasing
number of illegal border crossings, UNMIK is
currently evaluating possible punitive measures to
address this problem. As the Council knows, UNMIK
has been instrumental in encouraging the Kosovo
Albanian leaders to speak out publicly and condemn
the use of Violence as a means of addressing the
grievances of the Albanians in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia. I think that the declaration that
was signed by the three Albanian leaders in that respect
was a helpful move.

The border closures, however, did not prevent the
flow of an estimated 8,000 ethnic Albanian refugees
from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia into
Kosovo, most of whom were absorbed by host families.
On 3 April, UNMIK authorities, with the support of the
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), launched a systematic registration
of all nationals of the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia who have arrived due to the conflict.

The conflicts in the Presevo Valley and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia are also
further impeding freedom of movement for Kosovo
Serbs and other minority communities in Kosovo. This
worsening freedom of movement has been
compounded by the temporary suspension of inter-
enclave convoys, as KFOR has to review its security
mechanisms. Efforts are underway to ensure the swift
resumption of escorts when operationally feasible.

To conclude, I would like to say that despite the
adverse effects of the conflicts in the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and southern Serbia, which
have the potential to trigger large, destabilizing
movements of persons into Kosovo - and we are very
concerned about that - UNMIK has continued to
move forward with its key priorities. Progress on the
legal framework should allow the holding of Kosovo-
wide elections this year; serious measures to tackle law
and order are beginning to bear fruit; and increased
cooperation and dialogue with the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will pave the way for
progress in the key areas of security and return that
have so far blocked Kosovo Serb participation in
integrated structures.

I personally believe that it is in the best interest
of the Kosovo Serb community to actively participate
at all levels - municipalities, the Working Group on
the legal framework, and specific groups to address the
specific issue. The more it participates in those groups,
I think, the better off all communities will be and the
more peaceful Kosovo will be. I believe that progress
in all of these areas should help build a solid
foundation for the future, which will, in turn, assist the
Kosovar leaders in their rejection of violence.

