Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
Mr. President, I would like to thank you for convening
this open debate and for submitting a concept note on
the topic (S/2012/814, annex). We are also grateful to
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
briefing.

Maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea have
risen significantly in recent times, and, along with
transnational organized crime, including the trafficking
of illicit weapons and drugs, constitute a serious threat
to peace, security and the economic development of the
countries and regions concerned. We fully support and
commend recent efforts and initiatives undertaken at
the national, regional and international levels to focus
international attention on the problem and to enhance
maritime safety and security.

The Security Council has also dealt with the problem,
focusing primarily on piracy in Somalia and the Gulf of
Guinea. It is encouraging that over the past two years a
combination of measures has contributed to a decline in
the number of attacks and to a reduction in successful
attacks at sea off the coast of Somalia. The problem and
capabilities of criminal networks still remain, however,
and require constant attention and resolute measures.
It is important that efforts be continued to develop and
implement appropriate legal frameworks and national
maritime security strategies and mechanisms, as well
as to strengthen law enforcement and judicial capacity
for preventing, combating and suppressing piracy and
armed robbery at sea.

Pirates are able to operate successfully in
environments characterized by political, security,
social and economic instability. A sustainable response
to piracy therefore requires full and effective control
on the part of the Governments concerned over their
territories, their social and economic development, their
establishment of the rule of law and the implementation
of effective measures against impunity. Obviously,
most States cannot prevent or effectively manage
threats to maritime security in their coastal waters
on their own. It is essential that countries in regions
affected by piracy continue to emphasize interaction,
cooperation and coordination among themselves and
with international partners.

At the same time, while the primary responsibility
for eradicating piracy rests with the States concerned,
part of dealing successfully with piracy proceeds from
a concept of collective commitment to fighting this
form of criminality, which affects the interests of the
international community as a whole. As a complement
to national efforts, international assistance remains
crucial in that regard. It is therefore important that the
relevant States and regional organizations continue to
receive all the necessary support from the international
community. Such support should also contribute to
the development of early-warning mechanisms for
effective and timely information-sharing with States
that may potentially be affected by incidents of piracy
or armed robbery at sea. Any measures undertaken to
fight piracy or prevent potential piracy attacks should
be in full accordance with the standards and principles
of international law, particularly those relating to the
sovereignty of the States concerned.

The United Nations plays an important coordinating
role in mobilizing international support and developing
global and regional anti-piracy strategies to help affected
States and regions in this area. We look forward to future
reports of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of the Security Council draft presidential statement
to be made on this topic today, including discussion
of possible ways to promote international efforts to
combat piracy and armed robbery at sea.

