Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I cordially welcome
the European Union's High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini,
to the Council, and thank her and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for their briefings.

In a world that is getting flatter, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is not an option, but an essential element of preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. The European Union
(EU) has been the most reliable partner in promoting
the United Nations principles and strengthening respect
for the rule of law. It has been one of the biggest donors
of humanitarian aid. As the Secretary-General pointed
out during the most recent debate on this issue (see S/PV.7112), the EU is a champion of human rights
and a steadfast partner in promoting the Millennium
Development Goals, advancing gender equality and
tackling climate change. We see tangible results of this
cooperation, as reflected in the first-ever presidential
statement on institutional and strategic partnership
between the United Nations and the EU (S/PRST/2014/4),
adopted under the Lithuanian presidency a year ago.

The threat of terrorism has put the collective efforts
of the international community to an unprecedented
test. While this threat is not new, the recent tragic
developments in Iraq, Nigeria, the Sahel region and
elsewhere, including on European soil, attest to the
capacity of terrorism to spread and transform. It is
only through institutional cooperation that we are
able to meet the pressing need to shape and implement
effective counter-terrorism policies.

The landmark resolution 2178 (2014) provides
important guidance in this regard, and is high on the
agenda of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, which
Lithuania chairs. In December last year, the Committee
heard a briefing (see S/PV.7351) by Ms. Mara Marinaki,
Managing Director for Global and Multilateral Issues of
the European External Action Service, on the European
Union's role in the areas of common interest. Lithuania
recently joined the counter-messaging working group
of the Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State
of Iraq and the Levant, which is in line with the EU's
strengthened commitment in the field.

As reaffirmed at the EU-Africa Summit in
Brussels last April, the EU is committed to supporting
Africa's efforts to manage its own security. The EU
continues to provide targeted assistance, notably via its
Common Security and Defence Policy missions, and to
financially contribute to African Union peacekeeping
operations. The Central African Republic, Mali and
Somalia are some examples where the EU and the
United Nations work hand in hand to restore peace
and bring stability. Continued and more systematic
interaction of the United Nations, the EU and other
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, is crucial for ensuring an effective
collective response to the global challenges, such as
an unprecedented Ebola outbreak in West Africa. The
European Union has been a key partner in the United
Nations and national efforts to eradicate this disease.

The EU plays an active role in encouraging parties
to resume the Middle East peace process. We commend
High Representative Mogherini for her personal
engagement, including her recent initiative to seek
further engagement of regional partners, in particular
Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Egypt. At the same time, the
EU, together with its member States, remains one of the
major donors of the Palestinian Authority.

The situation in Libya remains a matter of grave
concern. Overcoming existing differences and forming
a Government of national unity is urgent in order to save
the country and prevent the spread of radical extremism
and terrorism in the region. We fully support Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
Leon's efforts in this respect. The Council must be
particularly careful with its decisions on the lifting of
the arms embargo and consider the impact of such steps
on the wider region.

We appreciate the efforts of the High Representative
aimed at reaching a comprehensive solution to Iran's
nuclear issue in the framework of E3+3 negotiations.
A successful outcome of this negotiation would lead to
greater stability and security in the entire region and
beyond.

The EU, together with the United Nations, has
to continue working actively to facilitate a political
solution to the Syrian conflict, which is the only way
out of this tremendous tragedy. We look forward to the
EU regional strategy for Syria and Iraq, as well as the
Daesh threat. Ensuring accountability for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and violations of international
humanitarian law must remain a priority.
Turning to the European neighbourhood, we
are confident that the stabilization and association
agreements between the EU and Kosovo and Bosnia
and Herzegovina will contribute to the overall stability
of the region. EU engagement in and commitment to
facilitating the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue remains
crucial. We look forward to furthering the process of
normalizing the relations between the two capitals
as Serbia and Kosovo continue on their respective
European paths. The commitment of the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to undertaking reforms in the
framework ofthe EU accession process is a solid signal.

Lithuania remains concerned about developments
in the South Caucasus, where Russia continues to pursue
a policy of de facto annexation of the Georgian regions
of Abkhazia and South Ossetia under the guise of so-
called alliance and integration treaties, in violation of
Georgia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Positive signals are badly needed in Ukraine.
This conflict, caused by Russia's aggression towards
its neighbour, undermines the international system
that emerged out of the ashes of the Second World
War and threatens international peace and security.
Ceasefire agreements have been repeatedly broken
by Russia-sponsored militants, causing thousands of
deaths, massive displacement and enormous suffering.
By adopting resolution 2202 (2015), the Council
put its weight behind the Minsk agreements and the
implementation of the package of measures. We must
make sure that the ceasefire does not end up as badly
as the previous ones. EU sanctions must be maintained
as long as destabilization is ongoing. Further measures
should be discussed if the Minsk accords are broken
again.

Both the EU and the United Nations should continue
providing support to the Special Monitoring Mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The monitoring of the whole section
of the Ukrainian-Russian border that has until now
allowed a free flow of Russian weapons, fighters
and mercenaries into the militant-held area should
be ensured. The OSCE monitors should be provided
with unrestricted, safe and secure access to all areas.
Consolidated United Nations, EU, OSCE and Council
of Europe efforts are needed in order to ensure secure,
safe and unrestricted international access to the whole
territory of Ukraine, including Crimea and along the
border with Russia. We should also carefully study the
peacekeeping option, as requested by the Ukrainian
Government.

International efforts to support the Ukrainian
Government and its people in dealing with the
humanitarian crisis facing the country should be
stepped up. Lithuania has contributed to the joint
operation organized by the European Commission and
Union member States through the EU Civil Protection
Mechanism and is providing bilateral and multilateral
support in response to growing humanitarian needs in
the country.

Finally, we look forward to the High Representative's
further briefings to the Council.

