Mr. Craxi (Italy) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Slovakia, which holds the presidency of the

Security Council for this month, for having organized
this important debate on security sector reform. I
would also like to welcome your presence,
Mr. Minister, which bears witness to the importance of
the issue. This meeting provides a useful opportunity
for us to undertake a shared assessment of what has
been done to date and to identify priority avenues of
action for the future.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union. However, we would like to highlight a number
of elements.

We attach vital importance to security sector
reform for the stabilization of countries emerging from
conflict, as well as for preventing a relapse in the
future. In this regard, we believe that we must adopt a
wide-ranging approach, Viewing security as a system
that includes not only the principal actors - mainly
the security forces and the armed forces - but also
Government institutions in general and the justice
sector in particular.

Security sector reform must be considered an
integral part of peacebuilding strategies, in which the
United Nations plays a very important - indeed,
fundamental - role. We are therefore convinced that
such reform must be both closely linked to the
immediate post-conflict phase - when priority is
attached to peacekeeping and to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants - and part of broader, long-term planning
for social development and the reconstruction of the
structures of Government so that they can be self-
sustaining. Our experience has taught us that it is not
enough to help a country to endow itself with a police
force in order to maintain public order, with respect for
the principles of the rule of law; an effective system for
the administration of justice must also be developed.
Italy therefore supports an organic and consistent
approach whose ultimate objective is good governance,
respect for human rights and ensuring that democratic
practices are deeply rooted all levels, as well as, of
course, the pursuit of economic and social
development.
My country feels that the role of the United
Nations in security sector reform is fundamental for
several reasons. First, the United Nations is the actor
that enjoys the international legitimacy needed to act in
a sector as sensitive as State security. Secondly, the

United Nations has a wide range of tools at its
disposal, which makes it possible for it to carry out far-
reaching activities, including not only the specific
programmes implemented by various funds, agencies
and programmes, but also the provision of assistance to
local authorities in the security sector, actions that the
Security Council has included in a growing number of
peacekeeping mandates, in keeping with a vision of a
more proactive role of the Blue Helmets.

In that context I wish to highlight the priority my
country attaches to the development of the police
component of the United Nations peacekeeping forces.
With regard to our recent engagement, we were very
pleased to welcome the decision of the United Nations
to establish in Brindisi the headquarters of the new
Standing Police Capacity. We thus expect an important
role to be played by the new Peacebuilding
Commission, whose specific goal is to ensure
consistency and the best utilization of the resources
shared among the many actors and of the activities of
provided by the donor community, non-governmental
organizations and civil society in many countries.

Italy believes that it is crucial to strengthen
international coordination among international and
regional organizations active in the field of security
sector reform. We encourage an intensification of
operational cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.

In conclusion, respect for national ownership
remains the key principle of security sector reform.
That principle implies, on the one hand, that the
authorities of a given country must define the priority
sectors for action and a streamlined intervention
strategy that addresses socio-economic development.
Those authorities are also responsible for the success
of the strategy.

Italy contributes to peacebuilding efforts in
different crisis regions. In Afghanistan, Italy is the
principle partner working to reform the legal system. It
is cooperating with the local Government to promote
coordination among the national authorities, the donors
and the United Nations system. A conference will be
organized in Rome, in May 2007, on justice and the
rule of law. Its objective will be to revive donor
activity in that sector. The popular demand for justice
in Afghan civil society is very strong. Our experience
in that area permits us to state that, without justice and
the establishment of the rule of law, we cannot expect

security or institutional or economic development. It is
only through the establishment of civil and social
justice and the rule of law that the civic awareness
necessary to build democracy will develop as the
mainstream political culture.

