Mr. Emiliou (Cyprus): On behalf of the Republic
of Cyprus I, too, would like to commend and thank
Chile for convening this important debate on inclusive
development and its impact on the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Cyprus aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier today on behalf of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make some remarks in my
national capacity.

In adopting resolution 2171 (2014), the Security
Council recognized the effectiveness of preventive
action in maintaining international peace and security.
The Republic of Cyprus believes that a comprehensive
approach to conflict prevention requires awareness
in tackling the root causes of conflict as well as the
implementation of policies for sustainable peace. In
order to build stable societies that live in peace and
security, inclusive development is essential. We all
recognize that development and peace are closely
linked and mutually reinforcing. There cannot be peace
without development, and in the absence of peace, no
development can take place. That is why we believe
that peace is the key prerequisite in the new post-2015
development agenda, so that it can be transformative
and make a real change in the world for societies and
people.

The marginalization of communities or groups based
on racial, ethnic, social, gender, religious, cultural and/
or economic grounds undoubtedly contributes to the
destabilization of societies and underlies many conflicts
today. Social, ethnic and religious divisions have been
a critical factor leading to the conflicts in Syria, Iraq,
Central Africa and elsewhere. Marginalization gives
rise to extremism, which in turn exacerbates existing
conflict and risks leading to the radicalization of our
youth.

The recruitment efforts of the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant provide an example of how
non-governmental actors can exploit cultural and
religious divisions to further conflicts. Inclusion and
tolerance can combat such radicalization and mitigate
the effect of existing conflict, in addition to preventing
conflict in future. For those reasons, we agree with
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's statement following
the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014): "Over the longer
term, the biggest threat to terrorists is not the power
of missiles. It is the politics of inclusion" (S/PV. 7272, p. 3). Exclusion, discrimination and deprivation are
causes of poverty and inequality that threaten social
cohesion. Meeting the imperatives of peace and
security means reaching out to the most vulnerable,
including women and girls, children and the elderly,
people with disabilities, migrants, refugees, internally
displaced persons and indigenous and minority groups.
An inclusive society should provide equal opportunity
for every citizen, regardless of his or her background.
Equal opportunity, tolerance and sound democratic
governance best ensure peaceful coexistence and
welfare. At the same time, strong and effective
institutions that are transparent, corruption-free,
accessible and accountable, and democratic forums for
participation are necessary ingredients for inclusive
and sustained economic growth and for peaceful and
stable societies.

The United Nations is a seminal factor in promoting
inclusive development. The Security Council in
particular has a unique opportunity to implement
inclusive policies because its mandated peacekeeping
and peacebuilding operations have a major role to play
in rebuilding and developing societies in the wake of
conflicts. Cyprus commends the Security Council's
efforts to increase the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations, which is emblematic of
inclusive policies. Similarly, an inclusive society is one
in which women have equal participation at all levels,
as their crucial role in the prevention and resolution in
conflicts cannot be doubted.

In conclusion, peace and security, respect for
fundamental freedoms and combating discrimination
and all forms of violence are critical conditions for
development; but at the same time there are also
developmental outcomes. Addressing the sources of
conflict requires a multidimensional approach that
must take into account the interrelated dimensions of
development, human rights, peace and security and the
rule of law. We firmly believe that 2015 will provide
us with a unique opportunity to shape a more peaceful,
just and prosperous world that will leave no one behind.

