Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his very comprehensive briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
Twenty-five years ago, the first Oslo Accord was
signed. Despite its many shortcomings, the agreement
represented a historic compromise. Unfortunately,
since then the conflict has not seen significant positive
moves towards achieving peace. On the contrary, we
have seen that the recent security situation in Israel and
the occupied Palestinian territory has become more
tense. Many times over the past couple of weeks, we
have expressed great concern about the tragic loss of
civilian lives on both sides. We have appealed to Israel
to use proportionate force. We have also called on the
Palestinians to stop indiscriminate and deliberate rocket
firings from Gaza to Israel and to refrain from causing
fires by launching incendiary kites and balloons.

Let me again underline that all sides must fully
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Recent
developments on the ground clearly point to an urgent
need to continue the de-escalation process. We believe
that a negotiated two-State solution and the resolution
of all final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, Palestinian refugees, borders and security
arrangements, remain a realistic way to fulfil the
legitimate aspirations of both parties and achieve long-
term peace.

We should strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region, especially Egypt and Jordan,
which would have a real impact on the de-escalation of
tensions in Israeli-Palestinian relations. We appeal to
both sides to refrain from unilateral steps that prejudge
the outcome of final-status negotiations and expect
them to demonstrate, through their actions and policies,
their commitment to peace. In more general terms, let
me underline that Poland supports a two-State solution
under which the national aspirations of both parties to
the conflict would be met, including the Palestinian
right to self-determination and independence, as
well as the Israeli right to ensure its security and the
normalization of relations with Arab States.

Unfortunately, so far we have not seen any
significant positive moves towards achieving that goal.
The situation in the Gaza Strip is extremely worrisome.
There is a lack of progress in political, security and
humanitarian processes in Gaza. The prevailing lack
of decisive steps towards the return of the legitimate
Palestinian Government to Gaza, despite Egypt's
best efforts to revive the process, is detrimental to
Palestinian aspirations to statehood, contributes to
the worsening of the humanitarian crisis and risks
escalation. Undoubtedly, progress in the Palestinian
reconciliation process would contribute to improving
the situation on the ground.

Unfortunately, provocation, incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric continue on both sides. In our
opinion, such acts constitute a significant obstacle to the
reactivation of the peace process. It must also be stated
that, as a result of such incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric, we have observed an increased number of
dangerous incidents, some of which involve children,
who should be particularly protected.

While we are on the subject of youth, we are deeply
concerned by the deteriorating financial situation of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. A lack of hope and real
perspectives for young generations - especially in
Gaza - could very easily be exploited by inflammatory
rhetoric. The effects of reducing this support can have
serious security and humanitarian consequences, not
only in the Palestinian territories but also in other
countries hosting refugees. The Agency already faces
a great challenge in upholding its mandate to preserve
its key services like education and health care. In the
absence of a lasting political solution, the international
community cannot abdicate its responsibility and
duty towards the Palestinian refugees to ensure
the continuation of the Agency's work on a sound
financial basis.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the long-
standing European Union position that all settlement
activity is illegal under international law and continues
to undermine the practical prospects and hopes for peace.
In this context, I also wish to reiterate the call issued by
the United Nations Coordinator for Humanitarian and
Development Activities in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory for plans to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu
Al-Helu to be cancelled. Not only is the community at
imminent risk of demolition and displacement, but such
a move would also set a significant precedent that may
affect other Bedouin communities in Area C.

