Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to express my delegation's
satisfaction in seeing you, Mr. President, steer the work
of the Security Council during the month of October.

Similarly, we welcome Her Excellency Ms. Mona
Juul, President of the Economic and Social Council.

We thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting, and Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
informative briefing. We commend the Department of
Peace Operations for supporting stability in Haiti for
more than 15 years.

Peru has a historic commitment to a safe and
prosperous Haiti. During the 13 years of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
we deployed 24 military contingents, with nearly 6,000
troops, to support that brotherly country. Today, we
welcome the progress that has made it possible to reach
this juncture and advance towards peacebuilding. We
must recognize that the path is not free of obstacles.
Indeed, we are concerned about the development of
a multidimensional crisis in Haiti, given complex
political tensions, fragile institutions and economic
standstill, which exacerbate social discontent and the
complex security situation. In that regard, we believe
that it is essential to promote constructive and inclusive
national dialogue among all political actors so as to
address the root causes of the crisis. General interest in
and the legitimacy of the fight against corruption and
impunity must guide those efforts.

At the same time, we must continue to make
progress in strengthening access to justice and respect
for human rights. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption of the strategic plan for the sector and of the
Legal Aid Law, which have helped to reduce protracted
pre-trial detentions.

We call for the adoption of crucial normative
legislation to strengthen the rule of law, such as the
criminal code, the code of criminal procedure and the
budget and electoral laws. Regarding the latter, we
welcome the support provided by the United Nations
system for the early resumption of the electoral calendar.

We trust that institutional strengthening will
help towards resolving the volatile security situation,
marked by gangs and political violence. In that regard,
we must acknowledge and commend the role of the
Haitian National Police and its increased operational
capacities through the implementation of the Strategic
Plan for the Development of Haiti.

In order to preserve that progress and strengthen
the trust of the population, it is necessary for the
Haitian National Police to continue to have the
necessary resources to carry out its mandate, as well
as to strengthen human rights monitoring mechanisms
and proper training, including on sexual violence. The
Mission's community violence reduction and weapons
management programmes and cooperation with the
Haitian National Commission for Disarmament,
Dismantlement and Reintegration Commission also
contribute to that end. We believe it key to work with
local communities, particularly young people, to
address the root causes of gang violence.

The humanitarian situation is another area of
ongoing concern, in particular Haiti's vulnerability
to natural disasters and the risk of severe food
insecurity. In that context, the support of the United
Nations and the international community is essential,
as demonstrated by the positive results of the new
approach against cholera.

In that regard, Peru supports the role that, from
tomorrow, the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
is set to play in support of the efforts of the Haitian
Government in coordination with the country team. We
stress the need for close cooperation with other entities
ofthe system, in particular the Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council.

We welcome the inclusive transition process under
way, including the strategic workshop in Port-au-
Prince, which helped to develop the new objectives of
the Integrated Office, envisaging that the humanitarian,
peace, security and development strands be mutually
supportive and reinforcing and provide a comprehensive
overview of the situation.

In that regard, we would like to congratulate
Mrs. La Lime on her appointment as Head of United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, while at the same
time expressing our appreciation and acknowledgement
of her work, as well as that of her predecessors at the
head of MINUJUSTH and MINUSTAH for their
dedication and valuable contribution to peace and
institutional strengthening in Haiti.

In that regard, we emphasize the importance of
continuing to work with the Haitian Government to
strengthen its understanding and ownership of those
objectives, while adjusting the role of the United
Nations in Haiti and assessing how best to continue to
support national efforts to achieve sustainable peace.

(spoke in French)

In that undertaking, Peru reaffirms its commitment
to the stability and development of Haiti. We will
continue to work together and to assist the efforts of the
United Nations system and the international community
to bring about lasting peace in the country.

(spoke in Spanish)

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my most sincere and deepest gratitude to all
my colleagues, Ambassadors and their entire teams,
whose valuable support I have counted on in our work
during my participation on the Council as Permanent
Representative of Peru. I would also like to extend that
sincere and deep gratitude to the Secretariat and all its
staff for their much-appreciated support, without which
our work in the Council would not have been possible.
I again thank you very much, Mr. President, for all the
support. I hope to see everyone soon in Peru.

