Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The following
countries align themselves with this statement: the
candidate countries Turkey, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia.

First of all, I would like to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening this debate and
for putting this important issue on the agenda of our
meeting today. That is a clear and welcome sign of the
Security Council's continued engagement in support of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its determination to drive
forward the implementation of last year's comprehensive
review of that resolution.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
a growing threat to international peace and security. It
puts at risk the security of our States and our peoples.
Some States have sought, or are seeking, the means and
technology to develop weapons of mass destruction and
their delivery systems. The risk that terrorists could
acquire such weapons is particularly worrisome. That
should be a cause of serious concern for all of us.

The international community needs to respond
firmly. In the European Union's view, our response
should be based on a number of principles. First
of all, we must continue to address the root causes
of instability. Secondly, multilateral disarmament
and non-proliferation treaties and agreements must
be upheld and strengthened. Thirdly, multilateral
institutions, especially those dealing with verification
and compliance, deserve our full support. Fourthly,
export-control lists and regimes play an important role
in stemming proliferation. Finally, we must mainstream
non-proliferation into our overall policies, resources
and instruments.

The European Union's global strategy, issued
one year ago, provides the foundation for the EU to
continue, and even step up, its efforts in the coming
years. In line with the global strategy, we strongly
support the multilateral disarmament, non-proliferation
and arms-control treaties and regimes, and we will
use every means at our disposal to assist in resolving
proliferation crises, as we successfully did with the
Iranian nuclear programme.

The EU and its member States believe that resolution
1540 (2004) remains a central pillar of the international
non-proliferation architecture. Resolution 1540 (2004)
has become even more important in the current
security environment, which is characterized by acute
and diffuse threats, and where external and internal
security issues must be seen and tackled together.

We are therefore pleased to see that the
comprehensive review conducted in 2016 reaffirmed
the centrality, importance and authority of resolution
1540 (2004) in the multilateral non-proliferation
architecture. All 28 EU member States sponsored the
new resolution 2325 (2016), which the Security Council
unanimously adopted on 15 December 2016. I would
like to warmly congratulate my Spanish colleagues for
their outstanding work on that topic.

As a follow-up to the comprehensive review and
the adoption of resolution 2325 (2016), last month
the EU Council adopted a decision in support of
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That
new EU Council decision is an ambitious funding
scheme designed to help implement the outcome
of the comprehensive review. Based on our fruitful
cooperation in the past, we will again ask the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs to perform the
role of implementing partner for this project. The new
scheme extends over a three-year period and is worth
more than €2.6 million.

Through the new Council decision, we will support
cooperation and capacity-building, both nationally and
at the regional level. We will pay special attention to the
role of industry and support the relevant initiatives. Last
but not least, we are keen to foster closer cooperation
between EU-funded projects implemented by the
Office for Disarmament Affairs and by other regional
organizations, such as the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, and those implemented
by the European Commission through our centres
of excellence.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the readiness
of the European Union and its 28 member States to
implement in a proactive manner the outcome of
the 2016 comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004). We will do so in close cooperation with the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and in partnership with
all United Nations States Members and with other
non-governmental stakeholders.
The proliferation challenges are multifaceted and
complex, and its consequences extremely worrying.
But, working together, we can succeed in preventing
the worst-case scenario from happening.

