Mr. Madeira: The representative of Somalia
responded to the question asked by the German
representative on the lessons to be learned from the
Sabiid and Bariire operations and the future need to
empower the forces that must continue to sustain
operations like those two.

He spoke of the need to ensure the ability of the
Somali National Army (SNA) to generate forces; a
properly trained and well-equipped SNA; and an SNA
whose members' salaries are paid, guaranteed and
predictable. Most importantly, he spoke of an SNA, like
the one we saw in Sabiid, that respects human rights,
protects the population and their property and does not
erect roadblocks and checkpoints, among other such
obstacles. Those are the things that we saw, and that we
are seeing, in Sabiid. That is an army that we want to
see multiplied in terms of numbers. For that to happen,
as the Somali representative said, we must continue to
fund, support and equip the Somali national security
forces. That way, they will have many more successes
and there will be a transition that can preserve the gains
so far accumulated.

Another important lesson we must draw from
Sabiid and Bariire is that the Government is present and
holding onto the recovered areas. The presence of the
Government is allowing it to win the hearts and minds
of the people and keep the population on its side, while
preventing Al-Shabaab from reaching and recruiting
those populations.
The other question raised was on the prospects
for the implementation of the transition plan. We are
implementing the transition plan. It will be recalled
that when we adopted the transition plan, the issue was
that the transitional drawdown should be gradual and
responsible, with the capacity to ensure that the gains
made were not lost. But what we are seeing now is the
time limit of the continued drawdown, without taking
into account the aspects of responsibility, graduality and
the need to preserve the gains. It is important that there
be a correlation with the need to preserve the progress
made. I want to insist however that the African Union
Mission in Somalia will be guided by the evolution
of the situation, and we are ready to comply with any
decision that the Security Council sees fit to make.

The other issue is with respect to the integration of
regional forces. Council members can see that Bariire
was recovered and captured by an integrated Somali
force - an integration that has since sought to impede
the regional force being transferred into the Somali
National Army as a clan army or clan group. It should
be integrated into the Somali National Army as part of
a multi-ethnic, multi-clan component, with the proper
profile of command and control. I have seen and am
still seeing that this is a strategy that the Government
is undertaking to ensure that the regions contribute
with forces. Those forces, however, should not become
clan-based groups that try to push for their own clan
interests, but rather a force that abides by the Republican
principles of an armed force. That is the way go. If that
persists, with time integration will become part and
parcel of a force that will be able to operate anywhere
in Somalia.

