Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Mr. Zenenga and Mr. Madeira for their briefings. I
shall not rehash their diagnosis and assessment of the
current situation, which, as the Secretary-General said
following his recent visit to Somalia, is a source of dual
and contrasting feelings of sadness and hope.

Progress has been made in Somalia since 2007.
The recent electoral process, despite its shortcomings,
maintains and extends that momentum. With respect to
the international security effort in Somalia, France, of
course, pays tribute to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), its fallen soldiers and the support
of the United Nations. France also recalls that the
European Union has contributed nearly $2 billion to
this effort.

But we also know that this significant progress is
partial and reversible. In that context, I would like to
emphasize the following elements, which, in our View,
constitute the priorities of the coming phase in Somalia.

First, on the political and humanitarian situation,
France endorses the recommendations of the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia,
which, beyond the guidelines for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia, identifies priority areas
for action, numbering four per month. This includes,
first, the conclusion of an agreement on federalism
defining the respective competences of the federal
authorities and the federated entities in both civil
and military fields. Secondly, basic public services
must be established throughout the territory capable
of providing the population with the services and
protections it needs.

In this regard, the drought currently affecting the
region requires urgent action and reminds us of the
importance of putting in place the measures necessary
to respond to the humanitarian consequences of crises,
whatever they may be.

Thirdly, a greater effort is required in the
establishment of the rule of law in Somalia and in the
area of respect for human rights. These principles must
be applied to all actors, be they national or international,
in particular in the area of security. The United Nations
policy on human rights must be our common framework
in this respect.

Fourthly, we need greater transparency in
public finances and in the management of
international assistance.

The second priority in the upcoming period is
AMISOM. In the context of our prioritization of United
Nations action, following this year's elections our major
priority is security. In this respect, France would like to
make three points.

First, concerning the financing of AMISOM,
France had hoped that other contributors would join in
the financial efforts undertaken by the United Nations,
the European Union and bilateral contributors. But the
geographical diversification of AMISOM. funding did
not, unfortunately, take place; we cannot and should not
stop here.

Secondly, on the issue of the withdrawal of
AMISOM, we understand the desire of certain troop-
contributing countries to withdraw and once again we
pay tribute to them. However, such a withdrawal should
not simply follow a national timetable but also must
linked to a Somali security solution.

Thirdly, before the withdrawal, AMISOM, which
is going to continue its operations in Somalia, must
increase its operational effectiveness. This requires
the establishment of mission support units, improving
intelligence-gathering capacities, strengthening the
chain of command, and coordination among the
various contingents.

France expects that the joint review of AMISOM,
as requested in resolution 2297 (2016) will take account
of these challenges.

But the crucial point when it comes to security, as
was underscored by the briefers and the speakers who
took the floor before me, is a greater involvement of
the Somalis themselves. This, we believe, is the key
issue for the upcoming period. About 1,900 Somali
army personnel are eligible for logistical support, to
be provided by the United Nations Support Office in
Somalia, in the framework of joint operations with
UNSOM. Also, local forces - also known as Darwish
forces - are carrying out security functions. These
forces must be involved to a greater extent and as
quickly as possible in exercising control over the
liberated territories.

The review requested in resolution 2297 (2016)
places the development of a Somali solution at the heart
of its objectives. A general, in-depth review of the
staffing of the Somali armed forces must be carried out
as soon as possible, and followed up by the establishment
of a transparent system of salary payments. The
European Union must also continue carrying out the
training of its forces through the European Union
Training Mission for Somalia, including in the regions,
and we welcome the fact that the European Union was
invited to participate in the joint mission.

In order for these goals to be attained, these goals
must be shared by the Somali authorities, which must
commit to working towards them. The concept ofmutual
accountability must be fleshed out operationally, and
France welcomes the recent encouraging developments
in this area.

Lastly, we welcome the London Conference,
held last week, at which these undertakings were
endorsed and international partners joined together on
a coordinated approach that must be implemented as
soon as possible.

