Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important and timely
debate. We welcome the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/158) and commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and
her team for their dedicated work.

The increasingly dire humanitarian situation in
northern Sri Lanka is alarming. Civilians, including
many children, are trapped in the conflict zone.
Liechtenstein calls on both of the parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and to facilitate unhindered access to those facing life-
threatening shortages of food, water and medical
supplies.

The monitoring and reporting mechanism on
serious violations of the rights of the child and the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict have brought about tangible progress
in advancing the protection of children affected by
armed conflicts. The decision to de-list various
situations from the annexes of the report of the
Secretary-General demonstrates that the mechanism
established by resolution 1612 (2005) has already had
a positive effect on the ground. Taking into account the
recent progress made in the various areas of civilian
protection, in particular with regard to resolution 1820
(2008), we believe it is time to acknowledge the clear
linkage between resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1612
(2005) and to further develop both agendas in a holistic
manner.

In accordance with resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on the situations listed in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's report, including the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, rape and other
forms of grave sexual violence against children, the
killing and maiming of children, the abduction of
children, the denial of humanitarian access and attacks
on schools and hospitals. However, only one out of
those six grave violations - the recruitment and use of
child soldiers - currently triggers the inclusion of
countries in the agenda of the Security Council, in
annex I of the Secretary-General's report. We believe
that the protection of children could be significantly
enhanced if a new resolution were to expand the
criteria triggering the mechanism to include all six
grave violations against children.

While acknowledging the equal weight of all
grave violations, we believe that the expansion would
best be done step by step, beginning with sexual
violence, as the most pressing issue. With a view to
further strengthening the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, we welcome the information provided by
non-governmental organizations and call for the
inclusion of child-protection advisers in all
peacekeeping missions and, where appropriate,
political missions. In order to prepare and develop an
action plan that will lead to de-listing, the States
concerned should allow direct contacts between the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and relevant non-State actors.

The fight against impunity is an essential part of
our efforts to improve the safety and security of these
children. Holding perpetrators accountable for their
crimes has already proved to have a deterrent effect.
While it needs to be emphasized that such
accountability should take place in national judiciaries,
the Security Council must also be mindful of its
competence to refer to the International Criminal
Court, for investigation and prosecution, violations of
children's rights falling within the Court's jurisdiction.
Any measures taken by the Working Group in response
to grave violations of children's rights must be
complemented by effective enforcement mechanisms
and measures, such as sanctions, arms embargoes and
bans on military assistance, as well as the imposition of
travel restrictions.

As a member of the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict, Liechtenstein will continue to be
active in this context. We hope that this open debate
will serve as a crucial step towards a new resolution
that will expand the monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

