Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I wish to extend my sincere
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and your country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation associates itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
that just made by the representative of Kazakhstan on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The situation in the Middle East, especially the
unresolved conflict on the question of Palestine,
continues to be the central issue in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The intransigence of
Israel on the question of Palestine, the Arab Spring, the
situation in Syria and Libya are issues that have drawn
our attention to the region. The Middle East continues
to witness incidents of violence and hostility.

It is without a doubt that the deadlock in the talks
on Palestine is diminishing the possibility of a return
to the negotiating table for a two-State solution. With
more Israeli settlements created, the probability of a
resumption of mediation is even more remote. But the
world cannot sit idle as the situation in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank continues to deteriorate, with no
hope of recourse. We should collectively demand that
Israel lift the blockade on Gaza immediately.

Israel must cease all its illegal settlement activities.
Malaysia has been consistent in its view that the
continued occupation by Israel of Palestinian land and
territory is unlawful and against international law. On
the same token, Malaysia is also extremely concerned
with Israel's intention to divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which is also a holy site for Muslims and Christians.
Such acts would further undermine international law
and aggravate the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.
Just a few weeks ago, world leaders gathered in New
York to participate in the High-level Meeting on the
Rule of Law at the National and International Levels.
Our leaders adopted what is considered to be a landmark
Declaration (resolution 67/1). The provisions contained
therein should be implemented. These include applying
the rule of law to all States equally and resolving
disputes by peaceful means, in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. World
leaders also committed themselves to upholding the
right to the self-determination of peoples who remain
under foreign occupation, and to ending impunity for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law. Malaysia hopes that the Security Council
will uphold the agreement adopted in the outcome
document.

The plight of the people of Palestine cannot be
ignored by the international community. It is our moral
responsibility to uphold their aspirations to freedom
and liberty. Their ambitions for self-determination
are legitimate aspirations. With 133 Member States
recognizing Palestine as a State, it is an irony that we,
the people of the world, cannot make this aspiration a
reality. We must continue to uphold the principles for
the establishment of a Palestinian State under the two-
State solution, based on the pre-I967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. Only then will Israel and
Palestinians live side by side in peace and security.

We are appalled by the death of thousands of
Syrian civilians and the thousands more who have
been displaced and have taken refuge in neighbouring
countries. The unabated violence and destruction of
property must end, the loss of lives must be stopped,
and due process of law must resume. We call upon all
parties in Syria to cease hostilities immediately and
abide by international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights laws. We believe that
a solution to the conflict in Syria must be a Syrian-led
process ifit is to be sustainable in the long run.

Malaysia joins the international community in
urging restraint between Turkey and Syria with regard
to the recent shelling incidents along their common
borders. We believe that resorting to military action
would worsen the situation. Both nations should find
the courage to resolve their differences amicably,
without the need for any military action.

Malaysia strongly supports the restoration of
Syrian sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. We
urge Israel to withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan
to the line of4 June 1967.
Malaysia also reiterates its support for Lebanon in
its efforts to complete the liberation of all its territories
and condemns the continued violations and aggression
launched by Israel. We urge Israel to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006), which called for a permanent
ceasefire and for the complete withdrawal of Israeli
troops from Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue
Line.

The situation in the Middle East needs our collective
attention and a solution. Malaysia urges the main
players to show political leadership and impartiality
in order to improve the deteriorating situation in the
region. We also wish to remind the Council that failure
to enforce many of its resolutions on the question of
Palestine has in some ways encouraged the occupying
Power to continue defying world opinion. The time has
come for us to make some difficult decisions for the
good of the region and the world. It has been a year
since Palestine submitted an application to be a State
Member of the United Nations. How much longer
does the international community have to wait for
the Council to take a decision, when the majority has
agreed to admit the State of Palestine as a Member of
the United Nations?

