Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, the Executive Director of
UN-Women and the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security for their briefings and for their visit
to South Sudan from 7 to 10 October in order to closely
assess the situation there.

Today I will address three issues: the transitional
process, the role and empowerment of women and
humanitarian concerns.

With regard to the transitional process, the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan turned a new
page in the history of that country. As we reiterate
our support for the peace process in all its phases and
welcome the decrease in hostilities, we express our
concern about some individuals who continue their
violations against the security and safety of the people
of South Sudan, who aspire to peace, reconciliation,
justice and development.

With regard to the role and empowerment of women,
lessons can be learned from war - and one of them
is that women are its main victims. They are also the
ones who first call for peace. Their role in negotiations,
transitions and sustainable peace is important and
vital. Women should not suffer from war and their
role should not be disregarded in peace. According to
what we have heard today and to what was stipulated
in the revitalized Agreement on the quota of women,
they deserve to participate more in decision-making.
We look forward to the completion of legal procedures
on the establishment of a hybrid court for South Sudan
to implement the Peace Agreement so that justice will
reign and women, men and children can enjoy justice.

With regard to humanitarian concerns, many
problems continue to destabilize peace, such as the
inability of approximately 4.5 million refugees and
internally displaced persons to return, the fact that
nearly 70 per cent of children are unable to go to school
and the increase in the cost of daily living. Successfully
achieving peace in South Sudan hinges upon addressing
those humanitarian challenges. Any step that does
not take into account the participation of women, the
education of children and ending hunger will face the
most difficult obstacles. Only by seriously addressing
those challenges will South Sudan reap the benefits of
security and stability.

Let me recall the presidential order of November
2017, which removed taxes on humanitarian workers.
We encourage the Government of South Sudan to
continue implementing that order. We call on parties
that still hinder humanitarian work and access to
assistance to stop their inhumane practices, as innocent
people in need are paying the price.

In conclusion, we thank the Government of
South Sudan for cooperating with the joint African
Union-United Nations delegation, and we encourage
it to continue its cooperation with both organizations
in order to serve the interests of South Sudan and its
friendly people.

