Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you and your
fraternal country, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I would like to
thank you personally for your guidance of the Council.
We would also like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to His Excellency the Ambassador of Gabon and the staff
of his Mission for their leadership of the Council during
the past month.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Muntasser, the
Secretary of the People's Committee for Foreign Liaison
and International Cooperation of our fraternal country, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.

The Sudan believes that the peaceful settlement of
disputes in accordance with the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations is a necessity in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security. This is
a concept that is in keeping with Article 33, paragraph 1
of the Charter, which states:

"The parties to any dispute, the continuance of
which is likely to endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security, shall, first of all,
seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation,
conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to
regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful
means of their own choice."

 

This is why the Sudan believes that the Security Council is,
first and foremost, duty-bound to compel the parties to the
conflict to settle their dispute by peaceful means, if that is
their wish.

Such is the role that developing countries believe the
Security Council should assume in order to resolve
peacefully many of the conflicts on the Council's agenda,
and especially the question of Lockerbie which is now
under consideration. Resorting to the policy of sanctions,
which makes the principles of equity a pretext for
hegemonic forces to use double standards by imposing
sanctions on weaker countries without the necessary
objective and legal conditions being met, constitutes a
violation of the principles and values of justice enshrined in
the Charter and contempt for the international conscience.

Faithful to its principles, and because of its
commitment to Africa, the Arab world and the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Sudan supports all the proposals and
initiatives advanced to find a peaceful settlement to the
Lockerbie crisis. We particularly support the joint initiative
of the Organization of African Unity and the League of
Arab States, which was expressed clearly before this
Council by Mr. Robert Mugabe, current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, on 25 September 1997,
during the ministerial meeting devoted to Africa.

The Judgment handed down by the International Court
of Justice in February 1998 regarding its competence and
the admissibility of the issue has reaffirmed the juridical
character of this item. The Sudan therefore invites the
Security Council to assist the Court by giving it the
necessary time to examine the case and find an appropriate
legal and peaceful solution to the dispute, and to lift the
sanctions against the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya or suspend
them until such time as the conflict is resolved.

The Judgement of the International Court of Justice
regarding its competence in this case demonstrates beyond
a doubt that this conflict is incontrovertibly of a legal
nature. It disposes of any dissenting opinions or doubts
about the role of the Security Council regarding this issue.
Notwithstanding the fact that the Council could have come
to this conclusion, given the evidence before it, without the
Court's Judgment, the Judgment has disposed of any doubts
that might have subsisted. It is therefore incumbent upon
the Security Council to assume the sacred duty bestowed
upon it by the Charter of the United Nations and refer the
case to the International Court of Justice in accordance with
Article 36, paragraph 3 of the Charter, which is clear and
unequivocal in this regard.

It is time for the international community, within the
international legal framework and in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and the objective initiatives, to
seek a solution to the Lockerbie crisis, particularly since
the maintenance of sanctions against Libya has direct
consequences which prolong the sufferings of the families
of the victims, the Libyan people and the neighbouring
countries.

We must take into consideration the Secretary-
General's report on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which
stresses the humanitarian consequences of the sanctions,
particularly as those consequences undermine the very
principle of the concept of international justice.

In conclusion, the delegation of the Sudan pays
tribute to the Security Council for agreeing to call this
meeting, which is an important step towards strengthening
the transparency so much desired in the Council's work.
It is time for the Security Council to decide on lifting or
suspending the sanctions against Libya until such time as
the International Court of Justice considers the case in an
objective manner.

