Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I wish to offer you our best wishes for
success in your work and to state that Spain endorses
the statements made by the representative of France on
behalf of the European Union.

Spain views what is happening in the occupied
territories with the deepest concern. These events
clearly show how easy it is for one obviously
unacceptable and destabilizing act of provocation to
spark a vortex of violence with tragic consequences
which as yet cannot be calculated. In these
circumstances, the disproportionate response of the
security forces merely serves the interests of those who
want the situation to get completely out of hand.

We consider that there is an urgent need now for
both those directly responsible for the events and the
international community to take whatever measures are
required to lessen tension and violence.

To that end, in this very dangerous time, what is
important, more important than ever, is to ensure
strictest compliance with the international legal
framework and international humanitarian law. It is
also essential to ensure observance of the agreements
between the parties aimed at ending the violence and to
have the presence of the armed forces reduced to a
minimum. It is also very important to have self-control
and prudence on the part of all. Similarly, Spain
considers that the establishment of an international
commission to objectively investigate what happened
could serve to reduce tension considerably.

These are initial emergency measures that should
make it possible, within the peace process, to address
the underlying causes of the crisis. The peace process,
with the principles and terms of reference that were
well established at the Madrid Conference, the Security
Council resolutions and the subsequent accords, are the
only common framework of reference that can bring
about a political settlement of the crisis.

Spain hopes that the meetings held yesterday in
Paris and being held today in Egypt will be able to give
effect to the measures required and that the proper
impetus can be given to the peace process, because the
enemies of peace must be thwarted in their purposes.

We must not play into the hands of those who
wish to sabotage the process.

It is very important to arrive at a peace
agreement. The Palestinians need it. The Israelis need
it. The international community needs this. It is deeply
to be hoped that the window of opportunity is not being
closed by these tragic events, because we need to make
use of it. Even more important is that the agreement,
particularly when it comes to Jerusalem, must be fair,
acceptable and satisfactory to both parties. This is the
only way to guarantee that it will be viable and lasting
and that a just peace can be attained, which has been
the hope of all the peoples in the region.

