Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Madam President,
for presiding over this meeting. We are also grateful
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zewde and Mr. Chergui for their briefings. We deeply
appreciate your efforts, Madam President, to promote
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).

Over the past year, the United Nations-AU
partnership has seen relatively significant progress,
thanks to efforts on both sides. The eleventh joint
annual consultative meeting was held last year in
Ethiopia and the twelfth will take place at the United
Nations tomorrow. We expect both parties to have
a candid and deep exchange on topics of common
interest to both sides. The two parties have also jointly
carried out activities in areas such as joint evaluations,
decision-making and briefing, and coping with the
problems of Somalia, Mali, the Sahel, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and many other hotspot
issues, with positive results. China highly appreciates
those efforts.

The continued strengthening of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU is very important
to peace and development in Africa and in the world
as a whole. The overall situation in Africa is currently
stable, but the continent is still facing challenges
on the peace, security, economic development and
humanitarian fronts, which creates new demands for
cooperation between the two parties.

China lends its overall support to the
recommendations 2018 annual report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/678) on the partnership between the
United Nations and the AU. We believe that, in order
to address new situations and challenges, the United

Nations should focus on the following three areas, while
continuing to enhance its partnership with the AU.

First, there is a need to continue to build on and
optimize the relevant partnership mechanisms. The
United Nations should fully respect the leadership
of Africa in solving its own security issues and
improve cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, such as the AU. Based on new trends,
they should find innovative ways of working together,
while improving the coherence of topics, the timeliness
of briefings and effective decision-making.

Secondly, there is a need to actively explore
ways to provide Africa-led peacekeeping operations
with sustainable and predictable funding. AU-led
peacekeeping operations constitute a significant means
to address crises in Africa and an important complement
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, but AU
peacekeeping operations face difficulties in terms of
human and financial resources. The United Nations
and the AU have made several attempts to jointly
resolve the funding issue and have seen positive results.
The Secretary-General and Chairperson of the AU
Commission have offered several relevant models, in
the light of which the two sides will be able to pursue
extensive exchanges and find innovative ways to find a
way to resolve the issue.

Thirdly, there is a need to maintain support for
Africa in its efforts to address the root causes of
conflict. Support for Africa's economic and social
development is a major way forward; it will expand the
United Nations-AU partnership in the future and is an
important channel to help Africa confront emerging
causes of conflict. The United Nations should closely
align the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development with the AU Agenda 2063.
As a priority, the international community should
increase assistance to and investment in Africa's health
care, education, economy, trade, connectivity and other
infrastructure to improve the economic and social
development of African nations.

China is actively committed to promoting African
peace and security and strengthening the United
Nations-AU partnership. China will continue to uphold
the principles and the concept of achieving shared
growth through discussions and cooperation, work
closely with African nations and assist and support
them in their effort to strengthen peace, security and

capacity-building, resolve regional hotspot issues, and
realize stability and development for African nations.

