Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): I join others in thanking
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for briefing us today and also
for his report, which has given us a fairly good idea of
the progress that has so far been made in the
implementation of the peace accords. My delegation
also thanks Mr. Jacques Paul Klein for his valuable
update on the situation prevailing in the country and
his proposals for the future status of the international
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Whatever decision is taken, it should eventually
take into account the situation on the ground and
reduce duplication of work. We note that the overall
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remains generally
under control. However, we are concerned that ethnic
tension still persists in some parts of the country. We
appreciate the work being carried out by the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) personnel to fulfil the mandate as
efficiently as possible and enforce the rule of law and
order in the country. We are convinced that by the end
of next year, when the mandate of the Mission ends,
the local police force will be well trained and equipped
to carry out their duty professionally.

The rivalry that exists among different ethnic
groups should not undermine the work of the police
force. We believe that an efficient police force in
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be possible only when
there is cohesion among its members. With a view to
achieving this goal, all communities should be fairly
represented in the police.

A safe and secure environment will not prevail
unless the offenders are brought to justice under an
impartial judicial system in which the population has
faith. We welcome the efforts by the office of the High
Representative to reform the judicial system in Bosnia
and Herzegovina in this regard. We hope that the
Independent Judicial Commission will improve the
quality and efficiency of the judicial system. We also
call on the political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina
not to interfere with the process and to respect the
Memorandum of Understanding that regulates the
appointment of judges and prosecutors.

At the same time, we call on the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and hand over all the indictees for
trial by The Hague Tribunal. We appreciate that the
Republika Srpska authorities have taken measures to
cooperate with the ICTY in this regard.

Another issue that seems to plague the country is
the problem of accommodation and property
repossession following the increased return of refugees
and displaced persons to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There seems to be no organized approach to the
reconstruction of the housing units and people who are
returning to their homes after a long period are facing
difficulties in repossessing their property. Welcoming
amendments made by the High Representative to the
property laws in both Entities, we hope that the
repossession of pre-war property will be facilitated as
soon as possible.

In order for other Bosnians to return to their
home, the issue of property needs to be addressed as
soon as possible, together with other related problems,
such as the provision of education, social services and
employment. We are fully aware that the Bosnian
economy is in bad shape for the time being, and that it
needs the support of the donors to revitalize the
country and put it back on its feet. In this regard, we
therefore call on the international community not to
lessen its resolve to assist Bosnia and Herzegovina in
its economic reconstruction and development efforts.
We also call on all parties to cooperate with each other
in the vital area of national reconstruction.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that the
Office of the High Representative is helping to improve
conditions for new investment in the country. We hope
that the authorities in Bosnia fulfil their commitment to
implement the reforms suggested by the Foreign
Investment Advisory Service.

With the new proposals of the High
Representative on the ways and means to consolidate
the implementation process of the Peace Agreement,
we have no doubt that the rule of law, good
governance, democracy and human rights will be
guaranteed and protected in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, Mauritius commends the work of all the
people of the UNMIBH, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
Stabilization Force, the Office of the High
Representative and others who are striving in difficult
situations to achieve peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

