Mr. Liu Zhengmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Under-
Secretaries-General Guehenno and Gambari for their
briefings, which were extremely helpful for us to gain
a timely understanding of the crisis between Lebanon
and Israel.

In its recent stage the situation between Lebanon
and Israel has been made drastically worse, which
causes us grave concern and worry. China is against
any actions that destabilize that region and calls on all
parties concerned to strictly respect the Blue Line and
relevant United Nations resolutions.
We denounce the armed aggression by Israel
against Lebanon. The Israeli military forces have used
disproportionate force and have caused massive
destruction of infrastructure in Lebanon. That has

seriously affected the daily life of local residents and
has caused large numbers of civilian causalities. It
violates the sovereignty of Lebanon and has caused a
grave humanitarian crisis. We demand that Israel stop
its current military actions and lift the air, sea and land
blockade against Lebanon.

At the same time we are against the practice of
Hizbollah militias who cross the borders to attack
Israel and launch rockets on Israeli cities. We call on
Hizbollah to release the abducted Israeli soldiers at an
early date.

At present the situation in the Middle East is
extremely precarious and volatile. Imprudent actions
by any party may set off the powder keg and lead to
catastrophic consequences - which no one wishes to
see. History has told us that violence for violence, and
a tooth for a tooth, will lead us nowhere. We strongly
call on all parties concerned to exercise the utmost
restraint and maintain calm and to resolve the current
crisis through diplomatic means.

We have noted that Secretary-General Arman has
decided to send a special group on an urgent trip for
mediation and brokering in the Middle East. We
support his decision and hope that the special group
will live up to the great expectations placed on it and
bring us good news of peace.

