Mr. Bartoli: I thank the Secretary of Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of the Philippines, His
Excellency Alberto Romulo, and through him the
Government of the Philippines and its representatives
here in New York, who organized this open debate
during its presidency of the Security Council.

I have been asked to present the perspective of
academic centres as part of civil society's contribution
to conflict prevention and the pacific settlement of
disputes, through the lens of the organization I founded
in 1997 at Columbia University, here in New York
City: the Center for International Conflict Resolution.
By the way, some students from the Center are here in
the room and I am very pleased to see that. My
intuition is that this contribution involves
understanding and experimentation.

Human yearning for peace is infinite, and yet at
times it lacks proper words and images. Individuals,
groups, States and nations fall prey to their own limits
as they explore the challenging world in which they
exist, to which they belong, for which they toil. The
first academic contribution to conflict prevention is
therefore to offer, sharpen and sustain the language that
allows all of us, as the human family, to understand the
conflicts in which we live, the ones that are coming
and the ones we fail to recognize.

That is why we must be grateful for the labour
and creativity of so many scholars who have given us
the words to describe, understand and respond to the
world of conflicts. Without academia we would not use
such words as "development" or "genocide" the way
we do today. Even the word "prevention" would not be
in our vocabulary as it currently is. So I am sure that
all in this Chamber are grateful, as I am, to those giants
who gave us the International Convention for the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Charter of the United Nations. Many of them were
academics, and dedicated to the human family.

They came from all backgrounds and belief
systems, for indeed conflicts are a common human
experience. All conflict resolution literature is in
agreement that conflicts are a part of life, along with
disagreements, differences and distances. Conflicts are
most commonly solved without resort to violence;
actually, most of the time the use of violence
exacerbates them.

The second contribution of academia is thus the
study of ways in which conflicts have been
constructively addressed without resorting to violence.
This research is not an empty promise; rather it is
recognition that all of us as humans have been fighting
against each other and solving conflicts since time
immemorial. All human societies have dealt with the
fundamental issue of conflict prevention and
resolution. All human societies have developed,
together with their own language, ways to describe and
address conflict constructively.

We must be simultaneously proud and ashamed of
this legacy, because on the one hand no human society
has ever been completely deprived of peace and on the
other hand no human society is ever free from the
threat of impending violence and destruction.
Academic centres are taking this legacy seriously,
incorporating it into the experimentation that is needed
to address the impending challenges of the moment.

The role of academics today, as interpreted by a
centre of higher learning such as the Center for
International Conflict Resolution, is to keep looking
for what is still not apparent and to give a name to
violence and peace in a way that is attentive to the
challenges of the moment, intelligent in its approach,
rational in its methods and responsible in its
prescriptions. It is a contribution of understanding and
experimentation.

An example comes to mind, such as the one
advanced by Professor Su Hao, a colleague at the
Foreign Affairs University in Beijing, who is working
on conflict prevention in a regional context, or by our
colleagues at the Swiss Peace Foundation, who are so
dedicated to the Early Recognition of Tension and
Fact-Finding (FAST) risk profile, an experimental way
to provide early warning.

Being part of the Community of Sant'Egidio -
the only non-governmental organization cited by the
Secretary-General in his 2001 report on the prevention
of armed conflict (S/2001/574) - which I have
represented at the United Nations since 1992, I had the
good fortune of contributing to the peace process in
Mozambique. We discovered then that while all can
make war, at the same time all can make peace, civil
society included. That discovery led to a renewed
search in a spirit of thoughtful experimentalism.
Columbia University welcomed this innovative
approach, which made it possible for the university to
become a meaningful point of reference, a space of
synthesis and responsibility in the field of international
conflict resolution.

Traditionally, universities have been stronger than
other sectors of civil society. By educating the elites
and often being supported by governing forces,
universities have frequently used their autonomy to
foster a human search beyond the constraints of
institutionalized politics. Universities have been places
in which stabilitas encounters innovation.

I therefore want to recall that on 26 and 27 April
2006 the prayer for peace that was initiated by Pope
John Paul II in Assisi in 1986 will be held in another
centre of higher learning: Georgetown University in
Washington, DC. At a time when the use of religion by
violent forces seems to be so prevalent, it is
indispensable to strengthen the synergy between people
of good will and people of learning: believers and
seekers, academics and decision makers.

I come from a country, Italy, which takes pride in
its many old universities. Names such as Bologna and
Padua are recognized everywhere in the world as
centres of higher learning. With them, a network of
centres of higher learning is now capturing the whole
globe from Baghdad to Bombay, from Beijing to
Boston. Countries must be proud of their centres of
higher learning, and we should all welcome the
wisdom of the Hadiths, authentic sayings attributed to
the prophet Muhammad, such as "He dies not who
gives life to learning".

The Security Council is an extraordinary, unique
human space. I hope it will keep its openness to
academic learning. Since 1998, the Center for
International Conflict Resolution has contributed a
course on conflict prevention taught at United Nations
Headquarters for United Nations officials, diplomats
from the missions and Columbia University students.
Ingenuity will lead us to try new solutions and new
forms of dialogue and interaction. This very open
debate is proof of it.

It is my hope that through the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, which held a very
promising meeting last year on academic contributions
to peace sponsored by the University of Rome/La
Sapienza, and the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict, which held its plenary
conference here just two months ago, and other
channels, free and open communication will be
maintained among all centres of learning and the
United Nations system.

Let us keep learning together. It was beautifully
put by the old rabbis, speaking about shared learning:
0 chevruta o mituta, an Aramaic expression that we
can translate as "Either together or dead". Indeed, let
us keep learning together and stay alive together.

