Mr. Choi: Since my last briefing to the Security
Council, in September 2009 (see S/PV.6168), the
Ivorian electoral process has made remarkable progress
in a peaceful environment. The data processing of
voter registration for around 6.3 million people was
successfully completed in November. This resulted in
the publication of the provisional electoral list by the
Independent Electoral Commission on 23 November,
with about 5.3 million persons confirmed and around 1
million persons remaining to be confirmed. This
provisional list was well balanced, credible and
consensually agreed by the major Ivorian political
protagonists.

The appeals process launched on 24 November
2009, which allowed the non-traced persons to have
their status verified, was completed on 9 January 2010.
It resulted in over 500,000 additional persons being
traced. This should provide the basis of a definitive
electoral list of 5.8 million people.

However, a contentious problem emerged
unexpectedly regarding the appeals process as the
Independent Electoral Commission cross-checked the 1
million non-traced persons and produced a second list
of 429,000 traced people. A controversy arose
regarding this semi-official second list. The
Independent Electoral Commission explains that this
list has been created purely for the internal
consumption of the Commission's 31 regional
supervisors. The presidential camp contests this
explanation, saying that this semi-official list has been
used to distort the official appeals process. The dispute
surrounding the second list of 429,000 persons is yet to
be resolved. It may take several weeks before the
electoral process gains speed again.

The United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) will do its utmost with the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement protagonists, especially with the
Office of the Facilitator, with a view to minimizing the
delay and establishing the definitive electoral list as
soon as possible. Once the definitive electoral list is
established as planned, in February 2010, only three
additional steps in six weeks are needed to arrive at the
presidential election. The first step requires two weeks
for the production of around 6 million identity cards
and 5.8 million voters' cards. The second step requires
two weeks for the distribution of these cards and the
transportation of electoral material to about 10,000
voting sites. The third and final step will require two
weeks for the official presidential campaign. This
10-21493
timetable would still lead us to spring 2010 for the
presidential election in Cote d'Ivoire.

Beyond the current dispute on the electoral list,
there is one possible obstacle to this electoral
timetable, which is the issue of the country's
reunification. In terms of the fourth supplementary
agreement to the Ouagadougou Political Agreement,
which is known as Ouaga IV, signed in December
2008, a de facto reunification is to be completed two
months prior to the presidential election. The progress
in this regard has been very slow. Yet all of the
Ouagadougou Political Agreement protagonists have so
far taken the position that the lack of progress on the
reunification issue should not hamper the electoral
process.

In the meantime, in the security domain,
President Laurent Gbagbo and President Blaise
Compaore of Burkina Faso jointly proposed the
deployment of a 500-man-strong Burkinabe battalion
during a three-month electoral period within the
framework of UNOCI's military contingent. UNOCI
deems that this proposal deserves to be supported.

In conclusion, if solutions are to be found on the
issues of the second electoral list and of reunification,
we shall finally have the long-awaited presidential
election in spring 2010.

