The President: I should point out for those
watching the video screens that we have been joined by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and the Joint Special
Representative for the African Union and the United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari, and that they will join in the consultations to
take place after the meeting of the Security Council.

I will now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

I regard this meeting as the most important event
of the United Kingdom's presidency of the Security
Council this month, and I am pleased that we have
agreed the presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/24)
that I read out earlier.

This is a defining moment for the Sudan and its
people as they enter the final stages of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). It is a period
of great risk and, therefore, a situation that the Security
Council cannot ignore, but it is also a time of
opportunity and a chance to achieve greater stability in
the Sudan that the world cannot let go by. It is vital that
the international community stand united and steadfast
in its support of the CPA.

In the United Kingdom, we are therefore very
grateful for the outstanding international leadership
being provided by President Mbeki, the United Nations
Secretary-General, Special Representative Menkerios
and Joint Special Representative Gambari. I welcome
the intense interest shown by all those who have
travelled long distances to be present today and the
enthusiasm that I have encountered in other Security
Council members to hold this meeting.

We are all only too conscious of the tragedy of
the Sudan's past - over 50 years of suffering, more
than 2 million people dead and many millions
displaced, not only in the South but also in Darfur,
where conflict continues, in Eastern Sudan and other
marginalized areas of the country.

The 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement
brought the Sudanese parties together in an
unprecedented manner. They put aside their differences
and ended 40 years of civil war, opening the prospect
for a new stage in the Sudan's history. The
international community must now come together and
support the parties as they work to cement the gains
achieved in the past six years.

A stable Sudan will help build security and
prosperity in the region. It will mean that the Sudan
does not again become a base for terrorism or a source
of refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries. Most
important, it will help the Sudanese people receive the
tangible benefits of peace that have eluded them for so
long.

Britain's Secretary of State for International
Development visited the Sudan last week. He made
clear that we are determined to help improve the lives
of the Sudanese people, but only if peace is kept and
conflict avoided will development succeed and those
lives be truly improved.

We are now in the final stages of preparation for
the referendums. As we have heard from the Secretary-
General and President Mbeki this morning, there has
been progress in recent weeks. I welcome the arrival of
the Secretary-General's high-level monitoring panel in
Khartoum to monitor the process so far and the work of
the domestic and international observers.

Voter registration began as scheduled yesterday,
the first of a series of essential steps. Early indications
suggest that registration is proceeding in an orderly
manner, and we must all encourage the timely and calm
completion of that process.

We have also been encouraged by political talks
between the parties over the past few weeks. Good
progress is clearly being made. Today, President Mbeki
summarized for us his invaluable work to bring the
parties together to address issues of fundamental and
long-term importance to the North and the South,
including citizenship, security arrangements, natural
resources, assets and liabilities and the border.

Success depends on the actions of the parties

themselves, and I welcome the commitments made by

both parties at the high-level meeting here in New York

on 24 September, in the framework agreement that

President Mbeki is helping to negotiate, and in their
statements here today.

In recent weeks, both sides have made
concessions and stated their determination to avoid a
return to war. We should not underestimate how
difficult this process is for the parties involved, but I
do not believe that any of the remaining differences on
the key issues cannot be bridged. We will continue
strongly to support President Mbeki's efforts to help
the parties reach agreement.

As we have heard, that must include an
agreement on Abyei as a matter of urgency. Tensions
there have been rising. We must ensure that it does not
become the flashpoint it has been in the past. The
United Kingdom urges the parties to work with the
communities on the ground to reassure them that their
rights will be protected whatever political agreement is
reached. We urge both the North and the South to
ensure that their military deployments in the area do
not contribute to instability.

The international community must also be ready
to support the parties' work on the long-term issues
affecting each side beyond the referendum, and
whatever its outcome. The United Kingdom, with
others, has taken a leading role on the handling of the
Sudan's international debt. The United States has made
a series of bold and imaginative offers of early action
towards normalization of its relationship with
Khartoum, which we welcome strongly.

The African Union continues to play a vital role
in helping the North and South to bridge their
differences. The Arab League and the Inter-
Governmental Authority on Development are also
making important contributions. The United Nations,
with over 30,000 peacekeepers on the ground in
Darfur, the South and along the border, is central to the
international community's work in the Sudan. Its role
is vital, giving political support to the negotiations,
practical support to the referendum process and
protection to civilians. I welcome the United Nations
planning to prepare for humanitarian contingencies
around the referendum, and I encourage the Sudanese
authorities actively to support those preparations.

Much international attention is understandably
focused on North/South issues in the Sudan. But we
must not lose sight of the situation in Darfur, where
hundreds of thousands have suffered and died. We must
work intensively with all the parties involved towards a
peaceful and inclusive political settlement, addressing
the violence and insecurity, including by combating
impunity and supporting the peace talks in Doha.

I welcome the role played by the Joint Chief
Mediator, Djibril Bassole, and the support of the
Government of Qatar. I urge all parties to participate in
peace talks to put a definitive end to the misery in
Darfur. Access for humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers must be improved and kidnappings in
Darfur must end.

In the coming months, there will be few greater
challenges for the international community, the United
Nations and the Security Council than the Sudan. What
we have heard today from our four briefers convinces
me that there can be peace and stability in the Sudan if
the parties commit to peace. They will receive the
strong support of the international community if they
do so. The United Kingdom stands ready to play its
part, based on our historic and enduring commitment to
all the people of the Sudan, to seize the opportunity for
the secure future their country deserves.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to Her Excellency the
Honourable Hillary Rodham Clinton, Secretary of State
of the United States of America.

