Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I should like to
start by thanking Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Ambassador Jorge Urbina
for their very comprehensive briefings on the work of
the 1267 Committee, the 1373 Committee and the 1540
Committee over the past six months and for their
continued cooperation. We commend the three
Committees, under the leadership of their Chairmen
and with the assistance of their expert bodies, namely
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the 1540 expert group, for the
achievements made and initiatives taken in carrying
out their mandates.

We continue to acknowledge the threat posed to
international peace and security by Al-Qaida, Usama
bin Laden, the Taliban and other individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities associated with them. The
adoption by the Security Council of resolution 1822
(2008) provided further directions and a legal
framework for the 1267 Committee's work.

My delegation takes note of the fact that the 1267
Committee has given high priority to conducting a
process of review of all names on its consolidated list.
For that purpose, the Committee circulated two batches

of names for updated information or additional
identifiers, and it plans to update all entries on the list.
The Committee also worked with its Monitoring Team
to publish on its website 53 narrative summaries of
reasons for listing. We support the commitment made
by the Committee's Chair to ensure that this review
process will be conducted seriously and thoroughly. We
once again stress that particular attention should be
given to the consideration of cases whose continued
listing may no longer be appropriate, with a view to
removing those names from the list. We believe that all
the aforementioned efforts will positively contribute to
improving the quality of the consolidated list and thus
the effectiveness of the 1267 sanctions regime of the
Security Council.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), for its
part, has been engaged in a stocktaking exercise on the
implementation by Member States of the Security
Council's counter-terrorism resolutions. Using all
appropriate tools, such as Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs), the country visit reports and
recommendations, the CTC has made further efforts to
improve the dialogue with Member States as well as to
promote technical assistance in the field of counter-
terrorism. My delegation supports the initiative of the
CTC to facilitate, in the framework of the stocktaking
exercise, direct dialogue between the CTC and the
Permanent Missions of Member States to the United
Nations, aimed at finding ways to assist Member States
in implementing their obligations under the related
Security Council resolutions.

The CTC continues to give guidance to its expert
body, the CTED, in developing a technical guide,
another reference tool to help ensure consistent
analysis and evaluation of States' implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We look forward to further
discussions with other members of the CTC on the
revised draft of the technical guide.

With respect to resolution 1805 (2008), by which
the Security Council decided to conduct an interim
review of the CTED's work by 30 June 2009, my
delegation welcomes the CTC's ongoing efforts in
assessing the CTED's assistance to the Committee in
delivering its mandate and the impact of the
Directorate's structural reorganization on its work.
Upon the completion of the interim review, we expect
the Council to be able to agree on recommendations
made by the CTC for the improvement of the CTED's
work.

My delegation welcomes the programme of work
for 2009 adopted by the 1540 Committee (see S/2009124) with a major focus on the organization of a
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee made great
efforts in formulating the modalities of the review,
which is aimed at addressing specific critical issues
that have not been addressed and at identifying new
approaches to promote the implementation of the
resolution, while avoiding the imposition of
unnecessary or overlapping obligations on Member
States.

With regard to cooperation among the three
Committees through their expert bodies, we take note
of further endeavours, such as the common approach
towards relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations, jointly proposed by the
Monitoring Team, the CTED and the 1540 expert group
for the consideration of the three Committees, and the
fact that experts of the Monitoring Team continue to
participate in the CTED's visits to Member States. We
support the three expert bodies in their work to find
appropriate ways to strengthen their coordinated
actions within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force to help promote the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm that Viet Nam
considers that the mandates of the three committees
and their contributions to the common cause against
international terrorism are important. We wish to
register our continued support for and cooperation with
the three committees in carrying out their mandates.

