Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation adds its voice to
the opinions expressed in the letter sent yesterday by
the Chairman of the Coordinating Committee of the
Non-Aligned Movement to the President of the
Security Council.

The Security Council is debating this issue at a
time when Syria is under terrorist attack, enabled by
the trafficking of arms and fighters who seek to
destabilize and damage security, destroy public and
private property, and undertake terrorist and sabotage
operations against civilians and the military alike. My
country has sent dozens of letters to the Security-
General and the Council, in which it has underlined the
threat posed by the trafficking of arms and combatants
across borders with neighbouring countries to the
stability and security of Syria.
Yesterday, we sent a letter to the Council
containing the names of a number of detainees of Arab
nationalities, most of whom carried out terrorist acts in
Syria, while others trafficked weapons into Syria. They
all entered Syria illegally through borders with
neighbouring States. Investigations have shown that
most of those detained belong to Al-Qaida and have
been given fatwas calling for extremist acts and
practices. The Security Council should send a clear
message to those who stand behind such acts, States
and groups alike, to cease and desist.

My delegation today heard the statement by the
representative of Israel. In this context, I would like to
state that such accusations and lies cannot replace the
evident truth. That is clear to all, as Israel is the main
source of instability in the region because of its
continuing occupation of Arab land and the Syrian
Golan.

It is indeed shameful for the representative of
Israel to accuse others instead of apologizing to the
international community for an abhorrent history of
aggression, including the Israeli army's use of millions
of cluster bombs against Southern Lebanon on the very
same day that the Council adopted resolution 1701
12-31963
(2006) demanding an end to Israeli aggression against
Lebanon.

It is well-known that the main traffickers of
conventional weapons in the world, particularly illicit
weapons, are retired Israeli military officers working
for Israeli weapons manufacturers and industries. It is
clear that the Israel representative's statement
contradicts his country's actions, since Israel's
involvement in the illicit trafficking of weapons across
the globe encourages international terrorism and
protects drug traffickers and secessionist movements
around the world. Indeed, international gangs led by
some Israeli religious figures are now trafficking
children's organs.

Finally, acts of international aggression,
occupation and piracy by Israeli cannot be hidden from
the international community.

