Ms. Guadey (Ehiopia): We have all been following
the new developments that have unfolded over the past
few months surrounding the issue of Western Sahara
and the undeniable progress that we have begun to see
towards the relaunch of direct negotiations following
the appointment of the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General, President Horst Kohler.

In this connection, we would have liked to vote
in favour of the text proposed by the United States.
Unfortunately, the points raised during the negotiations
on the resolution to make it much more balanced and
neutral were not taken on board. We were indeed
flexible in our approach and ready to engage in real
negotiations to reach the desired consensus on the text,
but we were not given the chance to do so, even if some
if not all of our comments were reflected in the text
submitted for the vote and it was put in blue without
passing through the silence procedure. Therefore, we
had no option but to abstain.

That having been said, however, we would like
to reiterate the important role that the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) has been playing and will play in
supporting the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
in his efforts to find a political solution to the issue of
Western Sahara. We continue to urge the two parties to
continue to closely cooperate with MINURSO.

The situation in Guerguerat was a matter of concern
for the Council in the past, and we hope that this
lingering tension will not undermine the new effort to
find a political solution to the issue of Western Sahara.

We call on both parties to honour their commitments
to the agreement reached with MINURSO in relation
to the ceasefire. While expressing our concern about
the recent rhetoric towards escalation, we underline the
need for both parties to refrain from taking any action
that could increase tensions, which would also make
it difficult to create an environment conducive to the
peace process.

The recent developments, of which we are all aware,
make it all the more urgent for the Council to support
the work of the Personal Envoy. We hope that the fifth
round of direct negotiations will be launched as quickly
as possible. However, any meaningful progress in the
peace process will hinge on the full cooperation of
the two parties with the Personal Envoy. We therefore
request the Council to engage the parties to enhance
their engagement, demonstrate the necessary political
will and commit themselves to resuming direct
negotiations in good faith and without condition.

We also reiterate the absolute necessity for
the Security Council to refrain from making any
pronouncement that could potentially undermine the
commitment of the parties to the peace process. As the
Personal Envoy has said repeatedly, the Council should
not be seen to be siding with one or the other party,
which would undermine efforts aimed at facilitating
the resumption of negotiations. What we tried to do
during the negotiations was to heed that call and make
every possible effort to balance the text so that the
Council would be able to convey the right message.
Unfortunately, we were not able to do so.

Finally, we would like to reiterate Ethiopia's long-
standing and consistent position in support of a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
would also provide for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara, in the context of arrangements
consistent with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.

