Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): As this is my first
appearance before the Council in my capacity as the
new Indonesian Permanent Representative, I would
like to congratulate South Africa on its presidency for
the month of January and to wish the members of the
Council, especially those that have joined this month as
elected members, every success in their endeavours. I
would also like to extend my sincere appreciation to
the members of the Security Council for convening this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question. My deep
appreciation also goes to Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing on such an important issue.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements delivered by the Permanent Representatives
of Kazakhstan and Egypt on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Non-Aligned
Movement, respectively.

The issue of Palestine is very dear to the people
and Government of Indonesia. We are deeply
concerned about the absence of progress in the peace
process between Israel and Palestine. The 26 January
deadline established by the Quartet for both parties to
resume direct negotiations will arrive this week, with
that goal nowhere in sight. Israel's continued illegal
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, is not only a
grave violation of international law, but also a
stumbling block in that respect. The January report of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
on the humanitarian impact of Israeli settlement
policies succinctly demonstrates the grave danger that
the settlement question poses, not just to the prospect
of peace in the Middle East but even for progress
towards the resumption of negotiations.

Continuing settlement construction, expansion
and encroachment on Palestinian land is an integral
part of the ongoing fragmentation of the West Bank,
including the isolation of East Jerusalem. As we know,
Israel has also continued its illegal construction of the
separation wall in the West Bank, including in and
around occupied East Jerusalem, in defiance of the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.

Perhaps it is not surprising, therefore, that Israel
maintains the same kind of control in the Gaza Strip,
where its blockade continues to hinder the movement
of people and goods. The blockade is responsible not
only for the terrible humanitarian situation there, but
also for even deeper unemployment and a shrinking of
private sector businesses, as many of them continue to
shut down.

Despite all of that, indeed because of it, my
delegation is still hopeful about the resumption of
negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians
under the guidelines outlined by the Quartet in its
statement of 23 September (see SG/2l78). Indonesia
therefore calls upon the Quartet and the parties to
ensure that everything is done to minimize every delay
and eliminate every hurdle.

We urge Israel to demonstrate good faith by not
placing insurmountable obstacles, such as we now have
in its settlement policy, on the path of peace. A
resolution of the conflict will not be easy, and nobody
should expect it to be. The core final status issues -
borders, water, security, refugees, settlements and
Jerusalem - pose considerable challenges, but they
are not insurmountable.

It remains our view that the road to peace lies in
confronting the issues, not in avoiding or complicating
them. To that end, true leadership and courage are
required.

Indonesia reiterates its support for the two-State
solution, namely, Israel and a viable and independent
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side in peace and security on the basis of the
principle of land for peace and a just and
comprehensive regional peace consistent with Security
Council resolutions, the road map of the Quartet and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

Let me also stress that a truly comprehensive and
lasting peace in the Middle East also demands a viable
resolution of the Israel-Lebanon and Israel-Syria
tracks. Israel therefore has to withdraw completely
from the remaining Lebanese occupied land, as well as
from the occupied Syrian Golan.

Finally, Indonesia wishes to reiterate its support
for Palestine's application for membership in the
United Nations, which was submitted on 23 September
2011.

