Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Following the minute of
silence at the beginning of our meeting today, I would
like to join others in expressing our condolences for the
victims of the terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka, the United
States, Burkina Faso and other countries. We condemn
any attack that claims innocent lives.

Let me also begin by thanking the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, for her briefing, as well as the
other briefers, who reminded us what is happening on
the ground.

Today's open debate also takes place following the
issuance of the report by the Independent Commission
of Inquiry on the Protests in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory on the violence committed against the
Palestinians in Gaza since 31 March 2018. The
Commission's report is a watershed in the history ofthe
occupied territory, as it exposes Israel's use of extreme
violence, including live ammunition at close range,
against Palestinians involved in civilian activities. That
is a blatant disregard and violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights - and there is no
guarantee that it will not be repeated given the slightest
excuse. Against that backdrop, allow me to start with
my first point, which concerns the humanitarian
situation in Palestine.

In the light ofthe financial problems confronting the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), we need to pay
attention to the humanitarian challenges in Gaza. The
blockade must also be put to an end. The suffering of
the Palestinians is also being made worse owing to
Israel's withholding of the tax revenues belonging to
the Palestinian Authority. We reiterate our full support
for the stance of the Palestinian Authority, which
rejects the acceptance of portions of the payment. It is
the Palestinians' money and should be paid in full, and
without preconditions. We again call on Member States
to maintain and mobilize assistance to the Palestinians.
For our part, Indonesia recently pledged to provide
additional $1 million to UNRWA.

Secondly, with regard to the resolution of the
conflict, we believe that any peace talks and negotiations
must have a clear basis and goals. That is explicitly
reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016), in which the goal
of negotiations was also clearly defined as "achieving,
without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace"
and "an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967" (resolution 2334 (2016), para. 9). Based on the
well-known parameters, a time frame should be set for
achieving a two-State solution, with an independent
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
ajust solution to the plight of the Palestineian refugees
based on the relevant resolutions. For any Middle
East peace plan to be successful, it must provide just
and permanent solutions to all final-status issues.
Furthermore, we caution against the lure of interim
arrangements. History proves they can be exploited
by the occupying Power to gain time to finalize its
settlement, colonization and annexation agenda, and in
the end, they make a solution more difficult to achieve.

That brings me to my final point, which concerns
the inaction of the Security Council. We have a two-
State solution on the table but, at the rate we are going,
only one State will exist, and that is not Palestine. If
that were to happen, it would be a tragedy not only
for the people of Palestine but also for the credibility
of this organ and its resolutions. We reiterate that the
expansion of settlements, violence and many other
violations of resolution 2334 (2016) and other relevant
resolutions are a blatant affront to the authority of
this body. International and regional efforts to end the
Israeli occupation based on United Nations resolutions,
the Quartet road map, the Madrid principles and the
Arab Peace Initiative must be intensified.

For our part, during Indonesia's presidency of the
Council in May, we will organize a Security Council
Arria Formula meeting on the core problem of the
Palestinian question, which is the settlements issue.
That exercise is intended to take stock of possible ways
the Council can take action in response to that problem.

This is a critical moment in history, and collective
efforts are crucial. Indonesia calls for the international
consensus to be maintained, strengthened and respected.

