Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Envoy Djinnit for his informative briefing. Against the
complex backdrop of the Great Lakes region, his good
offices have been invaluable in promoting regional
ownership and commitment to revitalizing the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework agreement. The
Framework agreement remains essential to achieving
sustainable peace and stability in the region. Japan
reaffirms its support for Mr. Djinnit's efforts in this
regard. Let me underline two major challenges the
region faces today.

First, with respect to the situation in the Democratic

Republic ofthe Congo, we recently renewed the mandate
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) in order to make it more efficient and
focused on key tasks. We are encouraged by the strong
commitment of the Southern African Development
Community, as reaffirmed in this Chamber by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic
of Tanzania, to continuing to work together with
MONUSCO to assist the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in achieving sustained peace.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is at a critical juncture. The Security Council has
been closely following the status of the implementation
of the 31 December Political Agreement. Three
months have already passed without the establishment
of transitional institutions. Japan renews its call on
President Kabila Kabange for further leadership and
urges all political actors to accelerate the political
process. Successful elections are the only viable way to
sustain the gains made by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region thus far.

The second challenge is the situation in Burundi.
Japan welcomes the recent meeting between President
Nkurunziza and the Chair of the Burundi country
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission. It is
important that this window of dialogue be kept open.
However, we remain deeply concerned about the
continued suspension of cooperation with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and reports of serious human rights violations,
especially the climate of impunity surrounding
Imbonerakure. We strongly encourage the Government
of Burundi to constructively engage with international
partners, especially the United Nations, to re-establish
cooperative relations based on mutual trust. Japan
reiterates that maintaining some level of United
Nations presence in Burundi will benefit Burundi
itself. In this regard, Japan emphasizes the importance
of engagement by the African Union (AU), including
through the deployment of AU observers.

I would also like to assure the Council of Japan's
full support for the mediation led by the East African
Community (EAC) and Mr. Mkapa's facilitation role.
We look forward to the forthcoming EAC Summit
on 20 April in Dar Es Salaam. We are confident that
the heads of State in the subregion will seriously
consider the situation in Burundi and provide strong
guidance to Mr. Mkapa so that he can lead an inclusive
dialogue process.
In closing, I would like to announce that the Japan
recently decided to provide $18 million in assistance
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi,
Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia, with particular focus
on refugees and food security. Japan will continue to
support the people of the Great Lakes region as they
seek more peaceful, stable and prosperous lives.

