Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me join others in
congratulating Senegal on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of November.
I also wish to express appreciation to the Senegalese
delegation for organizing this open debate on an issue
of critical importance, particularly for us in Africa.
I wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General of the
United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
International Organization of La Francophonie, as well
as the Executive Directors of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.

This open debate could not be more timely and
relevant in the light of the unprecedented challenges
faced by peacekeepers - whether in Mali, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, South Sudan or Somalia - who are operating
in a very complex and dynamic security terrain.
Asymmetrical threats from non-State actors, including
terrorists, negative forces and other transnational
criminal networks, are not only posing serious risks
to peacekeepers, but also threatening the lives of
innocent civilians.

That is why United Nations peacekeeping needs
to be reformed and adapted to the changing security
environment. In that regard, the review of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (HIPPO)
has certainly made important recommendations whose
timely implementation will go a long way in making
United Nations peace operations fit for purpose.
Of course, we know that the Panel advised caution
in mandating enforcement tasks to United Nations
peacekeepers, particularly in counter-terrorism
operations. Nevertheless, the number of targeted attacks
against peacekeepers and civilians is on the increase,
and asymmetrical threats are increasingly becoming the
norm rather than the exception for many peacekeepers,
if not all of them. Yesterday's incident against
peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
underscores the fact that responding to this new
challenge is no longer an option, and devising the right
strategic and operational interventions has never been
so critical. In that context, we would like to point out
the following.

First, the need for pragmatic and flexible
interpretation of the basic principles of United Nations
peacekeeping cannot be overemphasized. The debate
over traditional peacekeeping versus peace enforcement
is untenable. Peacekeepers cannot be, and should not
remain, indifferent in the face of significant threats to
themselves or to the innocent civilians whom they are

supposed to protect.

Secondly, peacekeepers should have a clear
mandate, concept of operation and rules of engagement
based on a thorough analysis of the situation, threat
assessment and planning. That will allow them to have
a robust posture in defending themselves and protecting
civilians in the face of mortal danger. However, having
a clear mandate, concept of operation and rules of
engagement is not enough.

My third point, therefore, is that peacekeepers must
have the necessary training and capabilities, including
force enablers and multipliers, to enable their operation
in an asymmetrical environment.

We know that such things are easier said than done,
and we have no illusion that strategic and operational
challenges will be easily overcome. But in the light of
the seriousness of the matter, it is imperative that those
challenges be addressed as expeditiously as possible.
The problem cannot be ignored or swept under the
carpet. Doing so would leave the commitment to protect
civilians unfulfilled.

Although the HIPPO report (see S/2015/446)
recommended against United Nations peacekeepers
undertaking counter-terrorism operations, it did not rule
out such a possibility by capable regional forces and/or
ad hoc coalitions authorized by the Security Council.
The African Union and its regional mechanisms, for
instance, have shown greater commitment and readiness
to deploy forces in an asymmetrical environment, with
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
being a case in point. No mission symbolizes a greater
need for partnership than AMISON - a mission that
is operating in one of the most hostile environments
on behalf of the international community. AMISOM
peacekeepers face asymmetrical attacks on nearly
a daily basis, yet they are underfunded and in dire
logistical conditions.

Based on the principles of complementarity and a
division of labour, the United Nations should be ready
to share the burden with the AU-led peace support
operations, among others, by providing a financial
and logistical package. In that connection, the relevant
recommendations set out in the HIPPO report are a
step in the right direction; therefore, it is absolutely
necessary that they be translated into concrete action.

We are aware, of course, of the ongoing discussion
between the two organizations on enhancing their
strategic partnership, including in peacekeeping,
and look forward to the outcome of the Security
Council debate scheduled for 18 November, under the
Senegalese presidency.

