Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is profoundly shocked by the alleged use of chemicals
as weapons in Syria that resulted in enormous civilian
casualties several days ago. We strongly condemn any
attacks against civilians. China firmly opposes the use
of chemical weapons by any country, organization or
person under any circumstances, and that has been its
unwavering and consistent position that no one should
ever distort. In Syria, there have been many instances
of the use of chemicals as weapons.

China supports the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and related United Nations entities
in carrying out comprehensive, objective and fair
investigations into all - I repeat all -uses ofchemicals
as weapons. The findings of such invesitigations must
be based on substantial evidence and stand the test of
time and facts. It is essential to hold accountable all
relevant perpetrators and responsible parties in cases
involving chemical weapons.

The Syrian conflict has entered its seventh year
and, to date, resulted in enormous civilian casualties.
China empathetically shares in the suffering of the
Syrian people, and we call on the various Syrian parties
to quickly end the conflict. A political settlement is
the only way out the Syrian impasse. China hopes that
all the parties will create the conditions for a political
settlement rather than create difficulties. It is China's
hope that the international community will capitalize on
the rare opportunities offered by a political settlement,
persist in the general direction of a political settlement,
step up its support for the United Nations as the main
channel for mediation, support the work of Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General De Mistura, urge
the various Syrian parties to consolidate a ceasefire
and build up mutual trust, adhere to the principle of
a Syrian-led and owned settlement as advanced in
the Geneva talks, and push for positive results to be
achieved within the framework of a political settlement.

Counter-terrorism currently is the primary
area of concern in connection with the Syrian issue.
The international community should strengthen its
cooperation, unify its working methods and resolutely
fight against all the terrorist organizations listed by
the Council.
Lastly, I should like to point out once again that it
is totally unacceptable for the British representative to
publicly distort the solemn position of another country
in the Council Chamber. His logic is untenable. We
hope that, on the issue of chemical weapons, on which
the international community is in consensus, he will
stop using the Security Council in an abusive manner
for his own political purposes, as that is not in the
interest of the Syrian people, and that, in the future, the
British representative will refrain from such practices.

