Mr. Vieira (Brazil): As the Middle East continues
to be plagued by an array of ever-more daunting
and interconnected challenges, let me stress that we
continue to follow the very worrying developments
pertaining to the question of Palestine, which cannot
and will not become another forgotten issue on the
international agenda. We are deeply concerned by the
approval of what is known as the regularization law, as
well as the Israeli decision to build a new settlement in
the occupied West Bank for the first time in decades.
We join Secretary-General Antonio Guterres in
regretting those measures, which constitute additional
impediments to the peace process. As the Council
reaffirmed most recently in resolution 2334 (2016),
all settlement activities are illegal under international
law and represent one of the main obstacles to peace
between Israel and Palestine.

Brazil has consistently advocated for the effective
implementation of the two-State solution. At the heart
of that formula is the need to end the occupation and
work towards a Palestinian State that is fully sovereign,
economically viable and territorially contiguous,
existing side by side with Israel in peace and security
within internationally recognized borders based on
the 1967 lines. We therefore urge the parties and those
with an influence over them to seek a constructive
political environment conducive to a return to
meaningful negotiations.

The conflict in Syria continues to generate
harrowing developments, some of which have recently
been brought to the attention of the Council. Brazil
condemns in the strongest terms any use of chemical
weapons by any actor and under any circumstances.
We therefore expressed alarm and the utmost concern
upon receiving reports of the possible use of chemical
weapons in Khan Shaykhun, in Idlib province. Those
allegations must be subject to an international, impartial
and comprehensive investigation, which should lead to
holding those involved accountable.

We also express our concern about the military
escalation in Syria. We are convinced that the key to
ending the horrific bloodshed in Syria lies in the pursuit
of effective dialogue among the key actors, as well as
in full respect for the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant international law under the clear mandate of
the Security Council. Effective dialogue is also needed
in the Council itself. We call upon the permanent
members to persevere in their efforts to find common
ground. Their cooperation is an essential aspect of the
search for a political solution in Syria. It is also key
to enhancing humanitarian access and addressing the
threat of terrorism. In that connection, we also praise
the efforts of some elected members of the Council
to bridge gaps and foster greater cooperation on that
fundamental issue.

The long-awaited resumption of the intra-Syrian
political negotiations in Geneva has enabled modest
progress with regard to the four key issues of governance,
elections, the Constitution and security. We renew our
full support for the tireless efforts of Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura. It is time for the entire international
community to send a unified message in support of an
inclusive political solution to the Syrian crisis based on
the parameters set forth in resolution 2254 (2015).

While acknowledging that the current ceasefire
may be under pressure, we underscore the importance
of the Astana process in reducing tensions and fostering
conditions for the continuation of the Geneva talks. We
commend the role played by the guarantor countries of
Russia, Turkey and Iran, as well as the host country,
Kazakhstan.

The humanitarian dimensions of the crisis should
never be neglected. Brazil has continued to welcome
refugees affected by the conflict since 2013 and recently
donated a large shipment of medicine and health
supplies to the World Health Organization in Syria. At
the recent Brussels Conference on the future of Syria,
we expressed our support for concrete actions aimed at
mitigating the plight of Syrian refugees in neighbouring
countries, such as Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey.

Regarding Lebanon, we take note of the results of
the strategic review of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon conducted by the Secretariat and submitted
last month to the Council. In that regard, we emphasize
the vital role played by that mission and its Maritime
Task Force in stabilizing a highly volatile region.

Brazil reiterates its steadfast support to the
Government and the people of Lebanon on the road
towards stability and development.

