I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing, and I would also like to express Estonia's strong support for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We warmly welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Colombia. We support the continued commitment of the Government of Colombia to implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We welcome the progress made in these challenging times, especially in the field of justice. The public apology issued by the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) secretariat marks a positive step forward. We also recognize the achievements registered by the Special Investigation Unit of the Office of the Attorney General. Lasting peace cannot be achieved without justice. Meanwhile, the continued killings of civilians, human rights defenders, social leaders and former FARC-EP combatants remain alarming and must end. We reiterate the urgent need to protect these and other vulnerable groups. It is important to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the violations committed. In that regard, the work of the components of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition is essential. We also encourage the National Commission on Security Guarantees to proceed with its work on public policy in order to dismantle criminal organizations and their support networks. The situation of children is particularly concerning. Children are at risk of forced labour, sexual exploitation and recruitment into armed groups. Child- protection measures must be strengthened. Despite the Government's commitment to bringing peace, security and development to rural Colombia, such areas are suffering from the absence of State authorities. Wider structural issues need to be addressed in order to better tackle those challenges. It is vital to ensure the sustainability of the reintegration process and address all pending issues, including access to land for former FARC- EP combatants. We encourage all parties to redouble their efforts and continue cooperation in a constructive spirit to achieve lasting peace. Finally, we remain hopeful that meaningful progress can be made. We would like to assert Estonia's strong support for the comprehensive implementation of the final peace agreement.
