Mr. Lucas (Angola): I would like to begin by
paying tribute to the victims of the terrorist attack in
Mali today. We strongly condemn such criminal acts.

We commend the United Kingdom presidency
for organizing today's meeting, which affords us an
opportunity to assess the proposals for enhancing peace
operations at a time of unprecedented challenges to
internationalpeace and security. We thank the Secretary-
General for introducing his report (S/2015/682) on the
future of United Nations peace operations and the
implementation of the recommendations of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). We commend him for his review of reform
efforts with a view to strengthening the effectiveness
of the United Nations system and specifically its
peacekeeping operations. We also commend the High-
level Panel for the expeditious and admirable manner in
which it carried out its comprehensive review of peace
operations, and for its far-reaching recommendations.

In the Security Council's recent open debate
on the prevention of conflict, its root causes and
building peaceful societies (see S/PV.7561), Member
States dwelled extensively on the growing insecurity
around the world, which is characterized by civil
wars, asymmetric conflicts, terrorism, intolerance
and hatred, as well as on how to prevent conflicts and
transition to peacebuilding.

The assessments of the High-level Panel and the
Secretary-General's report form the basis for today's
discussion of the review and the future of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. In the near future,
the entire membership will focus its attention on the
Panel's recommendations and on the priorities and
key elements outlined in the Secretary-General's plan
for translating them into action, centred on the three
pillars of prevention and mediation, regional and global
partnerships and the planning and conduct of United
Nations peace operations.

We fully agree with the Secretary-General on
the advantages of ensuring the Security Council's
early involvement as one of the most effective tools
we have for preventing and mediating conflicts. We
agree with the Panel's recognition of the impossibility
of effectively responding to the multiplicity of
crises and of the problems of overstretching conflict
management, and with its call for renewed efforts in
conflict prevention and mediation as a core United
Nations function. We also agree with its recognition
of the need for Member States' support as a signal of
our global determination to reduce armed conflicts.
To that end, the report identifies a range of tools and
capacities for strengthening and creating faster and
more cost-effective responses to conflict through early
action, including envoys, regional offices, good offices,
standby mediation experts and support to United
Nations country teams.

Originally, after an outbreak of conflict, a
political settlement was traditionally seen as the
fundamental prerequisite for the deployment of a
peacekeeping operation, since it would mean having
an actual peace to keep, with a political agreement
and the consent of the parties as a basis. Currently,
however, most peacekeeping operations are deployed
in environments where all-out conflict is raging, with
egregious violations of human rights, a scenario that
radically contradicts our traditional understanding of
the deployment of peacekeeping operations. The Panel
quite rightly insists on the need for political solutions as
a central part of such operations, based on the premise
that United Nations engagement must be designed and
implemented to help the parties to a conflict reach and
sustain a political settlement, given that the use of force
is not at the core of United Nations peace operations
and in our View should be used only when civilians are
subjected to violence and abuse.

The establishment and strengthening of regional
and global partnerships is another pillar identified
as a critical element for the future of peacekeeping
operations, through further institutionalized
cooperation and enabling consultation on early warning
and conflict analysis. Since most peace operations are
deployed in Africa, the African Union must be a key
partner of the United Nations. Thus Angola reiterates
the Panel's call for sustained, predictable and flexible
funding mechanisms in support of African Union peace
operations, even as more resources for these operations
should be mobilized by the Africans themselves.
Moreover, the African Union should continue to
receive technical and planning expertise in conflict
prevention, military and police planning, and financial
and logistics management, as well as in integrating
human rights issues into African Union operations.
Taking into account the recent experience of United
Nations and African Union peacekeeping operations,
it is essential to institutionalize a consultative process
and joint mechanisms.

The planning and conduct of United Nations peace
operations is the third pillar prioritized in the report,
which recommends - and we fully subscribe to this - a
sustained dialogue between the Security Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and regional partners for a better understanding of the
prospects, expectations, capabilities and constraints of
a given peacekeeping operation.

On the role of the Security Council, we share the
View that this organ should pursue a more critical
prioritization when evaluating mandates and reviewing
peacekeeping operations and, where appropriate, should
consider with rigor sequenced or phased mandates or
establish new peacekeeping operations.

Before concluding, we deem it necessary to call
for concerted action in the implementation of the areas
identified as critical in the United Nations capacity
to sustain peace, among which the prevention of
conflict assumes primacy. Concerning peacekeeping
operations, we reiterate the key importance of pursuing
political solutions to conflicts and the non-imposition
of solutions by coercive means or violence; the need
for political and operational support for peacekeeping
missions, particularly in cases of attacks and violence
against civilians; and, finally, the need for increased
partnerships and the strengthening of cooperation with
regional organizations, the African union in particular.

The comprehensive process of reviewing peacekeeping
operations, the peacebuilding architecture and the
women and peace and security agenda are crucial
initiatives in order to strengthen the effectiveness of
the United Nations in the quest for world peace and
security. The Summit that took place on 28 September
on the margins of the General Assembly, where
more than 30 countries reaffirmed their support and
made specific pledges of assistance to peacekeeping
operations, was an excellent opportunity to reflect on
and seek new ways of addressing the growing threats to
peace and security that the world is facing.

