Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation thanks
you, Mr. President, for arranging today's discussion on
this critical issue.

Sri Lanka also associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is undoubtedly at
the heart of the tensions in the Middle East and must
be resolved urgently in order to achieve a meaningful
peace, including in the wider region. Peace between
Israel and Palestine will be the answer to a long-standing
prayer of the international community. As things stand,
the conflict saps resources, makes life a continuing
and hopeless nightmare for many Palestinians, fuels
desperate responses, and keeps the world on nervous
toes. Unfortunately, the peace process, which was so
enthusiastically embraced, is at an impasse and tensions
continue to escalate.

It is an essential condition that all parties cease
tension-provoking activities. Israel's continuing
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territories are a critical sticking point. The resumption
of talks has become tied to that issue. The Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Human Rights
Council, the Economic and Social Council and the
International Court of Justice have called for an end to
settlement activity and highlighted its illegality. Israel's
practice of demolishing Palestinian homes is a matter
of concern and fuels resentment. The continuation of
that practice cannot contribute to confidence-building
or the peace process. It should be emphasized that
Israel must not undertake actions that are contrary to
the established truths of international law.

The humanitarian situation of the Palestinians in
the occupied Palestinian territory is of grave concern.
The large-scale detention and imprisonment of
Palestinian civilians, including children, often under
flimsy excuses, is disturbing. In the briefing this July,
in my capacity as Chairman of the United Nations
Special Committee on Israeli Practices in the Occupied
Territories, I detailed some of those unacceptable
practices. The detaining and mistreatment of children,
particularly in administrative detention, can only add
to the tensions. The frustration and resentment that this
generates detracts from the peace process.
The most pressing humanitarian situation is in
Gaza, where conditions are unsustainable. It remains
politically separated from the West Bank. We will
continue to encourage political rapprochement between
Gaza and the West Bank. In Gaza, the blockade, which
is now entering its sixth year, has created an aid-
dependent economy and thereby reinforces a sense of
helplessness and extremism. The principle result of
Israel's blockade has been to make almost 80 per cent
of Palestinians in Gaza dependent on international
humanitarian aid. Despite some easing of restrictions,
businesses in Gaza have been particularly affected
by the blockade, with imports remaining at a low
level compared to the pre-blockade situation. Israel's
restrictions on exports, with limited exceptions, has
stifled economic activity and made job opportunities
scarce. Between 30 per cent to 40 per cent of Gazans
remain unemployed. The United Nations is required
to keep most of the people in Gaza supplied with the
minimum necessities. Even a modest improvement of
the situation in Gaza would require the lifting of the
blockade and the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009).

With a view to ultimately establishing an
independent Palestinian State, existing in peace side
by side with Israel, both parties must actively pursue
every possibility for peace, taking into consideration
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the road map,
the agreements previously reached by the parties, and
the Arab Peace Initiative. A climate conducive to peace
will be encouraged by ending the settlement activities,
releasing more Palestinian detainees, and strengthening
the Palestinian Government mechanisms. It is also
necessary for the Palestinians to contribute to the peace
process by ceasing attacks on Israel.

We welcome the progress made by the Palestinian
Authority in institution-building, despite the severe
political and economic constraints imposed. We also
hope that the Members of the United Nations will
continue to support the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to seek membership in this Organization. We
would also wish to underline our strong support for
the work for the United Nations agencies in occupied
Palestinian territory, including the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Sri Lanka remains committed to the attainment
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to
statehood and to a two-State solution.
