We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing. We wish also to recognize the continued dedication of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to the people of Iraq, and we recognize the presence of our distinguished colleague, the Permanent Representative of Iraq. We begin by welcoming the completion of the Government-formation process, as well as Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi's announcement of his priority areas, which include holding free, fair and credible early elections, countering terrorism and enforcing the rule of law. These activities are critical for restoring State authority and ensuring public trust, and we offer our support and encouragement in this regard. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to assail the world with its extensive consequences, and we emphasize the importance of supporting and strengthening, where possible, the Government's efforts to combat the spread of the pandemic and mitigate its impacts. It is crucial that the international community remain actively supportive of the COVID-19 Global Humanitarian Response Plan, of which Iraq is a beneficiary. We welcome the leading role of the World Health Organization, particularly in its acknowledgment of and efforts to address the acute vulnerabilities of internally displaced persons to this virus. The most vulnerable groups must be at the centre of all measures adopted to combat the virus. To that end, we recognize the efforts undertaken by UNAMI and the United Nations country team to bring awareness to the increase in domestic violence amid COVID-19-related measures. We express concern over continued acts of violence and terror carried out by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including those that have resulted in civilian casualties. The Secretary-General's most recent report on the activities of UNAMI (S/2020/792) noted that 40 deaths and 45 injuries were attributed to ISIL between 1 May and 9 July. We condemn, in the strongest terms, these acts, as well as the ongoing killing and maiming of children caused by land mines and explosive remnants. We further condemn the targeting of civil-society activists and urge the Government to counter this campaign of intimidation and hostility. Equally important is accountability, which is critical to the reconstruction process. No act violating international humanitarian law or human rights law should be carried out with impunity. These are cornerstone principles under which all actors have a legal obligation and it is imperative that they be scrupulously applied. We conclude by reaffirming our support for UNAMI. We encourage its continued engagement with the Government of Iraq, in line with Iraq's sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence, which, we emphasize, must be respected by all actors.
