The past few days have seen millions of Syrians cast their votes in the legislative elections that resulted in the election of the members of the People's Assembly to the third legislative session. Those elections stress the commitment of the Syrian people and State to keep the Syrian State institutions working and thwart any foreign agendas aiming to replace those institutions with void and chaos, in a similar manner to what we have witnessed in other countries. The elections are also testimony to the fact that Syria is determined to carry out all constitutional entitlements as well as liberate its territories from terrorism and every illegitimate foreign presence. It is surprising how the United States and other follower countries issue statements and positions against Syrians exercising their free, democratic and responsible right to elect their representatives. We have not interfered, and will not interfere, in any American or other constitutional entitlements, despite all the defects and irregularities in them. We stress that Syria categorically rejects any foreign interferences aimed at undermining our legitimate elections, sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity, and our independent national decisions. The approach of the Western States, spearheaded by the so-called co-penholders during the consultations related to resolution 2253 (2015), days ago, as well as their pattern of voting on the draft resolutions proposed by the Russian Federation, expose once again those countries' false humanitarian claims. How can those countries justify their opposition to including in the draft resolution any reference to the catastrophic impacts of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people, even though both the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, Mr. Geir Pedersen, together with another 44 agencies and entities, have made reference to such impacts? How can they explain their refusal to mandate the Secretariat to submit a report or even information on the consequences of those measures on the lives of Syrians? The answer is crystal-clear and well known to everyone. Any professional, credible and objective report on the impacts of the coercive unilateral measures on the daily life of millions of Syrians will undoubtedly condemn the policies of the countries imposing those measures. United Nations resolutions are clear in that regard. Any report will also prove that those countries have flouted the call made by the Secretary-General and his Envoy to Syria to mitigate the impacts of those measures, especially with the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That will not be all. If issued, such a report will expose those who call themselves the opposition. These minions of American-Western funding, who serve their personal interests with the aim of filling their pockets, are detached from reality and are nothing but tools used to pass the criminal Caesar Act and the policies of embargo, starvation and deprivation imposed on the Syrian people. In that regard, my delegation would like to extend thanks and appreciation to the delegations of the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China for their noble positions derived from the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. We would also like to express our thanks to them, as they rejected any violation of Syrian sovereignty under false pretexts. We believe that all other countries should join us in expressing gratitude, because Russia and China are protecting what was left of the spirit of international law and the provisions of the Charter. Russia and China's positions prevent the recurrence of the crimes of Iraq and Libya's joint invasion by the United States of America and Britain. In that regard, the United Nations should have established independent, impartial and international mechanisms to investigate and hold accountable those responsible for these crimes and to ensure the application of international law to all countries and not to specific countries, as has been the case many times. Maintaining international peace and security necessitates controlling the raging elephant that is stampeding all over the principles of international law and the provisions of the United Nations Charter, destroying everyone who stands in the way of its reckless steps. What is required today is to put an end to the disregard of international law by those Governments that are hostile towards my country and to other countries and to stop their practices, which are based on the law of the jungle and the law of force instead of the force of law. These are aggressive practices of which my country and other have had to bear the brunt. How long do we have to wait for the so-called international community to take action and put an end to the crimes of the Erdogan regime and its operators in NATO? These crimes include the provision of various forms of support to terrorist organizations and proxy separatist militias, and the commission of acts of aggression and occupation, war crimes and crimes against humanity, including killings, destruction, the looting of antiquities, oil and gas, the recruitment of mercenaries, human trafficking, blackmail and the exploitation of the suffering of refugees, the burning of agricultural crops and the imposition of coercive unilateral economic measures on the Syrian people. Will the Europeans realize, before it is too late for them, that keeping silent about the behaviour of the Turkish regime against my country and many other countries threatens European peace and security themselves and undermines the stability of the Mediterranean and the entire region? The Europeans must realize that Europe's security is directly linked to the security of Syria. The historical links between Syria and Europe have left their marks on the European identity itself. The name "Europe" is originally the name of the Syrian princess - the daughter of the king of Phoenicia - with whom the Greek god Zeus had fallen in love and subsequently kidnapped to Greece; hence, Europe has its Syrian name. Some colleagues might not know that the ancient name of the Syrian city Deir ez-Zor, which was ravaged by Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham terrorism and American airstrikes, was originally Dura-Europos; that name is well known to European intellectuals. I invite my colleagues to look at the 2-euro coin; they will find an engraving of the Syrian princess Auropa. We also have the right to ask: how do the Council's resolutions explain the latest transgression of the Commander of the United States Central Command, Frank McKenzie, into Syrian territories? Such behaviour is considered to be a violation of Syrian sovereignty and an infiltration without permission from the Syrian Government into the north-eastern region of my country, in coordination with Syrian Democratic Forces militias, and into the occupied Tanf region, which is controlled by American forces and their terrorist tools such as the so-called Maghawir Al-Thawra terrorist group. It seems that McKenzie is fond of the cowboy mentality that does not take into account any law and that conquered the Midwest in the hopes of domination and expansion at the expense of the lives of indigenous peoples. We listened closely to the statement delivered by Mr. Geir Pedersen, the Special Envoy, and his communication with the head of the Syrian national side on the upcoming meeting of the Constitutional Committee. We hope that all logistical preparations will be timely and fulfil the needs of the national delegation. We also hope that the United Nations will take the required health precautions to protect participants from the spread of COVID-19, in accordance with the rules set by the World Health Organization and the Syrian Ministry of Health. We believe that the mission of the Special Envoy requires him and the Secretariat to speak out against the Turkish and American interference in Syrian internal affairs. They should also speak out against the coercive measures imposed by the United States and some European countries. Those measures hinder and contradict the task of the Special Envoy, since such economic unilateral measures inhumanely prevent the Syrian people from accessing food and medicine. Anyone claiming that those measures do not have impacts on children, women, the elderly and the rest of the Syrian people is a mere liar. In conclusion, the success of the political process facilitated by the United Nations with Syrian leadership and ownership requires that the Security Council fulfil its responsibilities and carry out its mandate to ensure full commitment to the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Syria, ending foreign occupation, combating terrorism and ensuring the immediate lifting of the coercive measures imposed on the Syrian people. Achieving this is the basis, essence and goal of any political process, and it is the compass and the goal from which we will not deviate, no matter how great the pressure is or how severe the challenges are. Other countries have faced aggressive wars similar to the one that my country is facing today. Representatives of those countries are now here in the Council after the triumph of their people and States over injustice, aggression and appalling apartheid.
