Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I have the honour to brief
the Council in my capacity as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) on the work of the Committee since the
previous briefing in May (see S/PV.6310).

As we have seen in many parts of the world in
recent months, terrorists continue their activities
unabated. In light of that ongoing and evolving threat,
we must continue our common efforts and act in full
cooperation with each other. We should be as vigilant
and resilient as ever, and counter-terrorism should
remain a priority for the international community.

Since its establishment, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) has played an important role in the
fight against terrorism. Now the Committee continues
to work actively in advancing our global efforts with
its more strategic and transparent approach. The
Committee tries to increase awareness about the need
for more effective implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and to enhance cooperation
among Member States. The Committee continues to
effectively monitor the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).

One of the main instruments available to the
Committee in that regard is the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment (PIA). The ongoing
stocktaking exercise, in accordance with its new
guidelines, allows the Committee to enhance its regular
dialogue with Member States and to further identify
areas where the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) is still inadequate.

The Committee organizes and conducts visits to
Member States. Those consensual country visits are a
fundamental component of the Committee's efforts to
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). They enable us to establish direct contact
and dialogue with the national practitioners on the
ground and help us better understand the challenges
that individual countries are facing.

The Committee and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) have placed
particular emphasis on capacity-building of Member
States, which is one of the main challenges in our fight
against terrorism. The Committee held a thematic
discussion on technical assistance to explore ways to
further facilitate the provision of assistance to relevant
Member States. The Committee and CTED have also
worked to enhance their ongoing dialogue with
Member States, donors and beneficiaries in that regard.

In the past six months, the Committee has tried to
make better use of the thematic discussions it organizes
on the issues mentioned in resolutions 1373 (2001) and
1624 (2005). Those discussions have proved to be
highly useful in helping us understand those issues in
greater depth and consider any possible concrete steps
that the Committee could take. As part of their more
transparent approach, the Committee and CTED have
also organized such thematic briefings for the wider
membership on four different areas.

In addition to the thematic areas, the Committee
has also started discussions on the challenges that some
regions face. Those discussions have provided the

Committee with a more in-depth evaluation of the
progress and challenges in each region. In accordance
with its work programme, the Committee maintained
and increased its dialogue and cooperation with other
relevant international and regional organizations. In
June, an open meeting was held with four regional
organizations and bodies. The Committee has also
continued the practice of hearing briefings from
relevant international and regional organizations and
United Nations bodies.

In light of the focused and regional approach the
Committee and CTED are pursuing, I wish to mention
briefly some of the workshops that have been
organized in the past six months in different parts of
the world. They have proved particularly important in
bringing together the relevant officials of the countries
and of regional and subregional organizations to
strengthen coordination and cooperation and to ensure
better sharing of information and experience. I would
like to touch briefly upon only three of the most recent
workshops.

The first was the three-day practitioners
workshop held in Nairobi in June. It was organized by
CTED, in cooperation with the International
Organization for Migration, with the participation of
operational-level officers from relevant agencies of
Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya, as well as a large
number of experts from international and regional
organizations. A frank and open discussion was held on
matters related to effective border control.

In October, CTED organized another workshop in
Sarajevo. It brought together senior officials dealing
with counter-terrorism coordination from 13 countries
in the region and other representatives. It was jointly
organized with the Regional Cooperation Council, the
Southeast European Cooperative Initiative Center and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and was
supported by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF). During the two-day event,
participants explored ways to enhance national
coordination and regional cooperation in the region.

Last week, CTED organized a workshop at the
Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation in
Indonesia. This workshop focused on community
policing, new payment technologies and investigations
using cell phone records and communications. During
this event, an additional set of working group sessions
was held for counter-terrorism coordinators from South
Asia.

The Committee continues to include in its
dialogue with Member States discussion of their efforts
to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far, a total
of 109 States have submitted reports to the Committee
on their implementation of the resolution. On the other
hand, the Committee encourages Member States to
become parties to and implement all international
counter-terrorism instruments.

The Committee considers effective counter-
terrorism measures and respect for human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law to be
complementary and mutually reinforcing. They are an
essential part of a successful counter-terrorism effort.
Therefore, the Committee has continued to remind
Member States that any measures taken to combat
terrorism must comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

I would also like to give the Council a few
examples of the Committee's cooperative activities
with its partners. The Committee, through CTED,
actively contributes to the work of the CTITF, The
Committee and CTED continue to engage actively with
the other Security Council subsidiary bodies and other
relevant entities working on counter-terrorism issues,
namely, the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and its Monitoring Team, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its Group of Experts. In this regard, the
CTC invites to its thematic discussions the Monitoring
Team, the Group of Experts, the CTITF, the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
representatives of INTERPOL.

Now, I wish to touch briefly on some activities
that the Committee is planning to organize in the near
future. One is a seminar on bringing terrorists to justice,
which will be held in New York from 1 to 3 December
2010. The seminar will bring together a select group of
national counter-terrorism prosecutors who have been
involved in highly visible cases within their national
jurisdictions. The Committee has made sure that the
participants will represent different regions, different
levels of development and different legal systems.

A second event that the Committee plans to hold
is the next special meeting with international, regional
and subregional organizations. The Council of Europe
has kindly offered to host that meeting in Strasbourg.
Let me express the Committee's appreciation to the
Council of Europe for its generosity. The Committee
has accepted this offer and decided to hold this special
meeting in April 2011 on the topic of the prevention of
terrorism.

To fulfil its mandate, the Committee relies on the
cooperation of and dialogue with Member States. I take
this opportunity to express the Committee's
appreciation to Member States for their cooperation
with the Committee and its Executive Directorate,
either during the preparations of the Preliminary
Implementation Assessment, in the country visits,
workshops and briefings, or through their permanent
missions in New York. The Committee and CTED wish
to continue this dialogue and cooperation with all
Member States.

In accordance with this understanding, the
Committee and CTED have attached particular
importance to keeping Member States abreast of their
work. In this regard, the Committee's Executive
Director and I gave a briefing to United Nations
Member States on 21 July. We intend to organize
another similar briefing in the upcoming weeks.

I would like to underline the valuable
contributions and excellent work of CTED, under the
able leadership of Mr. Mike Smith. CTED has
continued to provide the assistance the Committee
needed in the course of the past six months. I also wish
to thank the Secretariat for its continuous support.

Now, I will proceed to the second part of my
statement. In my personal capacity, I would like to
share with the Council and Member States some of our
assessments, views and suggestions on the work of the
CTC. I wish to thank the United Kingdom presidency
for arranging this open debate with this particular
forward-looking format.

In the beginning of this year, one of the priorities
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee was to streamline
its working methods to allow more time for substantive
and analytical work. Starting in February, the
Committee has spent less time on technical matters and
documents, and held in-depth discussions on the key
thematic areas and regions with a strategic approach in
an effort to better understand the evolving nature of the
threat of terrorism.

Furthermore, during the meeting held in Ankara in
June 2010, which brought together officials from the
capitals of the Security Council members with key

counter-terrorism figures in the United Nations system,
the issues that merited more attention and the steps to be
taken were further explored in an informal setting. Most
of the challenges that need to be addressed for better
international cooperation and national coordination
were highlighted in the comprehensive presidential
statement (S/PRST/2010/19) adopted at the thematic
discussion of the Security Council on 27 September
2010 (see S/PV.6390).

I believe that the Committee has played and will
play a critical role in our global fight against terrorism,
based on its sound legal framework. The CTC should
continue to pursue its focused and strategic approach.
This will require further improvements in the working
methods of the Committee.

At the beginning of this year, the procedure for
adopting the Preliminary Implementation Assessments
was substantially amended. Now it is time to improve
the format of the Assessments, with more focus on the
gaps and needs. This will help us to better monitor
implementation and identify the needs of each Member
State. Ensuring effective implementation is of high
importance if we are to succeed in our endeavours to
combat terrorism. Since capacity-building is one of the
main challenges, particularly for some regions, in
implementing relevant resolutions, the Committee and
CTED should continue to focus on this matter as well.

With a view to making the Committee's work
more accessible to Member States, Mr. Smith and I
have given two briefings so far to the wider
membership, and CTED has made presentations to all
Member States on eight different topics. These
briefings and presentations have proved to be very
useful in promoting more intensive dialogue and
interaction between the Committee and Member States.
The CTC and CTED have gained a lot from the Views
and suggestions expressed at these meeting. Such
meetings should continue, since it is also the
responsibility of the Committee and CTED to update
all Member States on the new developments and
challenges. In this respect, I would also like to suggest
that we explore new possible ways to increase the
interaction between CTC and Member States.

The current threat of terrorism demands a
comprehensive and holistic approach. Therefore, apart
from combating terrorism, it would be useful for the
CTC to place greater emphasis on the prevention of
terrorism, in cooperation with CTITF and other

partners. I believe that the recent decision of the CTC
to organize the next special meeting at the Council of
Europe in Strasbourg on this topic will be a step in the
right direction.

Another area that merits particular attention is
incitement to terrorism. CTC and CTED should be
encouraged to continue their efforts to work with
Member States, in particular in a regional and
subregional approach, with a View to addressing
different and particular aspects of incitement to
terrorism.

Let me also emphasize that all counter-terrorism
measures should respect the rule of law and human
rights. This is important for effective international
cooperation on counter-terrorism.

As I mentioned earlier, the CTED has organized
regional workshops in different parts of the world. I
have touched on these, and believe that they will
provide the Committee with more insight into regional
achievements and challenges and that it will contribute
to better coordination and cooperation among regional
countries.

The Committee is now planning to organize a
seminar with prosecutors, which is something new. We
should build on it. All these activities indicate that
there is a need for the CTED to use new tools so that it
can use extrabudgetary funding based on the
established practices of the United Nations.

Before I conclude, let me underline once again
the fact that we are all exposed to the global threat of
terrorism and we are all duty-bound to act in solidarity
and with a resilient, unwavering and common stance.
We should not be complacent.

Today's meeting constitutes another important
step to keep counter-terrorism high on the United
Nations agenda. I hope that this focused and forward-
looking approach of the Council will continue in the
future to ensure that the fight against terrorism remains
a priority for the United Nations.

