Mr. Hyseni: I appreciate the opportunity to
present the views of my Government on the specific
topic under discussion, but at the same time I also feel
it crucial to react both to some of the points made
regarding the subject itself and to some of the general
observations made by President Tadic'.

The Government of the Republic of Kosovo is the
sovereign Government of an independent State,
determined to exercise its authority throughout the
country and to be as connected as possible to all of its
citizens, regardless of their ethnic or religious
background. It is within that framework, and entirely in
accordance with that line of reasoning, that my
Government decided to establish a local office in
Bosniak Mahalla - a community service centre -
with the sole objective of bringing the most basic
services closer to the average Kosovar.

The establishment of such an office constitutes no
threat to anyone whatsoever, yet on hearing President
Tadie's statement one could conclude that it does
indeed represent some kind of threat, not to honest
Kosovar citizens but to criminals in the North - the
hardliners who organized the violent protest in
Mitrovica, with the obvious support, unfortunately, of
the authorities in Belgrade. All Kosovars were deeply
saddened by the death of Mr. Dzekovie and the injuries
inflicted on the other protesters. My Government is
doing everything it can to investigate the incident, to
find the perpetrators and to bring them to justice.
Kosovo police will work very closely with the
international presence in that part of Kosovo in an
effort to swiftly find out who the perpetrators were and
bring them to justice.

I am not going to rush, to jump to any
conclusions. I am not going to act as prosecutor,
investigator or judge. We heard from President Tadie
that the perpetrators are already known and are,
inevitably, Albanians. And according to President
Tadie, no one else could do such a horrible thing but
Albanians.

We also heard some history today from back in
2004. But unfortunately, President Tadie failed to go
further back in history. If he deems it appropriate to
mention 18 Serb citizens killed in 2004 - which we so
unspeakably regret - he should have mentioned
15,000 Albanians slaughtered in 1999. President Tadic'
should have also briefed Council members on the mass
grave recently uncovered in Serbia, with close to 300
bodies of Albanians killed during the war. And those
bodies were taken away to Serbia in an effort to cover
up crimes against humanity.
The community office, or community service
centre, is an office of the Government of the Republic
of Kosovo and will remain as such. Kosovo will
continue to work very hard to meet and respond to all
of the requests, concerns and grievances of its Serbian
population.

I wish to specifically invite the attention of the
Council to the recent local election in Partesh
municipality, the youngest of the Serb majority
municipalities. We saw a heavy turnout by the Serb
population for that election - over 65 per cent of that
municipality's Serb population participated in a very
regular voting.

I have a press statement here from the State
Secretary of the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo,
Mr. Ivanovic'. I quote, "Participation of over 65 per
cent of the population in this election is something that
worries us", and he called on Belgrade to do something
about it. It is a crucial moment for the Government of
Serbia to undertake steps, because the situation is
getting out of control. There is a reason why I
specifically took this as an example. I wish to ask a
question: How does a situation become out of control if
decent members of a community participate in a
regular electoral process in an effort to elect their own
representatives?

Our Government office in Mitrovica will
continue to work. It is not illegal. How can acts by a
Government within its own territory be considered
illegal? And to the honourable Council I say that
instead of making any other calls today, there is a
single call that, I believe, would be and should be very
helpful - that is to call on Belgrade to stop
interfering, to stop obstructively manipulating the
Kosovo Serbs just because they wish to work with us,
just because they wish to be part of the progress that
the youngest State in the world is making.

Yes, another very sad event did take place
yesterday. A member of the Kosovo parliament from
the Serb community was wounded by still-unknown
perpetrators. Mr. Petar Miletie is a very honest Kosovo
Serb citizen who is working very hard for the benefit
of his own ethnic community. He, like many other
Kosovo Serbs, chose to work with Kosovo authorities
and to be part of those authorities, with a single
objective, a single aim, a goal - to improve the
conditions of his own ethnic community. Besides that,
he also chairs a community consultative council, a very
10-43669
important body within the office of the President of
Kosovo.

It is human beings that have suffered in Mitrovica
this past Friday. I will not reveal much detail of the
investigation. I was on the telephone with the Interior
Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, Mr. Bajram
Rexhepi. The vast investigation is progressing. But
what I can say is that those hand grenades most
probably were thrown from the very crowd, from the
very protestors. This does not make me happy, but it is
just for the sake of stating the facts, because hearing
allegations that Albanian secessionists, Albanian
terrorists, did throw the bombs, without any
investigation having yet taken place, is in the best case,
awkward.

The so-called long line of violent attempts is a
fantasy. If there has been a long line of Violence in
northern Kosovo and among other hardline Serbs,
including the burning of Gate 31 and the attacks on the
Mitrovica district court - all of that was done by
hardliners of the Serb community in the north, with the
very obvious support, unfortunately, of the authorities
in Belgrade.

I have a call to make, and it is on President Tadie.
I would ask him, for the sake of the Kosovo Serbs, to
please leave them alone, to work with us for their
benefit, and to talk to us, as authorities of the Republic
of Kosovo, on the many practical issues that would, on
the one side, help relations between our two countries,
and, on the other, have a critical impact on the well-
being of the Serb community.

No one should reward violence. The members of
the Council should trust me when I say that we
Kosovars would be the last to suggest or advocate
rewarding violence because we have been subject to
Violence for decades - for more than a century - and
we know who caused that Violence.

The fantastical stories of angels and demons
should stop because there are neither angels nor
demons in the Western Balkans. We continue to hear
how thousands of angels in Bosnia and Kosovo were
killed or, conversely, how thousands of Albanian
angels killed many Serbian demons. These kinds of
stories have to stop for the sake of the future, because
we know who called for violence in the former
Yugoslavia. We all know who caused the violence. We
all know who the first and - in terms of numbers -
the biggest Victims were in the former Yugoslavia.
I acknowledge that there were Victims on all
sides, but if we want to speak of history, let us display
all of history, not only parts of history. I do not think
that would serve the future; quite the opposite, it will
obstruct severely, almost irreparably, the future if we
continue to go back to history repeatedly.

I have just a very short concluding remark. The
International Court of Justice ruling is expected soon. I
wish once again, very loudly, to declare Kosovo's trust
and conviction that the ruling will be free, fair,
unbiased and just. We have no reason to doubt
international justice. We should avoid even giving the
impression that justice is only good if it is good for me,
because justice is either good or it is not good at all,
for everybody.

Regardless of the Court ruling and the timing of
the ruling, again it is crucial that, first, the Republic of
Serbia cease once and for all its obstructive
interference in Kosovo, because it is severely
undermining our joint efforts - and "joint" means
Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and other international presences - to finally
restore the rule of law throughout Kosovo. The
institutions and Government of Kosovo are very
determined and are not going to give up this goal of
restoring the rule of law everywhere in Kosovo and of
being a Government at the service of every single
citizen of Kosovo.

I thank you, Madam, for the opportunity to
present the views of Kosovo. I regret, however, that
instead of talking today about the future relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, we have heard yet again
that there is no such thing and that the Serbian
Government will never talk to the Kosovo Government
about anything but, as they said, status. That is
regrettable because it is only talks between the
countries on mutual relations and on issues of mutual
interest that can take both countries forward to
European and NATO integration. Kosovo is very
resolved and very determined to pursue the goal of
good-neighbourliness, including with the Republic of
Serbia.

