President: whether or not we need additional instruments to
bolster this partnership.

As far as we are concerned, this partnership is not
only possible; it is indispensable, for a number of reasons.
The first is the vastness of Africa's wealth, which arouses
considerable covetousness, which in turn is often a factor
in conflict. Secondly, African problems have an impact on
international peace and security. And thirdly, Africa's
geopolitical weight is self-evident.

If partnership is essential and indispensable, what are
the ideal areas for it? We see two main areas: the
establishment of sustainable development and the
establishment and maintenance of lasting peace. On 8
December, the General Assembly addressed the question
of the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, but here in
the Council we shall confine ourselves to the maintenance
of peace. That involves the prevention of conflicts and,
hence, such "upstream" activities as preventive
diplomacy. It also involves the settlement of conflicts by
"downstream" means such as the deployment of
peacekeeping operations. If they are to be effective, all
relevant Security Council activities must involve Africa;
they must be undertaken with Africa's consent and must
be deployed with its full cooperation. Hence the need to
establish this partnership.

As a partner of the United Nations, Africa is an
organized continent that possesses the mechanisms to
which I have referred. Central Africa has its Council of
Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX); West
Africa has the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), and
ECOWAS has recently established a diplomatic and
political mechanism for conflict management, the Security
and Mediation Council; in southern Africa, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) has an ad hoc
structure responsible for peace and security; in East
Africa, the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development
is working actively to find a solution to the conflict in the
Horn of Africa. In addition to these subregional bodies, I
should mention also the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution.

All these developments share the goal of
demonstrating that Africa is a partner with the
institutional capacity to respond to the provisions of
Articles 52 and 53 of the United Nations Charter, which
encourage the regional settlement of conflicts. All of this
is intended to stimulate joint action by these bodies and
by the United Nations.

What additional instruments are needed? Essentially,
we envisage two. First and foremost are financial
instruments, which are vital both to strengthen the
capacity of regional and subregional organizations to
prevent and settle conflicts, and to support peace
agreements. In other regions, the signature of a peace
agreement is almost always accompanied with a financial
arrangement to help in settling the problem in question.

 

We believe that the same should hold for conflicts in
Africa.

And secondly, we believe that the Security Council
might begin thinking about the appointment of a
coordinator for Africa to work with the Secretary-General.
The coordinator would work to implement the provisions of
Article 54 the Charter by providing an interface between
the Secretary-General and African leaders, and would assist
the Security Council and the General Assembly in carrying
out the recommendations of the report of the Secretary-
General on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa. That
report outlines all courses of action and defines the
responsibilities of the various parties concerned with a view
to helping Africa, in a spirit of partnership, to move
forward. All that is needed is tireless promotion of the
implementation of those recommendations.

Let me conclude by recalling the words the Secretary-
General spoke in this Chamber on 29 September 1999:

"However imperfectly, Africans have provided many
important signs of their own yearning for peace,
stability and development and of their willingness to
work for it. The right kind of support now, carefully
directed to those best able to use it, could help
Africans turn a corner and set the stage for a brighter
future. Let us seize this moment." (S/PV.4049, p. 5)

It seems to me that that is the very essence and the
very purpose of a partnership between the United Nations
and Africa: to enable Africa to make a fresh start.

