Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for convening and including this
meeting in the June programme of work. I especially
welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and
the introduction of her detailed twenty-third report on
the activities of her Office with respect to the situation
in Darfur, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).

Uruguay takes this opportunity to reiterate its full
support for the role of the International Criminal Court
in strengthening the rule of law at the international
level by bringing to justice those responsible for the
most serious crimes of concern to humanity as a whole,
as defined in article 5 of the Rome Statute, wherever
they may be. In that regard, we call once again on the
States Members of the United Nations that are not yet
parties to the Rome Statute to accede to it and to thereby
contribute to the universalization of this instrument,
which is vital in combating impunity and defending
all the inhabitants of the planet from atrocious crimes
that pose a serious threat to the peace and security of
all humankind.

Uruguay shares the concerns noted in the
Prosecutor's most recent report, which include the
deterioration of the security situation in Darfur, an
increase in aerial bombardments, ongoing rapes and
acts of sexual Violence, continued forced displacement
as a result of violence, as well as obstacles, threats and
attacks on humanitarian workers and the personnel of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur. Moreover, in her most recent report, the
Prosecutor reminds us, as she has in previous reports,
that the arrest warrants issued by the International
Criminal Court have yet to be executed. The five
persons accused of war crimes and crimes against
humanity - one of them accused of genocide 4 have
not yet been subject to the Court's jurisdiction and
continue to occupy high-level Government posts in their
country. This scenario reflects States' non-cooperation
with the International Criminal Court.

As a State party to the Rome Statute, Uruguay
is concerned by all cases of non-cooperation. In this
particular case, it is worth recalling that resolution
1593 (2005) which in paragraph 2 decides that the
Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the
conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with the Court
and the Prosecutor. It also urges all States and concerned
regional and other international organizations to
cooperate fully. Therefore, faced with obvious
non-cooperation on several occasions and for several
years now, we believe that the Council should assume a
more active role in reviewing cases of non-cooperation
with the International Criminal Court and ensure that
arrest warrants are executed, a necessary condition to
enable the Court to fulfil its mandate.

To conclude, I reiterate Uruguay's commitment to
the work of the Prosecutor in her investigations of the
crimes committed in Darfur, which will undoubtedly
contribute to strengthening the rule of law and the
establishment of a society where rights and guarantees
are fully respected for all its inhabitants, who have seen
their fundamental rights abused for many years now.

