Mr. Braun (Germany): I would like to begin by
thanking New Zealand for taking the initiative, which
we applaud, of convening this open debate. It offers
a rare but important opportunity for the Security
Council to highlight the challenges and vulnerabilities
that affect 52 countries and territories and more than
50 million people on this globe.

Germany is convinced that the dimensions of the
threats facing small island developing States (SIDS) and
their vulnerability to them require a global response.
All must play their part, including the United Nations
system. Germany is prepared to assume its fair share of
responsibility in that endeavour. I would like to provide
a few examples and proposals for action.
First, concerning climate change, the implications
of global warming threaten small island States
disproportionately. For some, it is a question of survival;
for virtually all of them it is a matter of national
security. That is why it is so important that we reach
an ambitious climate agreement in Paris later this year,
since it would represent a crucial investment in future
peace and security, especially - though certainly not
only - for small island developing States. We must
improve our mitigation and adaptation efforts. A recent
study presented under the current German presidency
of the Group of Seven (G-7) showed that we do not
yet use risk assessments and early warning systems
effectively. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015-2030 (General Assembly resolution 69/283, annex II) should therefore be one of our prime
guidelines for further action.

My country is prepared to support vulnerable
countries, thereby making an ambitious climate
agreement more attainable. To that end, Germany
recently pledged to double its public climate financing
by 2020, to €4 billion annually.

Turning to the role of the United Nations and
the Security Council, I would like to reaffirm
Germany's position that the Council should discuss the
interdependence of climate change and security on a
regular basis. We consider the presidential statement
on the subject (S/PRST/2011/15) - issued, incidentally,
under Germany's presidency of the Council in
2011 - to be an important step in that regard. We
favour an update of the Secretary-General's 2009 report
on climate change and its possible security implications
(A/64/350). We also welcome the recommendations
made by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations in its report of 16 June (S/2015/446) and
hope they will be included in the Secretary-General's
report.

On the subject of sustainable development, we
look forward to the adoption of an ambitious post-
2015 agenda that takes into account the particular
vulnerabilities and challenges of SIDS. The successful
implementation of such a far-reaching agenda requires
a new global partnership for poverty eradication and
sustainable development. Again, Germany is prepared
to play its part here.
My country is also making use of its current
presidency of the G-7 to support small island developing
States. The G-7 leaders agreed at their recent summit in
Germany to increase to 400 million by 2020 the number
of people in the most vulnerable developing countries
who have access to insurance coverage against hazards
related to climate change. They also agreed to support
the development of early warning systems in the regions
most affected. Furthermore, they committed to taking
action to combat marine litter, which poses a global
challenge and affects so many SIDS. Back in April, the
G-7 foreign ministers issued a statement on maritime
security, addressing issues of considerable concern to
SIDS, such as piracy and illegal fishing.

With the adoption of the Sendai Framework,
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (General Assembly resolution 69/313, annex), the post-2015 agenda and a
new climate agreement in Paris in December, 2015 will
be a critical year for all of us, and very prominently for
SIDS. Let us all make it a year of success and hope.

