Mr. Bisogniero: Let me first of all express my
condolences to the Government and the people of
Haiti, and to other affected nations and organizations,
on the tragic losses caused by yesterday's devastating
earthquake.

It is a pleasure to address this distinguished
gathering on behalf of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO). I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to the President of the Security
Council, Ambassador Zhang Yesui of China, for his
invitation.

This meeting is another demonstration of a
fundamental change in the way we think about the role
of international organizations and institutions. In the
contemporary international security environment, we
are increasingly aware that institutions can no longer
work in isolation from one another and that the key to
meeting today's security challenges lies in building
new ties among them. NATO is actively promoting
such closer ties, because it is our firm belief that
bringing military and civilian means closer together is
absolutely vital to preventing, addressing and resolving
crises and conflicts.

Afghanistan offers us a compelling example. In
that country, NATO is leading the United Nations-
mandated International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) operation. But this is not a NATO operation
alone. It is set within a political framework that is
determined by the wider international community. And
in addition to the Alliance's own 28 member States, all
of which are present in ISAF, we now have 16 troop-
contributing nations that are not NATO members, some
of them located halfway around the world; they make
this a true joint commitment by the international
community.

ISAF's military presence is indispensable. Yet we
are all acutely aware that there is no purely military
solution to the problems in Afghanistan. Ultimately, the
key to success will be increased interaction among
military efforts, civilian interventions and improved
governance. This will require the Alliance's increased
cooperation with the United Nations, the World Bank,
the European Union and other international actors, but
also with non-governmental organizations and even the
private sector. And this can be achieved only if all
actors actively coordinate their efforts. In that regard,
let me underline that we see the main coordinating role
of those international efforts lying clearly with the
United Nations.

NATO has made some encouraging progress in
contributing to such international coordination. Not
long ago, the Secretaries-General of the United Nations
and NATO signed a joint declaration, which sets out a
number of areas for closer cooperation. NATO and the
European Union are also working more closely
together, not just in the Balkans and in Afghanistan,
but also in their respective efforts to fight piracy off
the coast of Somalia. We have worked with the World
Bank on several projects in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Since 2005, NATO has also been cooperating with the
African Union (AU), at its request, both by providing
logistical support to AU-led operations and by
providing some technical assistance to the African
Standby Force concept and planning.

But we all need to do more. For instance, with a
few exceptions, the various international actors
engaged in peace operations still do not train together,
do not really plan together and are not really joined up
in the field. In short, our efforts are much too
fragmented. Ending this fragmentation will require a
profound cultural change from regional organizations
engaged in peace and security. What we need is what
we in NATO have come to label a comprehensive
approach, and what the United Nations calls an
integrated approach. But in the end, we all mean the
same thing: institutions complementing and reinforcing
one another's efforts in order to prevent or resolve
crisis and conflict. And I can assure Council members
that, in our current work on NATO's new Strategic
Concept, we are giving the comprehensive approach
the prominent place that it deserves.

If we are serious about implementing the
comprehensive approach, we must consider innovative
steps. NATO has been a strong proponent of mutual
liaison arrangements, especially with the United
Nations, to smooth our day-to-day cooperation. We
could also imagine a pool of liaison officers from
various international institutions here at United Nations
Headquarters - and if needed, on a case by case basis,
also at NATO Headquarters - to enable better cross-
coordination.
We could also explore staff exchanges,
particularly of senior staff who will be working with
representatives from the other institution, either in the
field or at Headquarters. All of that is to say that there
are many practical ways to encourage more structured
and effective cooperation between us.

In the past, a lack of strategic dialogue has often
prevented us from examining common challenges and
formulating common responses, leaving this to the
working level to sort out. That is why today's
discussion and yesterday's United Nations retreat are
most welcome initiatives to pursue the strategic
dialogue that so far has been missing.

We all know that it will not be easy to end the
fragmentation between our institutions. We each have
different structures, procedures and working cultures.
But there is simply no alternative to much closer
cooperation. Our meeting here today clearly
demonstrates that the international community is rising
to the challenge. So let me conclude by once again
thanking the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for hosting today's remarkable event.

