Mr. Stuart (Australia): I commend your decision
to open this meeting to participation by non-members
of the Council at short notice. Developments in recent
days have again highlighted the continuing challenges
faced by the people of East Timor and by the
international community in the transition process.
These challenges deserve the focus and concern of all
United Nations Member States and warrant opening up
the Council to broader participation.

The Australian Government was deeply saddened
by the death of the New Zealand peacekeeper on 24
July at the hands of suspected militia members, near
the East Timor border with West Timor. We call on the
Indonesian Government to help bring to justice those
responsible for Private Manning's death.

We condemn the violent behaviour of those who
continue to seek to destabilize the process of peace and
reconciliation in East Timor. This tragic event serves to
remind the international community of the remaining
challenges it faces in meeting its commitment to the
people of East Timor.

Australia calls upon all parties to stiffen their
resolve to stamp out militia activity on both sides of
the border.

We are conscious of the efforts already made at
the most senior levels of the Indonesian Government to
deal with this problem, but ultimately only that
Government can take the steps which are needed to
prevent such incidents.

We urge Indonesia to redouble its efforts to bring
militia activity in West Timor to an end, including by
bringing to justice those militia members who have
committed crimes.

Another issue of serious concern to the Australian
Government is the situation in the refugee camps in
West Timor. Ongoing militia activity in and around the
camps continues to affect the refugees, who are the
most vulnerable members of East Timorese society.
Until these people feel safe enough to return to East
Timor or to make other free choices about their future,
the process of reconciliation will remain fragile.

We again urge the Indonesian authorities to take
all the necessary measures to bring an end to militia
activity in West Timor by disarming and disbanding the
militia, removing them from the refugee camps, and
enhancing cooperation with the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
to ensure an end to cross-border militia incursions.

We also call on the Government of Indonesia to
do everything possible to accelerate the resettlement
and repatriation of refugees, including separating
militias from refugees, ensuring that international
agencies have unimpeded access to refugees to
determine their preferences and to supervise
repatriation; to work with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to
respond to its serious concerns about its capacity to
continue to carry out its responsibilities in West Timor;
and, together with the international community, to plan
for the permanent resettlement of those who do not
wish to return.

