Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie for the report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and for his briefing. It is obviously very
necessary that the Council give such careful focus on
the human rights situation in Ukraine. We have heard
repeated assertions about threats against particular
groups, but we have seen little evidence to substantiate
those assertions. Those claims have been used,
however, as a justification for continuing interference
in Ukraine's affairs, including the threat and use of
force, contrary to the Charter of the United Nations.

As the Council, we need to be clear-eyed and
responsible about the situation on the ground and the
true nature of the challenges facing the Ukrainian
people. The report of the United Nations human rights
monitoring mission is what the Council needs to see at
this critical point in such an unstable and dangerous
environment. It seems to us to provide a balanced and
neutral depiction of the human rights situation and a
clear picture of the events leading to the Maidan protest,
the situation prior to the referendum held on 16 March
in Crimea, and the current situation both in Crimea and
in eastern Ukraine.

Russia has made various assertions about the
motivation of the Maidan protestors. The report makes
clear that human rights violations were among the root
causes of the demonstrations that took place throughout
Ukraine and in particular in Kyiv. The protests were not
driven by a so-called fascist agenda, but were a push
for a more representative and effective Government.
The heavy-handed response from security forces
was a catalyst for their escalation. These actions
of the security forces came against a backdrop of a
long-standing culture of impunity for human rights
violations, including by the police. We welcome reports
that the new Ukrainian authorities have committed
to investigating those violations and to holding
perpetrators to account.

The report also sheds light on the events in Crimea.
Russia has consistently argued that Russian-speaking
minorities were threatened with repression. It has used
that reasoning to justify its decision to take control
of and annex Crimea. The report makes clear that
there was no evidence of harassment or attacks on
ethnic Russians in Crimea ahead of the referendum.
Misinformed reports, however, of harassment of ethnic
Russians by Ukrainian extremists served to create a
climate of fear.

The report notes that since the referendum of
16 March, measures have been taken in Crimea that
are of deep concern from a human rights perspective.
Those include the introduction of Russian citizenship,
making it difficult for those who chose to maintain their
Ukrainian citizenship to stay in Crimea and raising
concerns about legal residency and the right to work.

As we heard at the 31 March Arria formula meeting
of the Council, the situation is particularly concerning
for Tatars. The report confirms that, noting that the
number of displaced Crimean Tatars is estimated to
have reached 3,000. The actions of paramilitary groups
in Crimea remain outside the law and threatening. The
report calls for their disbandment. It also emphasizes
that independent and impartial reporting on human
rights in Crimea would deter violations, stimulate
accountability and prevent the spreading of rumours
and political manipulation.

The report looks carefully at the situation ofRussian
minorities across Ukraine and finds nothing to support
the claims by Russia about threats to them. Russia's
claims on that point simply do not hold. The report
clearly notes that although there were some attacks
against the ethnic Russian community, in particular
those affiliated with the previous Government, "these
were neither systematic nor widespread". As Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovic' has just told the Council,

"they were isolated incidents which were then
exaggerated fuelling fear and insecurity among
the ethnic Russian community".

The report does make good proposals, which we
should all support, on the protection of minorities,
including the recommendation to ensure that minority
groups are consulted in developing laws on language
and recommendations to ensure that the treatment of
those associated with the previous Government is in
accordance with the rule of law and not motivated by
revenge. We welcome the Government of Ukraine's
willingness to ensure a break with past injustices
and create a better future for the people of Ukraine.
Elections are essential in that regard, and it is crucial
that the people of Ukraine be able to decide on the
future direction of their own country. We therefore
fully support the upcoming elections on 25 May and
call on all parties in Ukraine and in the international
community to support a free and fair ballot. Ukraine
must be allowed to prepare for these elections without
outside interference or any coercion in its domestic
affairs.

To conclude, the international community has

repeatedly urged Russia to actively reduce tensions, stop
its destabilization in eastern Ukraine and withdraw its
forces from the provocative posture they have assumed
on Ukraine's border. Ukraine's own response has
been restrained and responsible. The talks scheduled
to take place tomorrow in Geneva between Ukraine,
Russia, the United States and the European Union are
a crucial opportunity, now, for genuine dialogue. The
latest combustible events in eastern Ukraine - where,
as Ambassador Churkin has said, that the first blood
has been shed - make it essential that Russia engage
seriously in this dialogue.

