Ms. Eckels-Currie (United States of America):
I thank the Peruvian presidency for calling for and
presiding over this important briefing on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Neculaescu and Mr. Chergui
for their briefings.

Virtually every conflict-affected country
considered by the Security Council has struggled with
consolidating peace in the aftermath of conflict. The
United Nations has often struggled to find and apply
the right tools to prevent crises and break cycles of
conflict. The United States believes in the admirable
goals of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
as established. Towards that end, we are optimistic that
the General Assembly's endorsement of the Secretary-
General's proposal to integrate the Peacebuilding
Support Office into the Department of Political Affairs
will help break down existing institutional silos that
prevent us from using all the tools we have to prevent
conflict and maintain global peace and security.

Structural change alone will not ensure the success
ofpeacebuilding. Changes in the way the United Nations
thinks are necessary in order to ensure sustainable
peace. We encourage the Secretary-General to follow
through on many of the good ideas and commitments
in the report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
(S/2018/43). That includes integrated strategic
frameworks and the United Nations development
assistance frameworks and greater in-country cross-
pillar cooperation, such as among the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, global focal point for police,
justice and corrections, and the Joint UNDP-Department
of Political Affairs Programme on Building National
Capacities for Conflict Prevention and its Peace and
Development Advisers. We must do more to get in front
of and head off the drivers and underlying causes of
conflict. We also urge the Peacebuilding Support Office
to provide greater information on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace best practices for the Peacebuilding
Commission and Member States to draw from when
they are working to prevent conflict and sustain peace.

The United States, however, does not support
suggestions to repurpose, reprogramme or tie
a percentage of peacekeeping budget funds to
peacebuilding. We encourage countries to provide
voluntary funding to the Peacebuilding Fund. Access to
assessed funding is not a panacea for all problems, and
it will not fix the fundamental obstacles to effective
peacebuilding, namely, the lack of coherence and
coordination across existing programmes and the lack
of political will to integrate conflict prevention and
the promotion of human rights at the country level and
across the United Nations. One area where we would
like to see better integration of peacebuilding resources
is in enabling sustainable exit strategies for United
Nations peace operations, including plans for a viable
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

We have emphasized the importance of sustainable
exit strategies for peacekeeping missions and noted
that peacekeeping cannot be a substitute for political
solutions. Better integration ofpeacebuilding strategies
into the exit strategies of peacekeeping missions can
help enable sustainable political transitions. The
Security Council did precisely that when it mandated
that the United Nations to devise a peacebuilding
plan for Liberia in preparation for the closure of the
mission there. The United Nations devised that plan
in close coordination with the Government of Liberia
and with the participation of civil society. The result
was something that all parties could support and
something of which we should all be proud. The
Liberian Government committed to working with the
peacekeeping mission, the United Nations country
team, local stakeholders and international partners to
implement the steps laid out in this first-of-its-kind plan
to sustain peace in the years to come. That should be
the best-practice model for similar transitions in future.

We know that every situation is different. As we have
seen in Haiti, for instance, United Nations police can
play an essential role in ensuring viable exit strategies.
A critical aspect of achieving mission exit strategies
is better integration of the police into all aspects of
mission planning and ensuring that the United Nations
Police Division is empowered to properly assess, plan,
deploy, manage and support peace operations. Even
more critical is the inclusion of civil society actors in
peacebuilding planning, including women and youth
leaders, human rights activists, experts in transitional
justice and others. Only when all voices in a society are
heard and human rights and human dignity are respected
can effective and lasting transitions to peace occur.

Equally important to sustaining peace and
peacebuilding are partnerships with the World Bank
and other international financial institutions, as well as
the role ofthe private sector. Addressing socioeconomic
challenges is an extremely important element of
peacebuilding and requires greater engagement with
multiple stakeholders. Governments must hold up
their side of the deal, cooperating with United Nations
agencies and, most importantly, demonstrating the
political will to build and sustain peace. That political
will must include the protection and promotion of
human rights and commitments to building just and
equitable governing structures.

While we are far from resolving many of the
conflicts facing the world today, we are optimistic
that the Secretary-General's focus on United Nations
reform and on peacebuilding and sustaining peace will
yield good results. The United States looks forward to
continuing to work with all members of the Security
Council and the General Assembly to that end.

