Mr. Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, Sir, I would like to convey to you and to the
Argentine delegation the heartfelt congratulations of
Minister Celso Amorim on your excellent work as
Security Council President and to welcome your
decision to convene this open debate on Haiti. The
presence of the President-elect, Rene Preval, takes on
special importance at today's meeting.

I would also like to convey the condolences of
the Brazilian Government over the untimely death of
Ambassador Fenelon of Haiti yesterday in Brasilia.

We are meeting against the backdrop of the
success of the electoral process in Haiti. The large
turnout at the presidential elections in February has
conveyed to us a message of hope and shows that a
democratic Haiti is clearly possible. We welcome the
adoption of the electoral calendar for the second round
of parliamentary and local elections, and we hope that
this can take place in a climate of transparency and
stability. The election of a Haitian parliament that is
representative and democratic will complete the
electoral process, which lies at the heart of the mandate
of MINUSTAH. Brazil would like to encourage the
new Government to promote an inclusive and
constructive political dialogue among all Haitians,
which would make it possible to improve governance
and create the proper conditions for new efforts to
promote economic development and social justice. This
is the pact of governance referred to by President
Preval in his statement today.

My country reiterates its firm commitment to the
efforts of the United Nations to promote stabilization
and reconstruction in Haiti. I would like to express our
satisfaction at Mr. Preval's visit to Brazil on 9 and
10 March, during which he met with President Lula
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and which was
followed by visits to Chile and Argentina. We also
consider more recent developments towards closer
relations between Haiti and CARICOM. to be very
positive and an important signal that Haiti is rejoining
the Caribbean family and, more broadly, the Latin
American family. The presence here today of several
Ministers and Deputy Ministers of the region bears
witness to these closer relations.

The future of Haiti is a vital challenge for the
United Nations. The country's problems have deep
roots in political and social and economic matters that
go beyond security issues. We cannot simply limit
ourselves to seeking solutions from a military
viewpoint. We believe that the international community
must continue to support Haiti with the prompt release
of financial resources and sustained interest in the
economic, social and institutional reconstruction of the
country. Renewed international assistance efforts
should focus on strengthening basic areas such as the
judiciary and the police, as well as development
activities with respect to infrastructure so as to create
better conditions for sustainable development and to
foster job creation.

The international community, in dialogue with
the Haitian Government, must elaborate proposals for
the future scope of the MINUSTAH mandate. It is also
important to include Haiti in the agenda of the recently
created Peacebuilding Commission, as was underlined
today by Chile and other countries.

With a view to preparing for future challenges,
the members of the Contact Group in the World Bank
decided that the time had come to organize a new
donor conference which will take place before
September 2006 to extend the Interim Cooperation
Framework until the end of 2007. Brazil will have the
honour of welcoming in Brasilia a ministerial meeting
among donor countries and the new Haitian
Government in May this year. We are also working
through diplomatic channels to support forgiveness of
Haitian debt through the International Monetary Fund.

Brazil believes that we now have a good
opportunity for the establishment of an action plan to
support the first 100 days of the Preval Government, a
plan that is capable of creating a significant number of
jobs with the comprehensive use of the potential of the
engineering companies. I would like to highlight the
role played by the core group in coordinating the
efforts of the international community in Haiti and the
importance of the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Advisory Group.

We must also pay tribute to President Boniface
Alexandre for his tireless efforts in the current
transitional period. Likewise, we thank Prime Minister
Gerard Latortue for having guided the transition, which
made it possible for us to be here today to welcome a
new phase in the Haitian process and to reaffirm our
confidence in the future of the country.

We would also like to express our warm thanks
for the skill and the dedication of Ambassador Juan
Gabriel Valdes to our region. It is a source of special
satisfaction to have a representative of Chilean
diplomacy at the head of the international community's
efforts in Haiti. Like you, Mr. President, we believe
that, given the great political and financial commitment
of Latin American countries to stabilization in Haiti, it
would advisable that his replacement should also come
from a country in the region.
(spoke in French)

Allow me, through you, Mr. President, to convey
to the Haitian delegation and to President-elect Rene
Preval our warmest congratulations and firmest
support. As President Lula has said, Brazilian troops
will remain in Haiti as long as it is necessary. You may
rest assured of our determination to ensure that the
United Nations makes every effort to ensure that Haiti
can embark on the path of sustainable development in
an atmosphere of democratic consolidation and truly
become once again the pearl of the Antilles.

