Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of
today's meeting and thanks Special Envoy for Syria
Staffan De Mistura and Director John Ging for their
enlightening and objective briefings. We reiterate
Equatorial Guinea's support for their noble efforts in
an extremely difficult environment.

I will focus my statement in particular on the
ongoing military rumblings in Idlib, on the serious
humanitarian situation in the province, and, lastly, on
the importance of not obstructing the political process
to bring about lasting peace in Syria.

Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about
the situation in the Syrian province of Idlib and the
possible catastrophic humanitarian consequences in
the event ofa large-scale military offensive. The war in
Syria, which has been ravaging the country since 2011,
has reached its climax. According to reports, reports
of Government troops near Idlib suggest an imminent
escalation of violence in the area. It should be recalled
that Idlib, the last terrorist enclave, controlled by and
large by the terrorist group Tahrir Al-Sham, also known
as the Al-Nusra Front, as well as by armed opposition
groups, is part of the de-escalation zone in northern
Syria, sponsored by the Astana guarantors.

The United Nations estimates that there are almost
3 million people in that de-escalation zone, including
nearly 1.4 million internally displaced persons and
2.1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
In line with the Secretary-General's communique of
29 August, we urgently call on all parties to exercise
restraint and prioritize the protection of civilians.
We further encourage all parties to take all measures
necessary to safeguard civilian life, allow freedom
of movement and ensure the protection of civilian
infrastructure, including medical and educational
facilities, in keeping with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.

The international community must avoid any
military imbroglio in Idlib at all costs. If it does not,
in future meetings of the Council we will be forced to
discuss its direct and deleterious consequences, such as
the possible use of chemical substances as weapons of
war against civilians and, according to United Nations
estimates, the approximately 1 million displaced people
and more than $300 million needed to respond to the
imminent humanitarian catastrophe.

On the political front, we reiterate our firm
commitment to an inclusive political process, under the
auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We hope that the tripartite summit, held
today in Tehran among the Astana guarantors - the
Russian Federation, Iran and Turkey - as well as the
upcoming meetings of the Special Envoy on 10 and
11 September, will lead to consensus-based actions
for the establishment of a truly representative
constitutional committee, thereby paving the way for a
definitive settlement to the conflict. We agree with the
Special Envoy, who recently stated that it is necessary
to maintain moral pressure on the warring parties so
as to prevent a drastic military offensive and allow
more time for a sustainable solution that can combat
terrorism and save civilians.

We understand that in an increasingly multipolar
world, the balance among Powers no longer depends
solely on their economic capabilities, but also on their
military capabilities. The allies of the parties involved
in this politico-military labyrinth must seek another
mechanism or scenario to test their military might. It
is inconceivable to continue sacrificing the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to live in peace,
stability and lasting progress at the altar of economic
and geostrategic interests. For eight years, millions
of innocent people have suffered direct consequences
of the war and its collateral damage, which is both
devastating and horrific.

Idlib cannot be compared to any other region. The
city is home not only to the fighters who settled there
with their families, following their evacuation from
Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, Dar'a and Quneitra, under the
co-called reconciliation agreement, but also to civilians
who have nothing to do with the war and have simply
sought refuge there. Hundreds of thousands of people
took refuge in Idlib because they were told they would
be safe there. Russia, Turkey and Iran had decreed it to
be a de-escalation zone, but today the warring parties
have taken those people hostage. Equatorial Guinea
calls on Russia, Turkey and Iran, as well as the United
States and Western and Gulf countries with influence
in the area, to do their utmost to ensure that those with
weapons and power will , for the first time in this war,
make civilians their top priority.

I conclude by citing Mr. Jan Egeland, head of the
United Nations humanitarian task force on Syria, who
spoke recently of the intense ongoing political and
humanitarian negotiation on Syria. He said:

"If it succeeds we will have hundreds of thousands
of lives spared, if it fails in the next days and hours
we could see a battle more cruel than any previous
battle in the cruelest war of our generation".

