Mr. Eick (Germany): Let me begin by welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Jose Luis Guterres to the Council.
I would also like to join colleagues in thanking Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Finn
Reske-Nielsen for his briefing today.

As the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will come to its conclusion
by the end of the year, Germany expresses its sincere
gratitude for the excellent work of the United Nations,
both in Timor-Leste and in New York, in support of the
Timorese people.

We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in this debate.

Germany continues to be entirely confident that
the people of Timor-Leste, with the support of the
United Nations and its international partners, are on
the right track. We congratulate them on the progress
made since independence a decade ago. Both the
Secretary-General's report (S/2012/765) and today's
briefing underpin our optimism. In its tenth year of
independence, Timor-Leste has successfully conducted
presidential and parliamentary elections in a peaceful
and calm environment, marking a milestone in the
transition of the country, and formed a new Government
based on the outcome of those elections.

As we have stated in the Council before, the
successful completion of the three rounds of elections
marks the right moment to end UNMIT's presence in
Timer-Leste. We therefore entirely concur with the
Secretary-General's recommendation that UNMIT
continue to proceed with its drawdown until its
completion at the end of the year. Timor-Leste has
made impressive progress in many fields, in particular
with regard to the continuously calm and stable
security situation, which leads us to believe that
UNMIT's presence has served its purpose and is no
longer required. Considerable progress has also been
made in strengthening the institutional capacities of
State institutions, including in the security, justice and
governance sectors, providing a sound institutional
framework for a peaceful and prosperous future for
Timor-Leste.

At this stage, it will be key to ensure that the full
transfer of UNMIT's responsibilities to the Government
of Timor-Leste or its bilateral and multilateral partners
is smooth and that stability prevails. We laud the
respective efforts thus far, including in the framework
of the Joint Transition Plan, and assure the Government
of Timor-Leste of our continued support to that end.

In that regard, we stand ready to support our
Timorese partners, in the expectation of maintaining
a close link to the Council for as long as it is deemed
necessary. We want to see a smooth transition that
secures the important achievements made by UNMIT
in coordination with the Timorese authorities, including
in the security field and the area of the rule of law and
human rights, along with economic progress.

Future cooperation needs to be designed to counter
the remaining challenges described in the Secretary-
General's report and to further advance and consolidate
socioeconomic progress and reconciliation efforts,
while building on those undertaken by the Government
of Timor-Leste thus far.

I would like to express once more the sincere
appreciation of my Government for the efforts and
commitment of UNMIT in supporting Timor-Leste,
and to commend the dedication and service of its staff
on the ground.

Let me conclude by wishing Minister Guterres,
the Government under Prime Minister Gusmao and
all Timorese all the best for years to come. Let me
assure them that they will not have to shoulder that
responsibility alone. Germany highly values its close
friendship with Timor-Leste and will continue to stand
by Timor-Leste during the transition and thereafter.

