Mr. Shwaiger: Let me start by thanking Bosnia
and Herzegovina for organizing this debate on
institution-building in the context of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Your country, Madam President, has
first-hand experience of the importance of a topic such
as this and how deserving it is of the Council's
attention. I also want to thank the Secretary-General,
the Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste and
Mr. Peter Wittig, in his capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their statements
this morning.

The following countries align themselves with
this declaration: the candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Iceland and Montenegro; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Norway, member of the European Economic Area; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Armenia.

"Nothing is possible without men, but nothing is
lasting without institutions". That is a quote from Jean
Monnet, the chief architect of European unity. The late
Richard Holbrooke, the chief architect of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Peace Accord, once invoked those
words when arguing that one cannot build peace
without building institutions. As the concept paper
(S/201l/16, annex) for today's debate underscores,
national authorities are in the lead here, but the
international community has an important supporting
role to play. From our side, for the sake of brevity, let
me highlight just three elements that we think are
particularly relevant today: coordination, civilian
deployment capacities and civil society involvement.

First is better coordination of the different
international actors on the ground, including
international financial institutions and bilateral donors.
The Secretary-General's 2009 report on peacebuilding
(8/2009/304) stated that it was incumbent upon the
United Nations to spearhead such coordination,
especially in the earliest phase. It also stated that that
calls for stronger, more effective and better supported
United Nations leadership teams on the ground.
However, as the Secretary-General also acknowledged,
those United Nations leadership teams, as well as the
wider international community, need more clarity from
New York on the roles and responsibilities of the
various United Nations entities for the critical
peacebuilding sectors. We hope to see further advances
towards a more rational division of labour, including
through incentives to cooperate and harmonize, and we
encourage the Secretariat, funds and programmes to
press on with the reforms.

Also, the potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) should be further unlocked through
a strengthened link with the field so that United
Nations leadership teams on the ground can profit more
from its strategic guidance and political clout,
including when it comes to institution-building.
Furthermore, I would like to reiterate here the
Secretary-General's remark that the Security Council
could profit more from the PBC's recommendations in
the Council's own early consideration of post-conflict
situations, especially when there is a peacekeeping
mission on the ground. That would help to tie a
mission's activities into the wider coordinated
peacebuilding and institution-building effort in a
particular country. Let us not forget that successful
institution-building, particularly in the security and
justice sectors, helps pave the way towards the
sustainable exit of any peacekeeping mission.

The second element that I want to mention is
civilian deployment capacities. The European Union
attaches great importance to the review currently under
way in that area. A key task of the review's Senior
Advisory Group is to develop proposals to ensure that
the deployment of civilian experts in post-conflict
countries serves the goal of building national capacity.
We look forward to receiving the results of that civilian
capacities review soon, and hope that they will be in
the form of concrete and realistic objectives and
recommendations, to be given appropriate follow-up.

The goal is a more demand-driven, dynamic and
flexible civilian deployment that builds on existing
national capacities and exhibits a strong South-South
character. We hope that the review will chart a path to,
for example, the increased global availability of
civilian experts for post-conflict situations and the
seamless interoperability of civilian capacities within
the United Nations system and between the United
Nations and other key players, such as regional
organizations.

Another important point for us is the enhanced
deployment of female civilian experts, in the spirit of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General's
action plan on ensuring women's participation in
peacebuilding. Post-conflict institutions cannot be
effective unless they are gender-equitable.

The third and last element that I will mention is
civil society involvement. Bolstering civilian oversight
mechanisms and local civil society organizations and
giving those organizations a seat at the peacebuilding
table from day one will enhance the legitimacy and
demand-driven nature of both the priorities and the
institutions devised there. That is what guides much of
the European Union's institution-building assistance
around the world.

For example, in Timor-Leste, in the framework of
cooperation with Portuguese-speaking countries, the
European Union, at the request of the Government and
together with the United Nations Development
Programme, is working hard to strengthen the capacity
of Parliament and the media. Among other things, we
will provide media training to parliamentarians and
organize seminars for journalists on the role and the
functions of parliament in the democratic process.

Furthermore, the European Union has recently
funded extensive research on participatory approaches
to justice and security sector reform in a number of
conflict-affected countries. We are happy to share the
results of that exercise with interested partners. Finally,
European Union security sector reform programmes,
developed jointly with Governments in places such as
the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, revolve around increased
civilian and parliamentary oversight and accountability
to citizens.

It is important to draw strategic lessons, as we are
doing today, and to make them available in field
manuals. At the same time, we are aware that one-size-
fits-all solutions do not exist and that institution-
building efforts will always have to be tailored to the
specific post-conflict conditions on the ground. As the
concept paper points out, national actors know those
conditions best, and that is one reason that they should
be in the lead. At the end of the day, successful
institutional development cannot be transplanted from
elsewhere, but is home grown. That is why we are

always happy to hear from the countries themselves,
for example through today's statement by Deputy
Prime Minister Jose' Luis Guterres, whose country now
chairs the Group of Seven Plus and co-chairs the
International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding.

Supporting home-grown institutional development
has long been at the heart of much European Union
assistance, be it in the Balkans, the Middle East, Africa,
Afghanistan or Haiti. We would like to reaffirm our
commitment to pursuing that cause and to working with
national authorities, the United Nations, other
international actors, civil society organizations and the
people in post-conflict countries themselves.

