Mr. Jallow: I am honoured to have been given
the opportunity to report once again to the Security
Council on the state of the completion strategy at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

When I reported here six months ago, I indicated
that the Office of the Prosecutor at the ICTR would
focus its efforts in the ensuing six months on several
fronts: preparations for the trials of the two new
arrestees, Ndahimana and Nizeyimana; the conclusion
of the part-heard trials; the renewal of our requests for
the referral of cases to Rwanda in early 2010 for trial;
the commencement of rule 71 bis evidence
preservation proceedings in respect of three top-level
fugitives; and the intensification of our tracking efforts
to apprehend and transfer to the ICTR the remaining 11
fugitives. We have, during that period, indeed focused
on those areas, with varying degrees of progress.
During this period, the evidence phase of the
proceedings in five cases was completed. The
prosecution phase was also concluded in two other
cases. The defence stage of three cases is ongoing. The
commencement of the two new trials, the evidence-
preservation proceedings and the tracking of fugitives
have been hampered by staffing constraints. However,
we are finally set to commence the trial of Ndahimana
in September 2010. The Nizeyimana trial is now likely
to commence only in the last quarter of 2010, as my
Office is grappling with the challenge of constituting
an adequate trial team to prepare and prosecute that
case. The rule 71 bis proceedings are now likely to
commence closer to the end of 2010. We hope to renew
the requests for the referral of cases to Rwanda by
September 2010.

The slight delays in respect of those matters -
with the exception of the requests for the referral of
cases to Rwanda, which are tied to the ongoing
capacity-building programme in and by that country -
have been occasioned largely by the staffing challenges
we face at the Tribunal. The current budgetary
provisions have not provided adequately for the
additional workload in 2010. At this critical juncture,
we also continue to lose staff with experience and
institutional memory, especially in the trial and
fugitive-tracking sections, due to retirement or a desire
by staff members to move on in view of the imminent
completion of the ICTR's mandate. Replacing them has
been quite slow, due largely to the difficulty in
attracting staff with the requisite competence and
experience who are willing to work for just the short
period that remains of our mandate.

We have tried, as much as possible, to continue
some of our activities within existing resources, - for
instance by multitasking staff members. We continue to
remain firmly committed to the effective
implementation of the completion strategy, but I
believe that sympathetic consideration of the
supplementary budgetary proposals that have been
submitted, together with measures that would iron out
the challenges in recruitment, would greatly enhance
our efforts in that respect.

While my Office prepares for the renewal of the
requests for the referral of cases of indictees to
Rwanda later this year, we have also continued the
process of handing over files from my Office to
Rwanda and other countries that relate to suspects who
were investigated but not indicted by the ICTR.
Indeed, on 8 June 2010, I handed over 25 such files to
the Prosecutor General of Rwanda, thus bringing the
number of such cases handed over to Rwanda by my
Office to 55.

The tracking, arrest and transfer of Felicien
Kabuga and the other fugitives will continue to be a
top priority. Our tracking team will continue to deploy
all its efforts to that end. We count on the continued
call by the Security Council on all States to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal in those efforts.

I regret to report, however, that there has been no
further progress in the matter of cooperation by Kenya
in relation to the case of Felicien Kabuga. Despite
numerous requests, the Government of Kenya has so
far not provided my Office with details of Kabuga's
alleged departure from that country. More particularly,
the outstanding ICTR requests to Kenya for
cooperation relate to a follow-up on the investigation
of Kabuga's assets and properties in that country, the
provision to the joint ICTR/Kenya police task force of
access to all Kenyan Government files on Kabuga and
full particulars, as I have just indicated, of the
circumstances of his reported departure from Kenya -
reports that have come from the Government of Kenya.
Despite the copious evidence of Kabuga's entry,
residence, activities and occasional reported sightings
in that country, Kenya has neither arrested him nor
provided the information requested by the Prosecutor
to assist in the tracking and arrest of that fugitive.

In view of Kenya's continued non-compliance
with the requests of the ICTR, I have taken the step of
requesting the President of the Tribunal, under article
28 of the ICTR statute and the Tribunal's rules, to
notify the Security Council of the failure of Kenya to
cooperate with the Tribunal in relation to that fugitive.
That request sets out in greater detail the basis for the
notification to the Council. We request the Council to
consider the necessary measures to enable the ICTR to
secure the cooperation of that country in this important
case.

The number of requests for mutual legal
assistance from national prosecuting authorities
continues to grow. In the current reporting period, my
Office has already attended to 40 requests from
10 Member States for assistance with evidence - a
significant increase over the 2009 level. The nature of
this work continues to centre on extensive research into
the Prosecutor's evidentiary database for relevant
materials for use by national prosecuting authorities
and investigators in respect of their work on the
Rwandan genocide.

An important element of our international
cooperation practice has also involved extensive work
to declassify key exhibits and to vary witness-
protection measures. During the current reporting
period, my Office has secured consents for disclosure
from 89 prosecution witnesses and filed five motions
for the variation of witness-protection measures.
Submissions are being prepared for additional
measures as well. Those applications also contribute to
the overall objective of reducing the number of
protected witnesses and documents, thus scaling down
the eventual workload of any residual mechanism that
may be established.

In the months ahead, we propose to commence
the trials of the two remaining cases of detainees, file
new requests for the referral of the cases of eight of the
remaining 11 fugitives to Rwanda for trial by the end
of August or early September, intensify our efforts in
tracking and arresting fugitives, and prepare for the
commencement, early in 2011, of evidence-
preservation hearings in respect of three top-level
fugitives.

The cooperation of Member States and the
support of the Security Council, the other organs and
the Secretariat have been, and will continue to be,
indispensable to the success of the completion strategy.
I would like to convey our appreciation for all such
support. We look forward to it at this crucial stage of
the ICTR mandate.

