Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), Mr. Ghassan
Salame, for his briefing.

I will focus on two main topics: security and
political developments, and economic developments.

First, with respect to security and political
developments, the security situation in the capital,
Tripoli, has improved significantly since our most
recent meeting on the situation in Libya, on 5 September
(see S/PV.8341). The role played by UNSMIL, led by
Mr. Salame, had a clear impact on reducing tensions
and improving the security situation. Those efforts
led to a ceasefire and a revitalization of the work of
the security institutions, particularly the security
arrangements committee.

We welcome the adoption by the Government of
National Accord ofits resolution 1437, adopting thejoint
security plan for greater Tripoli, which will establish
security arrangements for the protection of civilians
and private and public property and for establishing
public order by regular police and security forces
instead of armed groups. In addition, the plan will set
up mechanisms to coordinate with UNSMIL, and we
hope that all stakeholders in Tripoli will cooperate with
and respond to this plan so as to enhance the security
and safety of civilians and promote stability in Libya.

The instability in Libya requires that the
international community and the Security Council
make further efforts to find a permanent solution aimed
at preventing the spread of armed groups through
support for legitimate, unified security institutions that
are subject to the authority and supervision of the State,
with a view to promoting the transitional process and
the political process as set out in the United Nations
action plan. That will help to prevent the spread of
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), which continues to exploit the political
and security vacuum to implement its destructive plans.
That is particularly true in the southern part of the
country, which, as we heard from Mr. Ghassan Salame,
is witnessing an unprecedented level of insecurity,
including a total absence of services and the threat of
spreading criminality.

In the context of the United Nations plan in Libya,
we commend the role of UNSMIL, which continues to
meet with various Libyan institutions and political and
social stakeholders. Most recently it met with the two
heads of the dialogue committees related to the House
of Representatives and the High Council of State, where
they issued ajoint press statement on the importance of
restructuring the executive authority and unifying State
institutions leading to end the division in the country.

We hope that the international conference to be
held in Palermo, Italy, on 12 and 13 November will
push the Libyan political process forward and help end
division and the spread of armed militias, leading to a
unified Libya that is stable and free of any threat to its
peace and security while representing all Libyans.

Secondly, concerning economic developments,
we are relieved that the production of oil in Libya
has been resumed and has reached its normal level of
about 1.3 million barrels a day, therefore overcoming
any negative impact resulting from the armed clashes
in the oil crescent region last June. This accelerated
recovery is clear evidence of the will of the Libyan
people to move forward towards an economic future in
a country that enjoys security and stability and where
their aspirations can be met.

In order to achieve economic and development
stability in Libya, we commend the adoption by
the Government of National Accord of the long-
awaited economic reform programme, which will
play a significant role in enabling Libyan economic
institutions to provide better services to the brotherly
Libyan people. The positive effects of the programme
have helped the exchange rate of the Libyan dinar
against foreign currencies to recover and increase.
We stress the importance of accountability and of
coordinating with Libyan financial and economic
institutions to preserve the wealth of the Libyan people
and prevent waste.

We renew our support to the efforts of Mr. Salame
to facilitate the comprehensive political process in
Libya according to the United Nations plan, and to open
an UNSMIL office in Benghazi during the upcoming
period. We urge all Libyan parties to work together
towards a peaceful settlement of the crisis by engaging
constructively and with determination in all technical,
legislative, political and security tasks necessary to
hold comprehensive, transparent and peaceful elections,
with a view to building a unified and stable Libya.

In conclusion, we welcome the visit of the
representative of Sweden last week in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, and we
look forward to a briefing on this visit in which our
delegation participated.

