Mr. Patriota (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
welcome this opportunity to discuss in a formal meeting
of the Security Council the relationship between troop-
contributing countries and Security Council members. It
is with great satisfaction that we participate in a public
debate on an issue of such interest to the membership at
large, and we hope that the views and suggestions
expressed today will be duly recorded and acted upon.
We are convinced that under your able guidance, Sir, we
will have the possibility of a fruitful deliberation on this
item.

I want to express my appreciation to the Permanent
Representative of Argentina, Ambassador Cerdenas, for
his active role in bringing about today's debate and his
initiative as a whole. I should also like to express our
recognition of the role of Ambassador Keating of New
Zealand in the launching of this initiative.

This formal session was organized in response to a
request made by 34 Member States in a letter addressed
to His Excellency the President of the Security Council.
In his statement this morning, the Permanent
Representative of Argentina named the countries that have
been discussing possible ways for improving the
coordination between the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries.

These countries have reached a general view on
what is considered desirable and feasible at this stage in
order to foster closer and more focused cooperation
between those involved in peace-keeping missions around

 

the world. We endorse the statement by Argentina, and we
would like to stress some of the elements that we feel are
essential in the handling of the subject.

With the recent increase in the number of peace-
keeping operations and their growing complexity, the
United Nations has had to face new challenges, with
varying degrees of success. On several occasions the
Organization has had to recognize its limitations, while on
others it has been able to deal creatively with the problems
it encountered. In any event, the experience gained in living
through difficult situations represents an important asset for
facing the uncertainties of the future in the realm of peace-
keeping.

In this context, the need for adequate procedures for
ensuring the necessary cohesion among troop contributors,
Security Council members and the Secretariat cannot be
overemphasized.

A Security Council presidential statement issued on 4
November 1994 established the basis for an informal
mechanism that has represented a first step in the right
direction. The statement itself, however, had the wisdom of
recognizing that the arrangements proposed therein should
be reviewed in the light of experience. After one year, we
feel that the time has come to look at ways to improve the
efficiency of these consultations and to fit them into a more
predictable framework.

Some measures that have been suggested in this regard
deserve serious consideration. A more formal and
institutionalized mechanism of consultations is needed.
Each consultation meeting should be held well in advance
of anticipated Security Council decisions on the extension,
modification or termination of the mandate of specific
peace-keeping operations. In the establishment of a new
peace-keeping operation, the mechanism should allow for
consultations with potential troop contributors. Special
meetings of the mechanism should be convened in the event
of unforeseen developments regarding particular peace-
keeping operations that require action by the Council.

In our view, the mechanism for consultations should
be chaired by a member of the Security Council for a one-
year term. This member could be assisted by other
members, as appropriate. The chairman would report to the
Council the views expressed by participants in the
meetings. The monthly tentative forecast of work of the
Council should include an indication of the expected
schedule of such meetings.

The support of the Secretariat in the meetings of the
mechanism will be of fundamental importance. These
meetings should be announced in the Journal of the
United Nations. The agenda, as well as any relevant
information to help troop contributors consider issues
under deliberation, should be provided by the Secretariat
prior to the meetings.

The meetings arranged by the Secretariat to inform
troop contributors on issues related to peace-keeping
operations should, in view of their different nature,
continue to be held as they are today.

In various United Nations forums, we have been
involved in discussions on the issue with a view to
strengthening the Organization's role in this field. As a
parallel endeavour, and guided by the same overall
objectives of today's discussion, we have been
encouraging expansion of the membership of the Special
Committee on Peace-keeping Operations. We remain
ready to work with Member States, as well as with the
appropriate United Nations organs and the Secretariat, in
seeking the best solutions to enhance actions taken under
the Charter to further international peace and security.

