Sir Jeremy Greenstock: In my national capacity
may I warmly welcome you to the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. You have our full
support. May I express my delegation's gratitude for
the very constructive presidency of your predecessor,
Ambassador Tafrov.

I am extremely grateful to the Secretary-General
for joining us this morning on this important subject
and I would like to express my gratitude to him and
through him for the solid support which the Secretariat
has shown under his leadership over the past year.

I speak to you this morning against the sombre
background which the Secretary-General has so
eloquently set out. One year ago today, the CTC held
its first ever meeting to discuss how it would fulfil the
mandate set by the Security Council to monitor the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The task which faced us then was challenging;
to begin a dialogue with every Member State on
resolution 1373 (2001), to find out what measures
Governments had put in place already and what more
needed to be done to ensure that there was no support,
active or passive, for terrorism, and to work with the
resolve demanded by the Council's determination in
paragraph 8 of resolution 1373 (2001) to take all
necessary steps to ensure the full implementation of
that resolution.
The way in which the CTC has responded to this
challenge is well known to the Council through the
quarterly reports I have made on behalf of the
Committee, and through the CTC's 90-day work
programmes, the fifth of which, issued recently as
document S/2002/1075.

Cooperation has the first hallmark of the CTC's
modus operandi, because resolution 1373 (2001), while
mandatory on all Member States, has to be
implemented willingly by Governments to make a
difference. Dialogue and partnerships with
Governments is essential in order to be successful in
raising global standards against terrorism. The natural
ally of partnership is transparency, which I hope has
become our second hallmark.

The CTC is not a tribunal and does not judge
States, but it does expect every State to work at its
fastest possible speed to implement the far-reaching
obligations of resolution 1373 (2001). They therefore
all need to know, all the time, how the CTC is
operating and why.

There is still much more to do before terrorists
find that there is no safe haven, because the bar against
terrorism has been raised in every country. The CTC
will continue to offer encouragement, advice and
guidance to States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). It will focus, when reviewing reports or
working on assistance, on the areas which need to be
tackled first. For most States that will be by ensuring
that they have, first, legislation in place covering all
aspects of resolution 1373 (2001) and a process in hand
for ratifying as soon as possible the twelve
international conventions and protocols relating to
terrorism. Secondly, States must have effective
executive machinery for preventing and suppressing
terrorist financing.

The CTC will continue to coordinate and
facilitate the provision of technical assistance focusing
on these priority areas. There is now, on the CTC's web
site (www.un.org/sc/ctc) a comprehensive directory of
information and sources of assistance in the field of
counter-terrorism, which has been put together as a
tool for States. Our experts are in direct contact with
Permanent Missions to discuss the provision of
assistance. They will do whatever they can to help
States access the help they need, and you will find that
the experts may have their own ideas about where
assistance might be helpful, drawing on their
knowledge of what assistance programmes are
available, what best practice has been established
around the world and what gaps have been identified in
resolution 1373 (2001) implementation, in the State
concerned.

While the response from the United Nations
membership to resolution 1373 (2001) has been
remarkable, it has not yet quite been universal. Let me
draw the Council's attention to the fact that 16 Member
States have not yet filed a report with the CTC. Of
these, 7 have not made any kind of written contact;
they are: Chad, Dominica, Equatorial Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia, Swaziland and Tonga. The CTC is
actively following up, with a view to offering advice
and assistance to these States on preparing a report.
The CTC urges all these States to submit a report, and
to be in dialogue with the Committee on the steps
needed to implement resolution 1373 (2001).

The CTC does not expect any State to report that
it has fully implemented resolution 1373 (2001).
Indeed, as I have said before in the Council, the CTC
will not declare any State "fully compliant". But it does
expect every State to strengthen its capacity against
terrorism by implementing resolution 1373 (2001) at its
fastest capable speed.

Achieving this will be easier for individual States
if they work within the collective effort of their region.
Regional organizations must ensure that no gaps are
left within their overall territory. To help them in this
task, the CTC will deepen its relationships with
international, regional and sub-regional organizations
during the coming work period. It will invite them to
contribute information on their activities, which can be
collated so that each organization can be aware of, and
glean ideas from, the activities of sister organisations
around the world. We will work closely with them on
the provision of assistance.

The CTC will remain in touch with Sergio Vieira
de Mello, the new High Commissioner for Human
Rights, in the context of the Committee's wish to
remain fully aware of the interaction of its work with
human rights concerns.

Let me say something about how the global
environment for terrorists has changed since October
2001, when the CTC was created. Forty meetings,
eighty-three sub-committee meetings and nineteen
open briefings later, I am honoured to set out some of
the achievements in the counter-terrorism field to
which the CTC has contributed. As you will see from
the following examples, global activity on resolution
1373 (2001) is taking place far beyond the walls of
conference room 7, in virtually every capital of every
Member State of the United Nations.

At the national level Governments throughout the
world have responded to the challenge laid down in
resolution 1373 (2001) to prevent and suppress
terrorism. In almost every case, parliaments have
begun to consider or adopt new laws and Governments
have reviewed the strength of their institutions to fight
terrorism. As required by the resolution, States have
looked again at the 12 international conventions and
protocols related to terrorism. Ratifications have gone
up significantly since July a year ago. Then, only
Botswana and the United Kingdom had ratified all 12
instruments; today, 24 States have done so. We want
the pace to accelerate further.

At the regional level, States have worked together
in practical ways, often through their regional
organizations, to improve regional capacity against
terrorism. They have recognized that no country is safe
from terrorism if its neighbour is not. Let me give a
few examples. The European Union (EU), already a
well-connected region, has introduced new measures
aimed at tackling terrorism, such as the Common
European arrest warrant. Across the Atlantic, the
Organization of American States (OAS) has agreed to a
regional convention and has developed practical ways
of sharing best practice and coordinating on region-
wide issues such as border security.

Last month, members of the African Union
adopted an action plan that sets out their own
determination to fight terrorism. The CTC has had
constructive contact with the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Regional Forum of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations and Pacific
Islands Forum. We shall continue our exchanges with
over 30 international, regional and subregional
organizations from every region of the world. It is
welcome that they have tackled counter-terrorism, a
new area for many of those organizations, with
seriousness and determination.

At the global level, the CTC has enjoyed
unprecedented support from the United Nations
membership for its efforts to turn the global consensus
on fighting terrorism into practical action. One hundred
and seventy-four Member States and five others have
reported to the CTC on the action taken and planned,
and the dialogue has continued. The CTC has
responded to almost all of those first reports and has
begun to review the 86 follow-up reports that States
have provided. To date, the total number of reports
received by the CTC stands at 265. Awareness of what
we are doing, and of what we need to know, is close to
universal.

Cooperation between States, particularly in the
form of assistance, has increased. More and more
States and organizations are looking at what they have
to offer and are informing the Committee of their
willingness to help where needed. Many States have
begun to provide help, and others have moved quickly
to turn commitments into action on the ground. The
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the
Financial Action Task Force on Money-Laundering of
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development are developing programmes to help
States put in place measures to stop their financial
systems from being abused by terrorists. The
Commonwealth Secretariat, with major funding from
the United Kingdom and Canada, is offering help to its
46 members and others with legislative drafting. The
United States has already offered training to
representatives of over 48 countries.

Let me close by paying tribute to the work of all
members of the Committee, the Vice-Chairmen, the
experts and the Secretariat. I recognize the strains we
have placed on the Secretariat, but we have all had to
raise our game on this important subject. Everyone has
worked with dedication, good will and increasing
professionalism. I should particularly like to mention
for tribute the three leaving experts of our team,
Dr. Walter Gehr, Ms. Heidi Broekhuis and Mr. Lotfi
Daoues, who have all served with distinction on that
team. I should also like to pay tribute to the support
that I have had from my own delegation, notably from
Anna Clunes and Juliet Gilbert.

The Security Council has placed confidence in
the Bureau to continue for a further six-month period,
and I am grateful to the Council for that. I thank the
Vice-Chairmen, Ambassadors Koonjul, Lavrov and
Valdivieso, for steering the work of the CTC and its
subcommittees. Together we are determined to make
the next months even more productive.

