Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to welcome this opportunity today for
some States directly concerned by the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to express their views. I should like to
thank Mr. Annabi for the information that he provided.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and its main component, the
International Police Task Force, are carrying out their
activities discreetly but effectively. The task entrusted to
them by the Security Council is to establish the main
elements of a genuine State of law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That is the purpose of the International
Police Task Force in training local police officers and
integrating minority representatives into local police
forces. This is also the purpose of UNMIBH's more
recent contribution to the programme of reform of the
judicial structures, under the auspices of the High
Representative. The aim is for every citizen in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to have recourse to the police and the courts
in order to exercise his rights, without fear of
discriminatory treatment of his case as a result of ethnic
origin.

This also involves fighting the corruption and the
pressures that continue to hamper the development of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. UNMIBH continues to run into
strong obstructionist forces in implementing its mandate,
a task that remains difficult and that requires sustained
political and material support.

The existence of other crises in the region should not
distract attention from the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. France, which provides the International
Police Task Force with over 100 police officers, will
continue to support the Mission and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in their activities.

 

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for having
chosen a French Gendarmerie officer, General Coeurderoy,
to lead the International Police Task Force. General
Coeurderoy will be determined to build on the
achievements of his predecessors, whose activities we
would like once again to praise.

I would like to make four specific comments and to
put some questions to the Secretariat. My first comment
relates to the creation of the Border Service. As we see it,
the creation of such a service is essential to combat
smuggling and to build a genuine State. Unfortunately, the
High Representative himself had to impose the law creating
the service, since the Parliament had not passed the relevant
law. It is obviously regrettable that things happened in this
way, and this once again raises the fundamental question -
often raised in this forum, even by the High Representative
himself - of the need for the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina themselves to take hold of the future of their
own country.

The Joint Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
just reported to the Security Council on the implementation
of the agreements adopted here on 15 November 1999. This
development should be encouraged in order to give real
follow-up to the decisions adopted. Despite delays, and
thanks to the courageous decision of the High
Representative, the Border Service will come into being.
My question is this: could Mr. Annabi give us a precise
idea of the timetable and funding envisaged for the
establishment of that vital service?

My second question concerns the need to reform the
judicial structures. This question has already been raised by
the Ambassador of the United Kingdom. UNMIBH
contributes to that reform by carrying out assessments in
the context of a broader programme under the auspices of
the High Representative. That work should be completed by
the end of this year. What will then be the subsequent
stages of that reform process? Is it envisaged that UNMIBH
will continue to play a role in the later stages, and, if not,
what organizations would be involved in implementing the
reform?

My third remark concerns the proposal made by
UNMIBH, in the framework of the Stability Pact, to create
a police training college for all South-Eastern Europe. The
training of police officers is obviously one of the important
tasks that has been carried out by the United Nations in
numerous missions in the Balkans. We should like to have
more details as to the modalities and objectives of such a
school.

My fourth and last comment is of a more general
nature. The French delegation would be interested to
receive an appraisal from the Secretariat as to the effects
on the work of UNMIBH of regional developments, such
as the situation in Kosovo and, as the report notes, the
political changes in Croatia.

The value of these meetings undoubtedly lies in
getting detailed information from the Secretariat. But
above and beyond that, these meetings should also offer
us an opportunity to lend our full support to United
Nations missions, in particular by supporting their
activities on specific points. Two particularly noteworthy
matters are addressed in the report before us today. The
first has to do with the difficulties encountered in canton
7, Mostar, and the second with the recruitment of police
from minority groups in the Republika Srpska. On those
two points it seems to us that the Council should call on
those responsible to ensure that they act in accordance
with their obligations within the shortest possible period
of time.

