Mr. Bessho (Japan): The situation across the Middle
East remains volatile. Through a long-term struggle for
peace and stability in the region, we have learned that
military solutions never provide a sustainable solution
and that creating a political solution is the only way
to bring about lasting peace and stability. Sadly, we
continue to witness a surge of violence and hostile
actions in the Middle East and North Africa.

During its two-year term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, which ended in
December 2017, Japan consistently stressed the
importance of the peaceful resolution of conflicts
based on the relevant Security Council resolutions
and other international obligations. We continue to be
committed to the maintenance of peace and security
in the Middle East, and we intend to strengthen our
political engagement to stabilize the region.

With regard to the Middle East peace process,
His Excellency Mr. Taro Kono, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan, visited Israel and Palestine in late
December 2017. He had candid discussions with Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, respectively.
In both meetings, Minister Kono articulated Japan's
unchanged position supporting a two-State solution
and the premise that all issues, including the status
of Jerusalem, should be resolved through negotiations
among the concerned parties. Minister Kono also urged
both parties to constructively engage in negotiations,
and, in that context, he underscored that the role of the
United States would continue to be important.

In parallel with those political dialogues, Japan
continues its unique confidence-building measures.
The Jericho Agro Industrial Park, with Palestine
and Israel's participation, as well as Japan's, has
entered a new phase, expanding its scope to cover the
information and communication technology sector and
the facilitation of its logistics. Japan will also continue
its long-standing Youth Invitation Program from Israel
and the Palestinian Territories, which is celebrating its
twentieth anniversary this year. The spirit behind such
confidence-building measures is that investment in
people and enduring efforts will eventually bear fruit.
Although it may seem a roundabout way to bringing
about peace, we believe that those confidence-building
measures contribute to creating an atmosphere
conducive to meaningful negotiations.

Although we welcome the resumption of electricity
supply to Gaza, the humanitarian situation there remains
dire. Desperation and frustration felt on the ground can
lead to the instability of the security situation. Japan is
committed to supporting the improvement of the living
conditions of the people of Gaza. At the same time, we
will also continue supporting the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, which contributes to maintaining the stability of
the wider region.

We are concerned about the heightened tension and
frustration among parties. At this critical juncture, the
international community must be united in upholding
a two-State solution through negotiations based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions and agreements
previously reached by the parties. We expect that the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians meeting to
be held at the end of this month will provide a good
opportunity to that end. Japan, for its part, will continue
its engagement through its three pillars of political
dialogue with the parties, confidence-building in the
region and economic assistance to the Palestinians.

