Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October and to say how much we appreciated
the leadership of Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo last
month. Our thanks go to him.

The French authorities are extremely concerned
by the ongoing deterioration in the situation in the
northern part of the Gaza Strip over the past week. The
large-scale Israeli military operation initiated in the
evening of 28 September in Jabaliya, Beit Hanoun and
Beit Lahiya has produced great casualties and is
unjustifiable. We have heard with dismay that at least
one third of the victims have been under the age of 18.

The French authorities condemn the
disproportionate use of force by Israel and the massive
deployment of troops and armoured vehicles in densely
populated urban areas. We also deplore Israel's practice
of targeted assassination of Palestinian activists. That
practice is contrary to international conventions and
democratic values and can only fuel the spiral of
violence.

As an occupying Power, Israel must act strictly
within the framework of international law and must
comply, in particular, with the Fourth Geneva
Convention. It must make sure that there is ongoing,
unfettered access by humanitarian organizations, in
particular the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), to
the civilian populations that are affected. At a time
when reports note that several UNRWA schools in
Jabaliya have been occupied by Israeli forces, we
reaffirm the need for Israel to respect and protect
UNRWA facilities, in particular its schools and clinics.

The French authorities also condemn the
continued launching of home-made rockets by armed
Palestinian groups against Israeli territory. Such acts
are entirely unacceptable. The Palestinian Authority
must put an end to those launchings and prosecute the
perpetrators. It must strongly reaffirm that violence is
counterproductive and that no cause can justify blind
terrorist attacks against civilians.

The violence that has been unleashed in the last
six days has imperilled the hope of peace brought by
the prospects of a withdrawal from Gaza. Withdrawing
from Gaza only after destroying it can only provoke
more hatred, violence and despair. France calls upon
Israel to put an end its deadly actions and calls upon
the Palestinians to give up violence, which leads
nowhere.

Following the Quartet's appeal to the two parties
on 22 September, France appeals to reason. Only a
mutual ceasefire and the prompt resumption of
negotiations can break the sterile and tragic cycle of
violence and promote the solution of two States, Israel
and Palestine, living side by side in peace and security.

I shall conclude by saying that we have taken
note of the draft resolution submitted by Ambassador
Baali. We hope that discussions can begin on that basis
in order to reach, if not consensus, at least the broadest
possible agreement.

