Mr. Mesdoua (Algeria) (spoke in French): It is a
very pleasant duty for me, Sir, to congratulate you on the
unprecedented initiative you have taken today. Despite the
fact that our statements have been limited to five minutes
per delegation, it shows the importance that your country,
and you personally, attach to Africa and its recovery.

Whenever we hold a debate on Africa, Algeria, as an
African State and a member of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), feels compelled to express once
again its frustrations vis-a-vis the Council, whose attitude
has in recent months has, unfortunately, been
characterized by a lack of interest - even enthusiasm -
with regard to African issues, although during that same
period it showed remarkable speed and great
determination in deploying operations in other regions of
the world.

African States therefore welcome the holding of this
meeting which we hope, far from being an exercise in
ritual speech-making, will respond to their concerns and
expectations through the establishment of a genuine
partnership that goes beyond words and good intentions.
For us, that means effective cooperation and the full
participation of Africa through the involvement of the
chairmanship of the OAU and of the African Group,
whose opinions and concerns should be taken into
account.

For several years Africa has accorded priority to
strengthening its ability to prevent, manage and resolve
conflict, and the OAU has become fully involved in many
parts of the continent, as was shown at its recent summit,
held in July 1999 in Algiers. The fact that Africa has
decided to take control and fully to assume its
responsibilities does not mean that the international
community - the United Nations and, especially, the
Security Council, which the Charter has given
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security - is relieved of its obligations to Africa. This is
particularly important, as the United Nations has acquired
unquestionable experience and expertise in peacekeeping,
and it would be regrettable if we were not able to benefit
from it. That is why Africa has always called for the
establishment of close and fruitful cooperation with this
body.

 

One of the key areas where it is possible to develop a
special relationship between the Council and other parts of
the United Nations with regard to conflicts in Africa is that
of peacekeeping, where, because of its knowledge of
African problems and its experience, which has been
proved in the field, the OAU is in a position to contribute
to the resolution of conflicts. The Security Council, for its
part, can lend its support to the efforts of both the
chairmanship of the OAU and African States through
subregional organizations or at the bilateral level.

From that standpoint, the proposal of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations to set up a working group to
strengthen the African capacity for peacekeeping was
warmly welcomed by African delegations, since its
objective is to support, in particular, the activity of the
OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, to enable African countries to benefit from
logistic and financial support and to develop their
peacekeeping capacities. In August 1999 the African Group
submitted its own proposals in this regard, and it is still
awaiting a response. The establishment of such a group
would, without undoubtedly contribute to the development
of cooperation between the United Nations and the OAU in
this essential area, and to building a genuine partnership.

We believe that for such a partnership to be viable and
workable it should be based on regular and constant
coordination between the Security Council, on the one
hand, and on the other, the Secretary-General of the OAU,
the current Chairman of the OAU and the Office of the
Permanent Observer for the OAU to the United Nations, as
well as the chairmanship of the African Group. The Council
would then be able to obtain the views and opinions of the
Organization of African Unity on the best way to deal with
a given situation. My delegation supports your proposal,
Mr. President, to create a mechanism to enable the Council
and the OAU to work together. The United Nations liaison
office at OAU headquarters, which was set up in 1998, is
in the process of playing a useful and effective coordinating
role. We believe that it should be further strengthened.
In the same context, preventive action by the Council
should be further strengthened, as was clearly affirmed
during the meeting on 29 November. In this regard, we
should point out that in order to be effective, and to benefit
from the necessary legitimacy, any United Nations initiative
to prevent conflict on the continent should be taken in
accordance with the principles of the Charter, especially
that of respecting the sovereignty of States. The adherence
to those principles of the protagonists and parties to a
conflict is indispensable for the success of any action taken
in this regard. Indeed, in such cases, as in any conflict
prevention or peacekeeping operation, the consent of the
State concerned and hence its cooperation are absolutely
necessary. That principle also applies to all situations in
which it might be necessary to provide humanitarian
assistance.

We believe that the prompt reaction of the Security
Council to conflict situations in the African continent is
crucial. The Security Council must, in fact, be able to
react rapidly and effectively to peacekeeping problems in
Africa. To that end, the Council should respond to peace
agreements concluded in Africa by the early deployment
of observer or peacekeeping missions. That is a key
element. In this regard, we recall the events surrounding
the adoption of the draft resolution on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which, in the end, did not
authorize the deployment recommended by the Secretary-
General.

Particular attention should be given to the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, which feed
conflict situations.

Another issue which we believe is particularly
important is the problem of resources. Recent experience
has shown their influence and impact on the dependability
of the peace processes and on post-conflict peace-
building. In this regard, the proposal to establish a special
United Nations trust fund for Africa deserves close
attention. Such a fund could provide regular assistance for
OAU conflict-prevention activities, as well as finance
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants during peacekeeping
operations. Innovative means of financing could be
sought, as could new ways and means to further mobilize
the donor community.

Those are a few of the proposals which the
chairmanship of the OAU wishes to make at this stage of
the debate. We hope that, thanks to this debate, the
Council will be able to contribute to the development of
a genuine partnership for peace in Africa.
