Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to express my delegation's high
appreciation for the way in which your country, Sir, has
led the work of the Security Council this month. The
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico
has considerably enhanced the quality of this debate.

My delegation notes with great satisfaction the
Secretary-General's personal contribution and the
diligent participation of the Deputy Secretary-General.
We see all this as strong evidence of the recognition of
the gravity of the situation of children in armed
conflict. We pay tribute to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, and her entire team, as
well as to the task leaders of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, for their untiring efforts and
praiseworthy self-sacrifice in discharging the heavy
burden entrusted to them.

The Secretary-General's very disturbing annual
report (S/2009/158), which Ms. Coomaraswamy
eloquently presented to the Council, says a great deal
about the scale of the challenge posed by the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict and
of the massive violations of their human rights. We
welcome the commitment of the members of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
charged with responsibility on this issue. They have
played a significant role in achieving progress in the
implementation of the action plans adopted by parties,
in cooperation with the mechanism, thus demonstrating
the great utility of the mechanism in assisting affected
children.

The invaluable contribution of UNICEF to the
implementation of child protection in the field, in
conditions that are well known to be extremely
difficult, is a particular credit to its leaders and staff at
headquarters and in the field. To my country, Benin -
which negotiated and co-sponsored resolution 1612
(2005) in the hope of putting a rapid end to the
aforementioned phenomena - their upsurge during the
reporting period is most alarming. The situation
requires bold measures to increase the pressure on
parties to conflicts that continue to commit grave
violations of children's rights. In that respect, the
Security Council should use the instruments at its
disposal to obtain the cooperation of unrepentant
violators of children's rights.

There is an urgent need to further develop the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in order to ensure
that it covers all crimes committed against children and
to end the prevailing use of double standards. My
delegation advocates the inclusion on the list of criteria
of the six identified violations of children's rights, to
include the no less horrendous practice of sexual
violence against children. Such practices are

sufficiently serious for the International Criminal Court
to involve itself by initiating proceedings against
perpetrators in cases where national jurisdictions are
unable to provide justice to victims.

The necessary arrangements must be made to
ensure that children exposed to such reprehensible
practices are not abandoned to their sad fate. The
responsibility to assist, which is incumbent on the
international community, requires action. These crimes
are part and parcel of the responsibility to protect that
it must fulfil through the competent entities, which
must use the means at their disposal. Peacekeeping
operations should be fully up to speed in that respect.
We note the briefing on that issue by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alain le Roy.

In all circumstances, there is a need to end
impunity for crimes against children in armed conflict.
The United Nations should fully exploit every
opportunity for action under resolution 1612 (2005). If
there should prove to be a need at this stage of its
implementation for an additional resolution to ensure
the universality of the mechanism and to enhance its
effectiveness in the fight to protect children in armed
conflict effectively, no artificial obstacles should be
raised to hinder its adoption.

We must give serious consideration to
strengthening national mechanisms for effective
follow-up and assistance to affected children.
Appropriate assistance programmes should be
established at the national and local levels to ensure the
rehabilitation and lasting social reintegration of
demobilized children. The testimony of Ms. Grace
Akallo has shown us the path we must follow in order
to provide a better future to children mistreated in
armed conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation associates itself
with the presidential statement to be adopted at the end
of this meeting. The deadline which the Security
Council has set for finalizing its deliberations on the
issue of extending the annexes to the report represents
a commitment that we duly note. Beyond the efforts
under way to increase pressure on violators of
children's rights in armed conflict, the best form of
protection would be the cessation of such conflicts. We
have always cherished that hope. We must enhance
diplomatic measures to reconcile belligerents and to

help countries at war to return rapidly to the path of
peace.

