Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
Rwanda would like to congratulate you, our colleague
and friend, Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso, the
representative of that friendly country Colombia, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of August. We welcome the outstanding
quality of the work of this body, the result of your great
intellectual and diplomatic skills.

We greatly appreciate the briefing that
Mr. Annabi, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, provided. I believe that his
analyses, suggestions and proposals aimed at
strengthening the ceasefire in the region and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and at creating a
climate of mutual trust and confidence deserve close
attention.

Rwanda welcomes the initiatives taken by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to achieve peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout
the Great Lakes region. In this context, it will be an
honour for us to welcome the Secretary-General and
Mrs. Nane Arman, as well as the members of the
important delegation that will be accompanying him, to
Kigali on 3 and 4 September. We are steadfastly
determined to support the endeavours of the Secretary-
General, and we hope that all the efforts that he will
undertake to resolve the crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will meet with success. We will
contribute to the best of our ability.

Rwanda also welcomes the success of the
preparatory meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue,
held in Gaborone, Botswana. We congratulate Sir
Ketumile Masire, former head of State of Botswana,
for his tireless and wise efforts, which, as the Council
knows, have been severely tested time and time
again - though wisdom has prevailed. If today we are
pleased with the success of this pre-inter-Congolese
dialogue in Gaborone, I believe it is the fruit of that
wisdom which we recognize today, which President
Masire has displayed. We thank him for it, and we are
all at his side. The benefits of the success of the pre-
inter-Congolese dialogue belong, first of all, to the
Congolese themselves, of all political leanings- the
Government, rebels, the unarmed opposition, civil
society, the people as a whole, without any political or
ethnic exclusion.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, that great
country with some 50 million people, has considerable
human potential. There are intellectuals of a high level;
there are very talented political men. Unfortunately,
after 32 years of Mobutu's dictatorship, these people
were silenced, paralysed, frozen. Now the sun has
risen, and the human warmth that has always been a
strong point of the Congolese people is again evident.
They are working hand in hand to set their country on
the right course, thanks to this inter-Congolese
dialogue.

The nine neighbouring countries of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are certainly the
second beneficiary of this inter-Congolese dialogue. As
a result of this inter-Congolese dialogue the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will, we hope, have
representative political leadership able to manage and
administer this large country and to set up mechanisms
for exercising political power and to keep the entire
Congolese territory under control.

In this way the Congolese and neighbouring
countries will be reassured that there will be
governmental interlocutors who can rise to the task of
administering the Congolese territory. In this way the
Congolese territory will no longer be used as a rear
base for attacks by negative forces, including the
planners and implementers of the Rwandan genocide
who carried out their infamous acts in the countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including Rwanda. This is how, at least in part, the
sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
will be assured.

The other beneficiaries of the upcoming inter-
Congolese dialogue will be the international
community, which will heave a sigh of relief to see,
finally, a positive outcome to the Congolese crisis, so
that international solidarity can prevail to promote
economic and social development in the Great Lakes
region and Africa as a whole.

Perhaps, Mr. President, you will tell me that this
is all well and good. That is quite true; it is very good,
but we must never lose sight for one moment of the
fact that we Rwandans have had our inter-Rwandese
dialogue, which lasted some two years in Arusha. That
dialogue led to an outstanding text, an unequalled
document which Rwanda sorely needed, but the fateful
moment came when one of the political leaders of
Rwanda, the late President Habyarimana, a signatory to
this text, as soon as he had signed it simply called it,
publicly, a piece of paper. He was in a province in the
north of Rwanda, where he was holding a public
meeting. He stated there that he and his followers, the
Interahamwe militia and the former members of the
Rwandan armed forces, would come down like
lightning and strike anyone in their path, reducing them
to dust. Everything disappeared in a flash - the text,
everything. And in this view of the whole world.

We hope that unfortunate event - which was due
to poor political leadership in Rwanda at the time, after
our dialogue - which we experienced will never, ever
happen to our neighbours and brothers in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We wish them
every success in this inter-Congolese dialogue, and we
hope that the agreements they sign at the African
Union, in Addis Ababa, will all be implemented in full
sincerity and openness for the good of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and for the Congolese people as
a whole.

