Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like to begin by
commending the United States on its successful
presidency in September. We also congratulate Bolivia
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and wish it luck
and success. My delegation thanks the Permanent
Representatives of Bolivia, Kazakhstan and Peru for
their respective comprehensive briefings on the fight
against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We recognize their leadership and
that of their teams in heading up the three Committees,
which are doing vital and extremely complex work that
shapes the credibility and effectiveness of the Council.

Terrorism is one of the greatest threats to peace and
security in the world. Through the briefings that we have
just heard, we are aware of the progressive ability of
terrorist groups to join and assimilate into anti-terrorist
cooperation initiatives, adapt technological innovations
and collaborate with international criminal networks
and armed groups, among others. In that regard, the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001), on counter-terrorism, especially its
indispensable work as an informative and strategic
forum for Member States. We also highlight the role of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
in monitoring and supporting the implementation by
Member States of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and other relevant resolutions.

We urge that the role of the Committee be
strengthened through greater collaboration with regional
organizations by placing a sharper focus on building
the counter-terrorism capacity of Member States
and regions in need; as well as with a more inclusive
approach towards Member States, communities and
subregions that are affected by terrorism and run the
risk of becoming sanctuaries for those who practice it.
In that way, we can strengthen preventive efforts and
avoid blind spots in the global fight against terrorism.
For that reason, we also want to recognize the growing
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in the Central African region, among other
initiatives. We likewise recognize the growing work of
the Committees pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups and entities, and the important
analytical and follow-up work of its Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team.

Ambassador Kairat Umarov's briefing and the
Secretary-General's seventh report (S/2018/770) on the
D'aesh threat to international peace and security, which
we are analysing at this meeting, confirm the disruptive
potential of that group for international peace and
security, in particular through its global network
of regional affiliates, its 20,000 to 30,000 foreign
terrorist fighters, including women and children, and
its increasingly deplorable suicide attack methods. In
that regard, we commend the work of the Committee as
a cautious supervisor of the sanctions list its increasing
collaboration with other sanctions committees. We
also welcome the appointment of Mr. Daniel Kipfer
Fasciati as Ombudsperson of the Committee. We trust
-indeed, encourage * that the Monitoring Team and
the Ombudsperson will step up their collaboration
with Member States and regional initiatives through
sustainable strategies.

With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, I
would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity
they offer by briefing us on their contributions to the
implementation ofthe resolution. Since its establishment,
the 1540 Committee has endeavoured to raise awareness
of the need to eliminate nuclear, chemical, biological
weapons, their delivery systems and related materials.
The Committee assists States with legislation, training
and equipment and facilitates cooperation between
the various regional organizations and Member States
with a view to improving their practices and general
preparedness to prevent the risks of non-State actors,
specifically terrorists, illegally acquiring material or
dual-use technologies, or trafficking in them. Despite
all those efforts, the terrorist threat remains real, and the
mere idea of non-State actors having access to weapons
of mass destruction is a matter of great concern.

Scientific and technological progress, together with
the globalization of world trade, poses new challenges
for monitoring, including the financing, acquisition,
possession, development, transport, transfer or use
of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
delivery systems, particularly for terrorism purposes.
In that context, the 1540 Committee is an ideal platform
for international cooperation to establish strong
international barriers that prevent proliferation and, in
particular, that prevent non-State actors from accessing
weapons of mass destruction.

To avoid proliferation, it is imperative that the
institutions in charge of enforcing local cross-border
controls have officials trained in the technical and
legal tools that govern the matter. In that context,
we highlight the work done by the Expert Group of
the 1540 Committee, which, through workshops and
seminars, has promoted the sharing of experiences
and practices according to the needs of each State
with respect to handling non-proliferation activities.
In the same vein, Malabo will host its first workshop
in December organized by the 1540 Committee, in
collaboration with the Government of Equatorial
Guinea and the Office for Disarmament Affairs, to
support improving the capabilities of our country's
national institutions in the area of customs services
and border control on non-proliferation activities. We
reiterate the need for States with greater capabilities in
the area of customs and border control to share their
experiences, technologies and best practices with the
States that are the least advanced in those areas. The
detonation of a nuclear, chemical or biological weapon
would have a global impact. Furthermore, terrorists can
take advantage of the deficiencies in the surveillance
capabilities of developing States to bring in such
weapons and attack the interests of developed States.

So far, 181 countries have submitted their national
implementation reports on resolution 1540 (2004).
We congratulate the Committee for its hard work and
encourage it to continue spreading the Committee's
objectives so that the remaining States also comply
with the commitments and purposes of resolution 1540
(2004).

The fight against terrorism and for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction are
the responsibility of all States, because no one can
face those scourges alone. The Republic of Equatorial
Guinea notes with concern the growth and evolution of
terrorist groups in the world, and especially in Africa,
where many countries are committed to sustainable
development and peace. For that reason, we encourage
States to continue investing in the implementation of the
resolutions of these three Security Council Sanctions
Committees. We also encourage States to commit to
sustainable development, which is the best prevention.

Lastely, Equatorial Guinea upholds its commitment
to continue fighting terrorism and working for the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, as
weall to collaborate on those goals insofar as possible.

