The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Hashi
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/89, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous decisions concerning the situation in
Somalia, in particular the statement by its
President (S/PRST/2004/43) dated 19 November
2004.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General of 18 February 2005
(8/2005/89), reaffirms its commitment to a
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
situation in Somalia and its respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia, consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress made in the Somali national
reconciliation process, in particular the ongoing
relocation efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG), expects further progress in
this regard and stresses the need for the
international community to provide strong
political, financial and capacity-building support
for these efforts.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in support of the TFG. The Council
reiterates its support for the African Union's
efforts in assisting the process of transition in
Somalia. The Council recognizes the African
Union's readiness to play an important role in a
future peace support mission in Somalia. Such a
mission must be carefully considered and planned
and would require the support of the Somali
people.

"The Security Council urges all Somali
factions and militia leaders to cease hostilities
and encourages them and the TFG to enter into
immediate negotiations for a comprehensive and
verifiable ceasefire agreement leading to final
disarmament, and welcomes the willingness of
the United Nations to provide advice in this
regard.

"The Security Council expresses its
gratitude to all those donors who have supported
the peace process in Somalia and encourages
donor countries and regional and subregional
organizations to contribute to the reconstruction
and rehabilitation of Somalia, in particular
through efforts coordinated by United Nations
agencies.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the Coordination and
Monitoring Committee (CMC), chaired jointly by
the Prime Minister of the TFG and the United
Nations, through which donor countries and
regional and subregional organizations can
provide support to the efforts of the TFG.

"The Security Council stresses that
improving the humanitarian situation is an
essential component of support for the peace and
reconciliation process. The Council strongly

believes that ensuring humanitarian access to all
Somalis in need and providing guarantees for the

safety and security of aid workers is

an
the

immediate priority and obligation of the TFG.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
of the United Nations Political Office in Somalia
(UNPOS) and its leading role in coordinating
support for the TFG to implement the agreements
reached at the Somali National Reconciliation
Conference and establish peace and stability in
Somalia. The Security Council takes note of the
need to expand the United Nations presence as
proposed in the report of the Secretary-General of
18 February 2005 (S/2005/89). The Council
concurs with the Secretary-General that a further
enhanced role for the Organization in Somalia
must be incremental and should be based on the
outcome of discussions with the TFG.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the peace process in Somalia and the
commitment of the United Nations to assist the
regional and subregional efforts in this regard."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/ll.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.

