Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, Sir, allow me to congratulate you for your
leadership of the Security Council during the month of
July. We express our appreciation for the holding of this
open debate.

We support the statement made by the delegation
of Nicaragua on behalf of Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people and
the statement to be made by the representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba expresses its deep concern about the situation
in the Middle East, which is plagued by violence,
interference in its internal affairs, foreign aggression
and long-term conflicts, such as the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict - the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. It is
time to settle the historic debt owed to the State of
Palestine and restore the inalienable rights of its people,
which have been violated by Israel during halfa century
of occupation, repression, collective punishment,
destruction and confiscation of Palestinian land and
property, forced displacement and settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories. We are compelled to
recall what our Commander-in-Chief Fidel Castro Ruz,
Leader of the Cuban Revolution, said on 12 October
1979 here at the United Nations:

"Pushed off their land, expelled from their own
country, scattered throughout the world, persecuted
and murdered, the heroic Palestinians are a vivid
example of sacrifice and patriotism, living symbols
of the most terrible crime of our era." (A/34/PV3], para. 24)

The Security Council must take concrete steps
to end that historic injustice by urgently ending
Israel's occupation of Palestinian and other Arab
territories dating back to 1967. The approximately
decade-long blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has
led to a profound socioeconomic and humanitarian
crisis affecting 2 million Palestinian civilians, must be
halted immediately, and obligations under international
humanitarian law must be fulfilled.

A two-State solution and a comprehensive, just,
peaceful and lasting settlement of the Palestinian
question will not be possible as long as Israel continues
to violate its obligations under international law and
the Charter of the United Nations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, as well
as the relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016).

Cuba also demands the end of the occupation of
the Syrian Golan. We reiterate that any steps or actions
taken, or to be taken, so as to change the legal, physical
and demographic status and institutional structure of
the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as Israel's measures
to exercise its jurisdiction and administration in that
territory, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements, the Charter and the relevant
United Nations resolutions, including resolution 497
(1981) and the Fourth Geneva Convention, as well as an
act of defiance of the international community.

Cuba takes note of the initiatives to resume direct
peace negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis
and the recently concluded agreement with regard to
supplying water to Palestinian territories. Cuba will
continue to defend the right of the Palestinians to
self-determination; a free, independent and sovereign
State, with its capital in East Jerusalem, within the pre-
1967 borders; and the return of Palestinian refugees.
We will also continue to support the entry of Palestine
as a full-fledged Member of the United Nations. We
hope that, in the context of the fiftieth anniversary of
the Israeli occupation and the tenth anniversary of the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, the Security Council will
live up to its responsibility and fulfil its debt to the
Palestinian people.

