Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, I should like to begin by thanking you
for having taken this initiative and Peter Piot and Jean-
Marie Guehenno for their respective briefings.

It is timely that we should have this discussion
two years after the Council's last discussion on
HIV/AIDS, when the Secretary-General's latest report
on progress towards implementation of the Declaration
of Commitment on HIV/AIDS - adopted at the special
session of the General Assembly - makes such stark
reading. Simply put, we are failing to tackle the global
HIV/AIDS pandemic effectively. We know now that
the 2005 targets set by the special session of the
General Assembly will not be met. Yet, more than ever,
we know what must be done.

This is unacceptable. We must bridge the gap
between our knowledge and effective practice and
implementation. Cementing the collective political will
to achieve this is our challenge, and we must act
quickly.

I have heard it argued that the Security Council
has no business discussing HIV/AIDS, as though
resolution 1308 (2000) did not demonstrate vividly
why this pandemic affects international peace and
security. People living in conflict are at greater risk of
sexual violence. Demobilizing forces pose a particular
risk. Military forces tend to have higher infection rates
than civilians. If life expectancy is falling by a
generation in a decade - let me repeat that: falling by
a generation in a decade - how can that not be a threat
to the security of the State?

The United Kingdom believes that the scale of
the challenge demands responses from the different
organs of the United Nations and from its agencies. It
is not a question of who should act, but of whether
collectively we all are doing as much as we can and as
much as needs to be done.

Of course, there are institutional sensitivities
around this issue, but HIV/AIDS, from the very
beginning, has been a sensitive issue - sensitive for
individuals, for families and communities; sensitive
also for our Governments and for regional and
international institutions. But not addressing it will not
make it go away.

With that in mind, I believe that there is a
fundamental question for the Security Council: can and
should we be doing more to support the Secretary-
General's leadership in combating the global
emergency that is HIV/AIDS?

In addressing that question, I should like to make
three key points today: first, the need for an assessment
of the link between human security and HIV/AIDS;
secondly, the need for more thorough monitoring and
evaluation of the progress being made towards
implementing resolution 1308 (2000); and, thirdly, the
need for substantive Security Council sessions to be
scheduled in 2004 and 2005 to explore those issues
further.

Before turning to those issues, I should like to say
something about HIV/AIDS and peacekeeping
operations in the context of resolution 1308 (2000). It
is now widely accepted that a nationally owned,
multisectoral approach is necessary for tackling
HIV/AIDS effectively. Such an approach should
include the civil and military security sectors, as well
as the health, education and other relevant sectors.

But at the same time, we are placing greater
emphasis on finding regional solutions to regional
conflicts, including the deployment of peacekeeping
troops from concerned regions. We know that, in some
of the worst-affected HIV/AIDS regions, the infection
rate in the general population can be as high as 37 per
cent. But in some areas, we know that the rate among
civil and military security personnel can be two to five
times greater than the rate in the general population.

Not only does this pose a risk to national security
and stability, it also undermines the potential for
regional peacekeeping operations in the worst-affected
areas. As a shrinking pool of adult workers is available,
and as the number of orphans increases dramatically, it
is not hard to predict a future in which many countries
and regions will face severe difficulties maintaining
their internal stability and increasing their global
influence as they struggle to cope with the impact. All
that undermines the potential for peacekeeping.

We therefore warmly welcome and endorse the
work of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and others in
supporting Governments in their efforts to develop
national strategies for raising awareness and to develop
training programmes and testing and counselling
services for controlling the spread of HIV/AIDS among
civil and security services.

I think that it is indeed encouraging to hear of the
progress which has been achieved. It is essential that
the work of UN AIDS and DPKO continue with the full
support and backing of the Security Council. But we
also believe that it is important that more work be
undertaken to identify the scale of the problem and the
impact of the response so far. Consideration of lessons
learned will help us to identify what more needs to be
done, by whom and when.

If I could turn to wider issues, I should like to
quote the United States Secretary of State, Colin
Powell, at the special session on HIV/AIDS in
September, when he described HIV/AIDS in the
following terms:

"more devastating than any terrorist attack or
any weapons of mass destruction as cruel as
any tyrant AIDS can destroy countries and
destabilize entire regions." (see A/58/PV.4)

The United Kingdom shares those sentiments.
HIV/AIDS has enormous potential to unravel societies,
destroy economies and roll back the development gains
of the last 30 years. In the worst affected regions, and
in particular in sub-Saharan Africa, it attacks the
human resource base and erodes the institutional
capacity that is vital to enduring stability and security.
The recent food crisis in Africa is only one symptom of
the effect of HIV/AIDS on human security.

The Security Council must be clear that it is
fulfilling its potential in working collectively with the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council to ensure that the United Nations system's
overall response is coherent, integrated and effective.
Understanding more fully the link between human
security and HIV/AIDS is a potential knowledge gap.
We should act to close this. Only when our
understanding of this issue is enriched through
discussion and debate will we be able to pinpoint the
full scope and range of the Security Council's potential
role.
But we need to minimize the threat we have just
heard about, to United Nations peacekeeping and to
societies where peacekeepers are operating. Let us
open ourselves to this challenge and in doing so
provide a powerful incentive to action in support of the
Secretary-General's leadership on this issue. I would
like to make three specific proposals: first, that in
2004, on the basis of a progress report from the
Secretary-General, the Security Council should hold a
further discussion on HIV/AIDS to consider how we
might strengthen our response to Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000). Secondly, we should draw on
the experience of UNAIDS, DPKO, civil society
groups and others in order to offer a clear evidence
base for the links between peace, security and
HIV/AIDS and, crucially, with suggestions for action.
Thirdly, we should ask the Secretary-General to bring
both strands together in a definitive assessment for
consideration by the Security Council in 2005.

In conclusion, I would like to recall the
Secretary-General's words to the General Assembly's
follow-up to the outcome of the twenty-sixth special
session, in September:

"We cannot claim that competing challenges are
more important or more urgent. We cannot accept
that 'something else came up' that forced us to
place AIDS on the back burner. Something else
will always come up. That is why we must always
keep AIDS at the top of our political and practical
agenda". (A/58/PV.3, p. 3)

Two weeks before World Aids Day, let us send a
clear signal of the Security Council's determination to
help the Secretary-General maintain HIV/AIDS on that
front burner.

