Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jeffrey Feltman for presenting the second
report (S/2016/1136) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We note the
productive start to the work of the Security Council's
new facilitator on the implementation of the resolution,
the Permanent Representative of Italy, Mr. Sebastiano
Cardi. We are also grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Spain for the important work that he
undertook previously on this very important resolution.

We highlight once again that the report of the
Secretary-General used less unsubstantiated data and
unverified information from the media that could not
be checked or confirmed than the first report (see S/2016/589). The new report has become more fact-
based, impartial and neutral than the first. However, the
text continues to include some elements that can raise
serious questions. There are also repetitions, creating
artificial emphasis.

The main shortcoming of the report is that the
Secretariat ignored Tehran's wishes to include in it
information on the actual problems related to meeting
sanctions-lifting obligations in the framework of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). As in
the first report, we note a clear slant towards issues of
implementing annex B aimed at maintaining limits on
the Islamic Republic of Iran. The result is a one-sided
and equivocal report.

Although the report is submitted pursuant to
resolution 2231 (2015), the references made in it are only
to annex B, which is actually a separate statement ofthe

5+l group. Let us not forget that, on 16 January 2016,
the Security Council drew up a special note instructing
the Secretary-General to submit reports. The note refers
to the entire resolution 2231 (2015), and not to separate
parts of it, in particular annex B. We suggest that, if
there are any doubts or questions about the scope, the
structure or individual elements of the report, then the
Secretary-General can, and must, approach the Security
Council for appropriate clarifications.

Furthermore, that procedure has already been used
by the Secretary-General, as reported in the report,
with regard to the issue of the temporary removal of
conventional weapons that are subject to restriction. We
call upon the Secretary-General to monitor the respect
for paragraph 27 of resolution 2231 (2015), which
clearly emphasizes the non-precedent-setting nature of
the provisions of the JCPOA, given that there have been
attempts to use the exclusive agreements in the JCPOA
in other contexts. A number of non-governmental
organizations have been trying to promote ways in which
the JCPOA could be used to enhance the International
Atomic Energy Agency's (IAEA) safeguards system
and advance nuclear disarmament. Such arbitrary
actions must be monitored.

As before, we continue to call for a change in the
conceptual approach to the preparation of the report,
which presents all information in a negative tone. First
and foremost, the document should help to establish
and enhance conditions that would lead to a successful
and lasting implementation of the JCPOA, which would
be the most important diplomatic achievement.

The Russian Federation is generally satisfied with
the results that have been achieved in the year since the
start of the implementation of the J CPOA. The working
mechanisms of the Joint Commission have started
functioning and have been working satisfactorily. In
our view, the Commission is effectively addressing
emerging issues.

We believe that Iran is fully complying with its
obligations, which is reflected in the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency. The occasional
technical problems that have emerged are being
addressed effectively, and the most recent clear example
of that is the approval by the Joint Commission of the
decision regarding the clean-up of the production line at
the Isfahan plant and the handling of enriched uranium.
In the long term, the procedure developed will allow
us to address the issue of Tehran's compliance with
the established limit of 300 kilogrammes for stocks of
such material.

We advocate against any attempts to exert pressure
on Tehran in the area of its missile and conventional
weapons programmes. Any threats in that area affecting
the lifting of unilateral sanctions and Iran's return to
the international economic and financial markets are
unacceptable and counter-productive.

We would like to address an element contained in
the report - the request of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council to clarify the issue of the temporary
transfer of conventional weapons. We are ready to
participate actively in preparing and providing an
adequate reply to the Secretary-General. We believe
that the temporary removal of conventional weapons
does not fall under the scope of annex B.

