Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain applauds the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2259 (2015), which demonstrates the
international community's recognition of efforts to
pursue dialogue with a view to bringing Libyans
together under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those efforts culminated in the 17 December Skhirat
Agreement, the signature of which was attended by the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation.

With today's resolution, the Security Council
notes the broad domestic support for the Agreement
and gives it international legitimacy. The resolution
serves as a reminder to all parties and sectors of Libyan
society of the urgent need to join in the common project
represented by the Agreement. It also reminds us of the
need to hold accountable those who obstruct or disrupt
the transition process. In that vein, I would like to stress
three ideas.

First of all, it is important to strengthen the
Agreement by attaining the greatest internal consensus
possible. In our view, the letter circulated to the
Security Council today is not in alignment with the
constructive spirit that the international community
requires or expects of the relevant stakeholders in the
Libyan conflict. Secondly, it is critical that all parties
work together to implement the Agreement and create
a Government of National Accord. That is the only
way to resolve the serious humanitarian and economic
crises in the country, and to address the security threat
represented by the presence of Daesh and other terrorist
groups on Libyan territory. Thirdly, it is essential that
the international community, along with each of our
countries, remain ready to work to strengthen and
expand the support of all Libyans for the Agreement,
making it possible to establish a new Government in a
safe Tripoli, the capital of a united country.
Since the beginning of the crisis, Spain has firmly
supported the leadership of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, as well as the work of the two Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, Mr. Leon
and Mr. Kobler. I wish to highlight the good work done
by Martin Kobler, who was able to go beyond the basis
provided by the Agreement and the names proposed by
his predecessor after extensive inclusive consultations.
The crisis does not allow for improvised solutions.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate my country's
commitment to the Libyan people, which has been
demonstrated by our political support for the process,
aimed at achieving peace in and the territorial unity
of Libya, but also our commitment to humanitarian
assistance and to tackling human trafficking networks.
We stand ready to extend our cooperation to the
Government ofNational Accord as soon as it is formed,
so that it may achieve what was defined so accurately
by Martin Kobler as peace, security, and prosperity in
a united country.

