Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this timely consideration
of the situation in Afghanistan.

The focus of the international community on
Afghanistan has been unremitting since the start of
this year. The Security Council visited Afghanistan
in January. A ministerial debate on Afghanistan and
regional connectivity was organized by Kazakhstan
in the Security Council (see S/PV.8162). Several
international and regional conferences have been held
to address aspects of the issue. We therefore hope
that this debate will continue to reflect the unceasing
commitment of the international community to
Afghanistan. We thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Yamamoto for sharing his
insights, Mr. Fedotov for providing the perspective on
drugs and crimes and Mr. Voronkov for emphasizing
the counter-terrorism dimensions. We also express our
sincere appreciation of Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal's
articulation of the challenges with which Afghanistan
is confronted.

Listening to the briefings, it is obvious that the
events ofhope that are being discerned need to transform
into a process if the situation in Afghanistan is to take
a turn for the better. Sadly, the markers of progress
on fundamental concerns about the situation strike a
sombre note, whether in terms of the suffering of the
ordinary people of Afghanistan, the senseless orgy of
heinous killings by terrorists or the displacement of a
conflict-weary people. Those aspects have a sobering
impact by bringing us in touch with the harsh realities
that the millions of people of Afghanistan face on a
day-to-day basis.

Despite the much-appreciated peace offer of the
Afghan Government, the offensive by the Taliban
has taken many lives. Such offensives cannot but be
planned and launched without the existence of safe
havens in the neighbourhood of Afghanistan. Those
supporting the terrorists targeting Afghanistan have
not been deterred. Notwithstanding the efforts of the
international community, there are still those that
provide sanctuaries to support the dark agendas of
terrorist organizations, such as the Taliban, the Haqqani
network, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Al-Qaida, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed.

The same safe havens that sheltered Mullah Omar
also sheltered Osama Bin Laden. Lest we forget, the
terrorism problem in Afghanistan is not a local one.
We do not need a catastrophe again to remind us that
Afghanistan requires strong and steady international
support in the elimination of the scourge of terrorism,
which is a threat to global peace and security.
Mr. F edotov's presentation of the Taliban's involvement
in virtually all aspects of the opium trade suggest that
it is not only a political or terrorism problem but also
one of organized crime. The Security Council therefore
needs to build on the reference in resolution 2405 (2018)
to the linkages between extremism, terrorism, drug
production and the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of Afghanistan. It is time for the Council
to look at options to better utilize the range of tools
available to it to deal with those transnational networks
of drugs, terrorism and crime.

For its part, India is aware of the resilience of
the friendly people of Afghanistan. On the basis of
Afghanistan's desire for robust, reliable and year-round
connectivity and to improve trade and investment
relations with prominent markets in the region and
beyond, India has tailored its support as a development
partner of Afghanistan to meet such requirements. In
recent months, there have been significant developments
as far as connectivity is concerned. Chabahar port in
Iran was inaugurated in December 2017. The Indian
grant assistance of 170,000 tons of wheat supplies to
Afghanistan recently transited through Chabahar,
highlighting the benefits of improved connectivity.
The India-Afghanistan air freight corridor, established
last year, has gained momentum in the first year of its
operation. There are now cargo flights between Kabul,
Kandahar, New Delhi and Mumbai. Thus far, such
flights have carried more than 2,000 tons of exports
from Afghanistan to India worth more than tens of
millions of dollars. Encouraged by that, we have plans
to expand the air freight corridor network to various
other cities in Afghanistan and India.

Looking at the football on the table and the
importance that you, Mr. President, have placed on the
power of sport, I believe it important to mention the
role of sportspersons from Afghanistan. The Persian
poet and Sufi mystic Rumi once said that where there
was ruin, there was hope for treasure. That seems
to have been the case with the sportspersons from
Afghanistan. They have left behind the memories of a
time when sport was explicitly banned by the Taliban
in Afghanistan. The national team of Afghanistan
is the new sensation on cricket pitches globally. A
few months ago, Afghanistan qualified for the next
Cricket World Cup. They made their first foray as a test
cricket-playing nation earlier this month, ensuring their
presence among the best cricket-playing countries in
the world. While having made cricket grounds in India
their home base, Afghan cricketers have flourished.
However, we look forward to the day when we, too, can
play cricket with them on their soil.

We appreciate the efforts of our Central Asian
friends in assisting Afghanistan in the most difficult
times. The efforts of Uzbekistan in organizing the
recent Tashkent conference on Afghanistan and the
continuous tireless efforts of Kazakhstan in working on
Afghanistan-related issues in the Security Council are
indeed significant and crucial to our collective efforts
in the region. We will work with all those in the region
that also believe that the interests of the Afghans are
paramount in bringing about a lasting solution to the
security situation through an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned process.

Such efforts and those of partners from beyond our
region all contribute to the indomitable spirit with which
the friendly Afghan people are building their country
despite the difficulties that they face. The Council, too,
must incessantly contribute to that noble cause.

