I am addressing the Security Council as we close on one of the most momentous years that Afghans have endured. Since my most recent briefing (see S/2020/891, annex I), the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban have made incremental but genuine progress in their peace talks. On 2 December, the two parties announced that they had agreed to the rules and procedures for negotiations. The two sides then formed a working committee to discuss the agenda and both parties presented to each other an initial list of topics for discussion. Those developments are an early but positive sign that both sides are willing and able to compromise when needed. Earlier this week, following 93 days of uninterrupted talks, the parties agreed to take a 20-day recess. We hope that will allow both sides to regroup, consult internally and externally and resume negotiating with a renewed commitment. The parties have committed indeed to return to the negotiating table on 5 January, after that short three-week break. Along with members of our humanitarian, development and human rights teams, I visited Doha twice recently to meet with both Afghan parties, and, of course, members of the diplomatic community. I should note that on each trip to Doha I have met with the women negotiators to seek their views on how we can help. And the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) also retains a team on the ground in Doha, working alongside the parties and members of the international community to support the process. I want to thank the State of Qatar for hosting the talks, as well as the United States and members of the host country support group - Germany, Indonesia, Norway and Uzbekistan - for their diplomatic efforts. I look forward to further constructive engagement by the larger international community in the various existing and developing formats to further enlarge the support for the peace process. Any sustainable peace will need to be owned by Afghanistan's very diverse society. That is possible only if the process is inclusive from the outset, with meaningful participation by all constituencies, including women, young people, minorities, victims of conflict and religious leaders. The recent formation of the High Council for National Reconciliation will allow the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan to establish a broad base for consolidating its negotiating positions. The Taliban, too, must expand and broaden its consultations with Afghan constituencies. One of the key constituencies for both negotiating parties must be Afghanistan's young people. Two thirds of Afghan citizens are below the age of 25. That is also the most educated generation of young people in Afghanistan's history. Young Afghans have clear views on the future of their country, and we must do all we can to amplify their voices. And so I am delighted that Shkula Zadran, Afghanistan's Youth Representative, will join us here today. I look forward to hearing her thoughts once again. I am proud to say that, through our youth-focused local peace initiatives, which are conducted throughout Afghanistan, UNAMA has provided a platform for the young people of Afghanistan to have their say on peace. Most recently, in the rural province of Faryab, young participants issued their own declaration, with strong recommendations specifying an immediate ceasefire; setting out the role of Islam under Afghanistan's Constitution; identifying the all-important Sustainable Development Goals; and emphasizing the need for transitional justice. Those are the young people of Afghanistan. Their voices deserve to be heard. As we all know, cooperation throughout the region, Central and South Asia, will be essential to an enduring peace. Increased trade and connectivity will build the foundation for peace and regional prosperity. It is therefore important to support regional efforts, and I particularly want to take note today of the regional efforts on counter-narcotics and transnational organized crime - two serious threats to the countries in the region - and I want to highlight that those topics were part of a major discussion that I participated in with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime regional Steering Committee meeting, which is made up of Central Asia, Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan. Addressing those issues and the incredibly destructive impact on Afghanistan and the people of the region will be essential to promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan and in the region. During my recent visits to Iran and Pakistan and my participation in events hosted by the Government of Turkmenistan and the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, I am happy to say that I noted an increasing commitment among regional players to making peace in Afghanistan a reality, as well as the critical recognition that regional stability does indeed require an enduring peace in Afghanistan. Regrettably, the unrelenting violence remains a serious obstacle to peace and a threat to the region. I will admit that we are still compiling this year's data, but I would like to mention a few provisional statistics on the impact of the violence. In October and November, improvised explosive devices caused over 60 per cent more civilian casualties than in the same period last year. In the third quarter of 2020, child casualties rose 25 per cent over the previous three months, while attacks against schools in the same period increased fourfold. In the first 11 months of 2020, targeted killings by anti-Government elements rose by nearly 40 per cent as compared with the same period in 2019. It is no surprise, then, that the Global Peace Index 2020 ranked Afghanistan as the least peaceful country in the world for the second year in a row. Such a ranking illustrates the psychological impact of the violence: as one Afghan official told me recently, "the sense and perception of violence and insecurity is higher now than ever". Let me say that again: the sense and perception of violence and insecurity is higher now than ever. Since the start of November alone, two separate rocket attacks in Kabul, the attack on Kabul University, the increased conflict in Helmand and Kandahar and a brutal bombing in Bamyan - to name but a few incidents - have strained the public's already fragile confidence and exacerbated the fears around the emergence of new terrorist threats. I ask all countries to continue to pressure all parties to the conflict to bring about a sustained reduction in violence, and I expect that will be a top priority when the negotiations resume. The ongoing security transition, coupled with the emerging reality of international troop withdrawals, have obviously added to the anxieties felt by the Afghan population. I anticipate that in the coming months that larger security transition will become a central topic in the dialogue among Afghan officials, countries of the region and the larger international community. And yet at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference in Geneva the international community came together to reaffirm its financial support for Afghanistan. The conference exceeded expectations, and I congratulate our co-hosts, the Governments of Afghanistan and Finland, for making it a success. The generous pledges - remarkable in today's fiscal environment - will enable Afghanistan to pursue its core development priorities and deliver vital services to its people. But it is not just about the money. It was also about a very important dialogue. UNAMA convened three high-level meetings: one on regional cooperation; another on the peace-security-development-humanitarian nexus - that complex Rubik's cube that we will have to understand as we move forward to face the challenges of the coming year; and, of course, a high-level meeting in which Afghan private-sector actors participated to discuss how they can move towards self-reliance in the new peace environment. Those meetings brought a diverse range of voices to Geneva to address the challenges of governance and economic growth. But above all, the conference sent a clear signal to the people of Afghanistan: the international community still stands with them. Adopted by no less than 66 countries, the conference communique reaffirmed support for "a unified, sovereign, peaceful and democratic Afghanistan"; it was signed by 66 countries. And then, three days later, that message was echoed at the session of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization for Islamic Cooperation in the Niger, where member States committed to "helping Afghanistan achieve a lasting peace, sustainable development, rehabilitation and reconstruction." They also once again called for a ceasefire. It is important to note, however, that donors have made clear that their generous financial assistance comes with conditions. A short year from now, we will all gather again - the Government and the donors - at a Senior Officials Meeting to assess the progress made against those pledges. Sustaining the current level of funding will require tangible improvements on peace, governance, the rule of law, certainly anti- corruption, and human rights, especially women's rights. There is no time to lose, and it is not business as usual. And so we have begun to work with the Afghan Government and development partners to galvanize the reform priorities. Together we can ensure - and will ensure - that donors' assistance serves its intended purpose: building strong and accountable institutions and delivering services to the Afghan people. And yet, unfortunately, Afghanistan remains one of the most dangerous places in the world for journalists - and I want to take note of that today. Six have lost their lives this year alone - six journalists - with scant accountability for perpetrators. Eleven human rights defenders have also lost their lives, and many more have been injured or continue to be threatened. Such attacks are completely unjustifiable. They risk chilling the public discourse just when dialogue is most needed. So I call upon the Government to take effective measures to protect the media and to investigate and prosecute violent crimes against journalists. The Taliban, too, must refrain from attacking civilian targets. The Taliban must recognize the critical role that the media and civil society fulfil in a modern-day Afghanistan, as a vital member of the global community. Like much of the world, Afghanistan is now facing a new wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Already the effects of the pandemic have been devastating, and we are moving into a winter second phase that is likely to be much more damaging than the spring first wave. Hunger and malnutrition have spiked, and livelihoods have been eroded, with women and children particularly affected. And so, in coordination with the Government and civil society, the larger United Nations family has scaled up to ensure that work is getting done to respond to the pandemic. Just this week, the President and I launched, and will be heading up, an emergency SWAT team to oversee the process on a daily basis. I encourage Member States to fund humanitarian activities generously. We must ensure that Afghanistan's most vulnerable people are not left further behind in the pandemic. As the year draws to a close, we must acknowledge that 2020 has brought a profound shift for this country - with the United States-Taliban agreement, the United States-Afghan Government joint declaration, three months of intra-Afghan negotiations, the renewal of pledges from international donors and a revitalized regional cooperation effort - all under a new Government in Kabul. By all accounts, this was a big year. But a bigger year lies ahead - a full security transition, peace negotiations, which must and will advance, the health and socioeconomic challenges resulting from COVID-19, the ongoing commitment of the international donors and the expected results of even more regional cooperation - all of that with whatever political and societal changes accompany it. Clearly Afghanistan will continue to move forward in this new year, but equally it will continue to need the dedicated support of the Council. I look forward to our discussion.
