Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): First,
Mr. Foreign Minister, let me welcome your presence in
this Chamber, which underlines the importance of the
topic that brings us here. Let me also congratulate
Colombia on the initiative of convening an open debate
on the question of small arms in the Security Council.

There is no doubt that this is a problem with
universal dimensions, which our Organization should
address not only in the Assembly but also in the
Security Council. In this regard, the presidential
statement of the Security Council on 24 September
1999, which incorporated this item on its agenda,
recognized that what we are facing is "multifaceted and
involves security, humanitarian and development
dimensions". (S/PRST/1999/28, secondparagraph)

Because we are really dealing with "small arms
of mass destruction", it is vital to take every
opportunity to keep alive the commitment to combat
this scourge on all fronts.

The question of small arms is a complex issue
that represents a serious threat to human security. We
believe that we must undertake to eradicate this
scourge through measures that promote respect for
human rights, the rule of law and good governance, as
well as equitable socio-economic development and the
implementation of programmes to eradicate the culture
of violence and replace it with a culture of peace.

Here we must take note of the outcome of the
recent United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade
in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.
In this context, we fully support the substance of the
presidential statement made by Ambassador Camilo
Reyes of Colombia, who so successfully guided the
proceedings ofthe Conference.

We agree that the Conference represented a very
significant step, in that it was the starting point of a
process to address in a comprehensive manner one of
the most urgent issues in the area of international peace
and security.

However, we, too, were disappointed at the fact
that it was not possible to reach agreement on
recognizing such significant aspects of this struggle as
the establishment of restrictions on the private
ownership of weapons and the need to eliminate their
transfer to non-State actors. We are convinced that
agreement on this last aspect would have markedly
facilitated the work of the Council. For this reason, we
deem it appropriate to note that the Secretary-General
highlighted the potential benefits that the international
community might expect from an understanding on
these issues.

On this particular point, we believe it important
to reiterate that at the Conference, Chile expressed its
conviction that it was essential to make progress on the
elaboration of an international instrument to strictly
limit the manufacture of, and illicit trade in, these
weapons. It stated also that, in a matter that is so
closely bound up with human suffering, we should
promote restrictions that will safeguard life, above and
beyond simple free-trade considerations.

We believe that the Security Council must play an
active and clear-cut role in this process and that it
should in its work consider the fresh responsibilities
that the international community has set out in the
Programme of Action of the Conference. For this
reason, we would to highlight a number of initiatives
that take on particular significance in the light of that
document.

It is clear that the question of the proliferation of
small arms is a source of immediate concern in post-
conflict peace-building situations. It is therefore
essential for the Security Council to consider including
in peace agreements and in the mandates of
peacekeeping missions specific measures to give effect
to programmes for disarmament and arms destruction
and for the demobilization and reintegration of former

combatants, with particular emphasis on the situation
of child soldiers.

We believe also that we must incorporate in the
process of planning peacekeeping operations experts
who are skilled in the area of international
humanitarian law, human rights and the rights of
refugees, including provisions relating to children and
gender issues, so as to ensure the effective
implementation of these principles. As a reflection of
the importance of these programmes, it is also essential
to allocate the necessary resources for their
implementation.

It is clear that illicit flows of small arms
complicate the work of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes. Not only should the
States involved strive to restrict these flows, but the
Security Council should also make rigorous use of the
monitoring mechanisms available to it. In other words,
this body should not simply confine itself to calling for
the implementation of these measures; it should ensure
their full and effective implementation.

We believe that efforts to restrict the flow of
small arms will require a change in the way in which
sanctions are applied. On this particular point, the
Council will have to continue to explore new ways of
improving the effectiveness of arms embargoes by
reviewing the functioning of existing sanctions
committees.

It is extremely important to strengthen preventive
measures in order to restrict the use of these weapons
and avert the need to resort to the programmes
mentioned earlier. In order to do so, the Security
Council should have available to it, in its consideration
of each conflict, the relevant information about the
illicit use of small arms and military weapons. This
would make it possible to give priority to such illicit
use in the general framework of the efforts deployed by
the Security Council in the process of the restoration of
stability.

In this regard, the Security Council must play a
dynamic role in educating Member States about the
negative effects of sustained flows of weapons to
hotbeds of tension and to areas of conflict. These
efforts can be enhanced through the exchange of
information and the development of close international
cooperation with the various regional and subregional
bodies involved in the monitoring the destabilizing
proliferation of these weapons.

We would like to conclude by highlighting the
tremendous responsibility we have in alleviating the
plight of peoples that are hostage to crime and armed
conflict, which are fuelled by the excessive and
uncontrolled circulation of these weapons. We must
find solutions to promote social and economic
development as well as national, regional and
international stability. As Ambassador Reyes noted at
the conclusion of the Conference on the illicit trade in
such weapons, we should continue to address this
question in all its aspects until the conscience of
mankind is at long last satisfied that all that can be
done has in fact been done, in order to alleviate this
global tragedy.

