Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio
for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
commend his stewardship of the Committee and the
professionalism with which the Committee has been
implementing its mandate.

I would like to welcome the submission of the final
report (S/2012/395) by the Panel of Experts, which was
issued as an official document of the Security Council
last week. We also welcome the extension last week of
the mandate of the Panel till 9 July 2012.

We expect that the Panel will continue to work
under the direction of the 1737 Committee and assist
the Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We appreciate the
work, including the outreach activities, that the Panel
has been doing and encourage it to continue its work
in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, in an independent, objective,
transparent and impartial manner. The Panel should
also continue the practice of briefing the Committee
regularly on all its activities.

We also support the Chair's intention to hold an
open briefing along with the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts in July 2012 for interested Member States
on their mandates and to answer questions that Member
States may have. We think that the briefing will also
provide an opportunity for the Committee and the
Panel to get the views of the wider United Nations
membership.

India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to peaceful uses of nuclear energy in accordance
with the relevant international treaties to which
they are a party. Iran should fully cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to restore
the confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. In that connection, we welcome the
recent exchanges between Iran and the IAEA, including
the visit of the Director General of the Agency to
Tehran. We hope that the outstanding technical issues
concerning the Iranian nuclear programme will be
resolved peacefully through Iran's cooperation with the
IAEA.

We also welcome the talks between the five plus
one group and Iran held in Istanbul and Baghdad during
the last two months. We think that those talks should
continue and hope that the parties will be able to make
progress in the next round, which is scheduled for next
week in Moscow.

India supports the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council concerning
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is necessary that, in
implementing those resolutions, all efforts be made so
that legitimate trade and economic activities do not
suffer.

Before I conclude, I would like to assure Ambassador
Osorio of my delegation's continued cooperation to
facilitate the work of the 1737 Committee.

