Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you, Sir, on
having assumed the presidency of the Security Council.

I would like to begin by expressing thanks to the
President for having convened this meeting, thus
addressing one of the issues of greatest interest to the
peoples of the world who wish, like the Costa Rican
people, to become active promoters of peace.

 

I also take this opportunity to express my delegation's
complete support for the initiatives being taken by the
United Nations under the leadership of the Secretary-
General in order to prevent and alleviate the regrettable
impact of armed conflicts on civilian populations, especially
on women and children, who, as has become clear, are the
most vulnerable sector of the population.

As we know full well, current armed conflicts almost
always reflect historical accumulations of unsatisfied
demands, in most cases aggravated by inadequate social and
economic situations and by international political and
economic conditions. In other words, they constitute
responses to internal and international injustices. War is in
itself an injustice, an unlawful injustice to which, in many
cases, we can only be witnesses - indignant witnesses, but
incapable of intervening in the course of events.

Central America has been no exception in this world
traumatized by violence. In recent years, the Central
American isthmus itself suffered the scourge of war. We
Costa Ricans, being Central Americans, were pained by the
bloody battles in which so many of our brothers and sisters
struggled. We were witnesses to the separation of families
and the death of civilians, especially women, the elderly
and children, dragged by harsh reality into armed conflicts
that they had simply and unwittingly inherited.

That is a reality that hurts us to the core, and it
confers a moral responsibility upon the whole of
international society, particularly when the victims of those
conflicts have silently appealed for intervention and
international action in defence of their innocent lives.
Undoubtedly, history will demand an explanation for our
passivity in the face of events.

The international community knows only too well the
tragedy experienced by civilian populations in the context
of armed conflict. We constantly see how innocent civilians
are dragged into violence that is not of their making and
from which they - innocent human beings who have
nothing to do with the conflict - also suffer, whether they
are men, women, the elderly or children.

As we said several months ago in this very forum,
when we were non-permanent members of the Security
Council, we are particularly disturbed by information
provided by the United Nations regarding the tragic reality
of children in armed conflict. In recent years, over a quarter
of a million children in the world have participated in 30
armed conflicts. Some 2 million children have died in those
wars, which have left between 4 million and 5 million
children disabled, 12 million homeless and 1 million
orphaned. Those statistics are a reflection of one of the
cruellest realities of our day and of the regrettable impact
of conflict on millions of children throughout the world,
who unjustly lose their innocence in conflicts that they
are not even capable of understanding, much less
explaining, and about which all they can do is cry.

The most tragic aspect of these events is well
expressed in paragraph 16 of document A/53/482,
prepared by Mr. Olara Otunnu and submitted to the Third
Committee in October last year, which states:
"Cessation of hostilities does not mean that war is
over, particularly for children who have been
extensively exposed to the culture of violence."

Unfortunately, it is also possible that, when they
grow up, those children will repeat their present reality.
It is disturbing to know that that reality is dominated by
an indiscriminate struggle for power, in which there is a
profound absence of ethical values and anything is
allowed. International society is the constant witness to
the new modalities of war in which the distinction
between civilians and combatants has disappeared.
Children, as well as women and the elderly, have become
legitimate pawns in the harsh battle for power, fought to
attain supposed "ideals". Children, women and the elderly
are innocent victims who deserve and demand vigorous
international protection. However, as children are the
most vulnerable, my country believes that we must first
and foremost focus our efforts on their protection and
defence.

It is imperative that we take effective international
action in defence of those young creatures, who represent
the future of humanity and whom we are allowing to be
killed or, at best, whose innocent lives we are exposing to
treatment as objects of hatred and violence.

First of all, it is essential to see the problem for
what it is and with full awareness of the fact that the
involvement of children in armed conflict constitutes a
violation of human rights and that therefore those
responsible must be punished. Costa Rica considers it
essential and urgent to enact international legislation
clearly prohibiting the recruitment of children under the
age of 18 by forces involved in a conflict. In this context,
my delegation fully supports the establishment, as soon as
possible, of an additional protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, and we welcome the intention
explicitly to incorporate in the rules of the International

 

Criminal Court the principle that a child is a minor until the
age of 18. That is a small contribution that the States
Members of the Organization can make to humankind.

This Organization, which represents the greatest hope
of the human race for survival in the twenty-first century,
must move from words to deeds. This is the moment when
history calls for our intervention: our clear, firm and
vigorous action in defence of innocent human beings. The
time has come for our words and our thoughts today, which
are directed towards the effective protection of civilians in
armed conflicts - especially children - to be supported
by concrete action on the part of the international
community.

In spite of my comments, we must point out that
although international legislation is of enormous importance
in resolving this problem of the involvement of civilians,
especially children, in armed conflicts, such legislation in
itself is not enough to prevent the situations that put those
civilians, particularly children, at risk. That is why, in
addition to what has been proposed in the international
sphere, we need an appropriate legal framework at the
domestic level, within each of our societies and each of our
States, as well as clear and effective social action to make
it possible for the children of today to exercise their right
to be the men and women of the future, to protect their
right to become adults who are in charge of their own
development and who can thereby contribute to the
development of humankind and, in their own valuable way,
to the building of a better world of peace, justice and
liberty.

