Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to congratulate our colleague the
representative of Japan on his quarterly briefing in his
capacity as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) has just issued a very clear
report. Despite the Council's injunctions, Iran is
operating nearly 4,000 centrifuges and is set to start
operating another 1,500. It has produced nearly a ton of
lightly enriched uranium, an amount that is all the
more significant and worrying for having been
underestimated in the Agency's previous reports.

Iran has refused to cooperate with the Agency. It
has undermined the Agency's verification powers by
refusing access to the heavy water reactor under
construction at Arak. That reactor has been concealed
in such a way that activity is no longer visible from the
air. It has refused to provide the design of the reactor
whose construction at Darkhovin has been announced.
It has also refused to implement the transparency
measures known as Code 3.1. Those measures, which
Iran must apply, are indispensable for short-term
comprehension of its projects in the nuclear field. At
the most recent Board of Governors meeting, the
3
Agency's legal adviser made it very clear that that
refusal is a violation of Iran's safeguards agreement.
Concerning the study on the militarization of the
programme, Iran continues to refuse to respond to the
Agency's questions and to give the Agency's inspectors
access to the relevant individuals and installations.
Lastly, Iran refuses to implement the Additional
Protocol.

The Agency has thus concluded that it has made
no progress. It cannot provide credible assurances
about the absence of undeclared activities or nuclear
materials in Iran. At the same time, Iran has not
responded to the proposals made to it in July 2008 to
resume negotiations. We must therefore hope that Iran
will reassess its behaviour, stop obstructing the
Agency's efforts, take the hand that has again been
extended to it and finally take the actions expected
from it to restore confidence.

For our part, the responsibility of all and of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) is rigorously to implement the
rules of the Security Council. In that regard, today's
report of the Committee is both a source of concern
and a reason for hope.

Our first cause for concern: A vessel full of
weaponry materials - shells of all sorts, bullets,
explosives - departed Bandar Abbas, Iran, for
Latakia, Syria, in gross violation of resolution l747
(2007). Moreover, the Committee has asked the
Syrians and Iranians to explain themselves within
10 days. We intend to closely monitor the follow-up of
that extremely serious matter. We must do everything
to prevent any such further violations. The enhanced
vigilance of all is indispensable.

But there is also a reason for hope. The Cypriot
Government assumed its responsibilities and quickly
noted that the cargo of that ship could in no way be
conveyed to its destination or returned to Iran. It took
the only decision that it could i to keep it on its
territory. We must all respond in the same way. States
that take these kinds of measures should know that
they can count on the solidarity and mutual aid of
others - a solidarity which is even mandatory under
Security Council resolutions.

Finally, we must learn several lessons from this
affair. We should observe total intransigence when
confronted with violation attempts. We need to
cooperate further among ourselves, systematically
report cases of violations to the Committee and
investigate them to their end. Finally, the activity and
vigilance of the Committee must be strengthened. We
are ready to cooperate with the Chairman to achieve
that.

