Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Rwandan presidency for organizing
this annual debate on the work of the seventh session
of Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also thank
Mr. Vladimir Drobnjak of Croatia and Mr. Antonio de
Aguiar Patriota of Brazil for their briefings.
First of all, I would like to welcome the
commemoration of Peacebuilding Day and the holding
of the first annual session of the Commission on
23 June. We welcome the informal debates launched
by the Organizational Committee as well as the new
partnership between the Peacebuilding Support
Office and the Dag Hammarskjold Foundation. We
also welcome the holding of the informal interactive
dialogue of 26 April 2013, which allowed members
of the Security Council, the Chairs Group and the
countries on the PBC's agenda to identify prospects
for developing the partnership between the Council
and the Commission. In that regard, we welcome the
designation of Rwanda as coordinator of an informal
process of evaluation and review of the progress made
and the challenges encountered in the management of
relations between these two bodies.

We also reiterate the important role of the
Commission in taking stock of the potential risks and
the gaps in the efforts of the PBC undertaken in the
countries on its agenda, the follow up in the level of
attention given and engagement of national, regional
and international actors, the promotion of coherence
and alignment in national policies, the activities and
aims of the United Nations and of other entities,as well
as in a successful transition for the United Nations
missions in the countries on the agenda.

We welcome the support for the transition of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) as well as for the country's
own transition. With the adoption of the prosperity
programme, the launch of the transition and the
withdrawal of UNIPSIL, the work and functions of the
Commission in Sierra Leone need to be refocused and
adapted to the specific needs and an evaluation of the
situation on the ground. In that regard, we welcome
the regular dialogue with the Government of Sierra
Leone and its partners. We call upon the international
community to continue to meet the needs of the country
in terms of peacebuilding.

We also welcome the support for Burundi in the
follow-up to the Geneva Partners Conference in 2012,
and welcome the follow-up activities to the conference
in question in awareness-raising and in regard to
preparations for the 2015 elections.

By the same token, we also welcome the support
to Liberia in designing and launching the national
reconciliation process, as well as the support to the
activities carried out by the United Nations and
the region in preparing for the legislative elections
in Guinea. We also welcome the launching by the
Government of Liberia of the Road Map for National
Healing, Peacebuilding and Reconciliation and the
National Palava Hut Programme. We encourage
the Commission to make concerted efforts with the
Government and its partners for their implementation.
We also note the holding of a workshop on security
sector reform in order to strengthen the links between
justice and security actors and between them and the
legislature.

We note that $5 million was provided by the
Peacebuilding Fund's Immediate Response Facility to
facilitate the work of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau to help the
country to continue the process of re-establishing
constitutional order.

We deplore the difficulties that the Commission has
encountered in Guinea-Bissau and the Central African
Republic due to the unconstitutional changes that have
taken place.

We also note that the programme for marshalling
resources has made it possible to promote and to
advance the implementation of the programme of
political and economic reforms, and that, by October
2013, approximately 52 per cent of the $2.5 billion in
pledges made had been disbursed.

We welcome the partnership established among
the international financial institutions and regional
development banks within a multidimensional
framework, as well as support for the actions taken
by the States themselves to mobilize resources. In
that context, Burundi's experience, in particular the
positive results of the finance division, has shown
that strengthening countries' capacities to generate
domestic funds has enabled them to finance priority
reconstruction and peacebuilding actions themselves.
Such experience could be shared with other countries
on the PBC's agenda.

We encourage efforts to find ways and means of
involving the private sector, with a focus on economic
growth and job creation in countries emerging
from conflict. We welcome the strengthening of the
consistency of peacebuilding actions in the countries
concerned and coordination between the Commission
and the Peacebuilding Fund in that respect, and
encourage a strengthened partnership between the
Commission and high-level United Nations officials on
the ground. We also welcome the informal consultations
leading to the PBC's new working methods involving
the countries on its agenda, the mutual learning among
the country configurations, and the convening of
annual sessions of the Commission to allow for deeper
interaction and closer cooperation among the actors in
New York and those on the ground and in the capitals
of Member States.

We note the Commission's debates to consider the
four action areas - namely, work in the field, results
and impacts, forms of cooperation, and transition and
results - as the essential core of its future programme of
work. My country encourages the PBC to convene other
such debates, as necessary. We note the conclusions of
the programme of work, in particular relating to future
matters concerning the roles of the Commission's
members, as well as the role of the main United
Nations bodies concerning the strategic dimension of
the Commission's essential functions and the working
methods and preparations for the 2015 review.

Chad welcomes the taking into account of gender
equality issues in the work of the Commission
and welcomes the partnership with UN-Women in
examining the role of women in reform efforts in
post-conflict countries. In that context, it is essential
to raise awareness and draw lessons. The economic
emancipation of women can indeed contribute to
effective economic growth in countries emerging
from conflict, as well as to improving the quality
of life and the social impact of economic recovery
policies and efforts. We encourage the emancipation
and participation of women in recovery efforts in post-
conflict countries, and urge the lifting of all obstacles
to women's access to justice, resources, financial
means and economic participation. Furthermore, it
is important to consider the gender dimension in the
process of national reconciliation. The Commission
could assist countries in establishing reconciliation
processes that take due account of women's role.

To conclude, Chad welcomes the role of the PBC in
the countries on its agenda and calls for strengthening
its role in advocacy, the mobilization of resources
and the formulation of integrated strategies aimed
at peacebuilding and post-conflict reconciliation.
However, Chad is concerned about the many remaining
challenges, particularly in the Central African Republic,
the Sudan, South Sudan and elsewhere. We anticipate
the 10-year peacebuilding review that will take place
in 2015 to evaluate progress made in implementing the
main recommendations formulated following the 2010
review and to take stock of the challenges that remain.
