Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, Mr. Onanga-Anyanga; the Special
Representative of the African Union to the Central
African Republic, Mr. Moussa Nebie; and Mr. Koen
Vervaeke for their briefings on the latest developments
in the Central African Republic and the activities
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). We also appreciate Ambassador Le'on
Adom for his briefing on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013)
concerning the Central African Republic and the
outcome of his recent visit to Central African Republic.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of
the Central African Republic, who is participating in
this meeting.

The Central African Republic continues to face
enormous challenges. The absence of State authority in
most parts of the country and the activities of armed
opposition groups and self-defence militias fighting for
land and resources by illegal parallel administration
and taxation structures are plunging the country into
yet another cycle of violence and conflict. We recognize
the efforts of President Touadera and his Government,
including in the areas of security sector reform and the
establishment of functioning State structures, with the
support from MINUSCA. We appreciate the role of

the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as several bilateral,
regional and international partners in that regard.
However, we wish to emphasize the importance
of creating strong national ownership and building
the necessary momentum for genuine and inclusive
dialogue, in the context of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, to address the most pressing challenges
facing the country in stabilizing the security situation,
expanding State authority and putting in place inclusive
governance structures.

We are encouraged by the increasing support for
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic led by the African
Union (AU). We underscore the need for closer
coordination and synergy among African Union, the
United Nations, the European Union and all other
actors involved in bringing peace and stability to the
country. In this context, we welcome the holding of the
high-level ministerial meeting on the sidelines of the
General Assembly, which reaffirmed the support of the
international community to the African Initiative.

We support the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission in
jointly appointing a special envoy, who will also be a
guarantor of peace process on the ground and facilitate
the effective implementation of the African Initiative,
including by liaising with all partners of the Central
African Republic and the region. That will, we hope,
help to expedite the peace and reconciliation process in
the Central African Republic. We also acknowledge the
outcome of the recent consultations led by the President
of the Republic of the Sudan, His Excellency President
Omer Al-Bashir, and the declaration of commitment
issued by the anti-Balaka militia, led by Maxime
Mokom, and the ex-Seleka led by Noureddine Adam,
towards peace in Central African Republic.

The role of MINUSCA remains indispensable,
and we appreciate the Mission's efforts in fulfilling
its mandated tasks under difficult circumstances.
We strongly condemn the attacks against MINUSCA
peacekeepers and other humanitarian actors operating
on the ground. We pay tribute to those who have paid
the ultimate sacrifice for the cause of peace.

We are confident that the Security Council will
continue to strengthen MINUSCA so as to enable
it respond to the evolving situation on the ground.
Particularly, the quick-reaction battle groups, the
reserve battalion, the special forces company, the quick-
reaction force company and its enabling units must be
strengthened. In this regard, we note the outcome of
the strategic review and support the implementation
of the relevant recommendations of the review. The
Mission's support to the Government-led local peace
and reconciliation initiatives remains vital, and we note
its contribution to reducing violence, building trust
between communities and facilitating the return of
internally displaced persons.

We therefore support the renewal of the mandate
of the Mission and we look forward to constructively
engaging in the upcoming discussions in this regard.

