Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting is further confirmation of
the serious concern of the world community in quickly
finding a solution to the conflicts and the many
problems in Africa. It is also evidence of our desire to
develop an effective strategy for the maintenance of
peace and sustainable development in Africa.

The Russian Federation is pleased to see that
recently - thanks primarily to the efforts of the
Africans themselves, but also thanks to the
international community, the United Nations, the
Security Council, the regional and subregional
organizations - it has been possible to achieve
tangible success in the settlement of conflicts and in
stabilizing the situation in the Central African
subregion. Peace is steadily being consolidated in
Angola, life is returning to normal in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the peace process in Burundi is
moving ahead, and in the Central African Republic
measures have been taken to restore the constitutional
order.

But at the same time there are still serious risks
and difficulties in Central Africa. We noted that the
dangers listed in the report of the multidisciplinary
mission do not differ from the threats that we have
been discussing here in the Security Council. In other
words, our analyses are virtually the same, and this
provides a certain foundation for multilateral and
multifaceted interaction in order to neutralize those
risks and dangers.

But what worries us is something else. The main
causes of the current situation in Central Africa -
unsatisfactory Governments, widespread poverty, a
particularly high level of unemployment among young
people - have also been the main causes of instability
for decades. We have to adjust our focus; we have to
ask questions not only about the causes of the present
situation, but also why African States are facing the
same root causes of instability as they faced as they
were approaching independence over 40 years ago.

Then there is a second lesson we can learn. We
must listen to the Africans more. The report notes that
a number of African countries would be willing to
participate in consultations on the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. They are
requesting that they be admitted as full participants in
the proposed international conference on the Great
Lakes region. It is the Africans themselves that have to
define themselves. They are neighbours; they have to
live together as good neighbours.

There is a third point. It is extremely important
that international assistance through this process of
stabilization be coordinated, focused and accountable.
A central role must be played by the United Nations,
which would have the closest contacts with the
regional and subregional organizations. Those
organizations must be purely pragmatic in their
functioning, for their very existence is justified only
when their work is truly useful. If those organizations
need help, then they must be helped.

The report refers to the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa. I would like to ask Mr. Kalomoh whether there
is any specific output from that Committee. Are the
reports of that Committee available?

There is a fourth point. We are worried that some
African countries tend to appeal to the international
community and the United Nations before fully
exhausting their own national or regional possibilities.
This applies, as we see it, to perhaps a rather excessive
approach for the establishment in Central Africa of a
United Nations office, which would be in addition to
structures already there. Along the same lines are the
requests relating to international commissions for
investigating violations of human rights and of
international humanitarian law, and structures to
combat impunity. Africans could make fuller use of
national, bilateral and regional potential. This is
mentioned specifically in the report of the
multidisciplinary assessment mission.

We agree that the United Nations system could be
of assistance in this respect. Such assistance should be
provided first to those who have demonstrated their
resolve to solve problems and who are willing to use
their own resources as well for this purpose.

The Russian delegation supports the measures
proposed by the Secretary-General to strengthen the
role of the United Nations in Central Africa, in
particular with regard to the appointment of a special
envoy of the Secretary-General to the subregion and
the area of competence of such an envoy. We believe
that the work of that special envoy would be fully
transparent in the Security Council and that
information would be provided on his activities
through regular reports of the Secretary-General to us.

