I thank the Secretary-General and the African Union High Representative for Mali and the Sahel for their briefings. As Mali navigates pathways towards durable peace and people-centred development with the support of the international community, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the recent progress towards the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In this regard, we highlight as significant the support of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to the redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian army to northern Mali, the bolstering of policing capabilities, and the country's holding of the second round of legislative elections, on 19 April, in spite of the challenges of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The increased number of women elected to the legislature, from 14 to 41, signals both symbolic and qualitative shifts in the terms of engagement with women. We also welcome steps towards increasing women's participation in the follow-up mechanism of the Agreement and the imminent appointment of six women to the Agreement Monitoring Committee, and encourage further democratization with respect to gender and young people across public institutions, as outlined in the Agreement. The Government of Mali, with MINUSMA's support, must be recognized for the COVID-19 response - particularly the provision of sanitary supplies to justice institutions and the release of prisoners in order to protect persons in detention facilities, but also for the coordinated approach with public, private and other international actors to mitigate the effects. MINUSMA's support for the establishment of reconciliation committees in central Mali, and their capacity- building work on reconciliation and social cohesion, conducted across the linguistic divide, are noteworthy, given ongoing intercommunal hostilities in the central region. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemns the continued terrorist attacks in Mali and the wider Sahel region. We express our deepest sympathy to the families of those civilians and peacekeepers who lost their lives in the past few months as a consequence of that violence. As the number of food-insecure and internally displaced persons in Mali and the wider Sahel region continues to rise, combating violent extremism and intercommunal violence remains urgent. This situation, we must emphasize, is primarily due to armed conflict and climate change. We endorse the call for greater support of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), and their work in defence of the tri-border and wider Sahel region. We also reiterate the request made by the G-5 Sahel countries, and echoed recently by the African members of the Security Council together with Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, that the Joint Force be placed under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. This would be advisable given MINUSMA's limited ability and mandate to provide support outside of Mali, and as armed terrorist groups are well networked across borders in the region. Notwithstanding these limitations, we welcome MINUSMA's force adaptation efforts towards a more mobile, flexible and agile posture, in line with the principles of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that durable peace demands the simultaneous pursuit of a comprehensive security agenda as well as inclusive socioeconomic development. Lasting peace also requires a renewed social contract in which the State, with the support of its international partners, re-establishes its authority by protecting civilians and strengthening essential institutions. We welcome efforts to accelerate the decentralization of key State services; the operationalization of the Northern Development Zone; the greater focus on education and psychosocial support for children and survivors of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence; and engagement with Malian women and youth organizations currently pursuing adaptation and resilience strategies for economic development. We stand with Malians on the cusp of engineering futures beyond the limits of violence and conflict, COVID-19 and adverse climate.
