Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to ask you, Mr. President, to
convey to Foreign Minister McCully how pleased we
were to see him presiding over the Security Council,
and also to congratulate you and your team on your
excellent stewardship of the Council this month. I
would also like to put on record - and this seems to
be a trend, whereby we see briefings turn into genuine
debates - that we agree that we need to change the
traditional format that we use to deal with this or
any other issue on the Council's agenda. We believe
it warrants a collective decision by the Council and
probably the devotion of a meeting and consultations to
our methods of work.

That said, I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive briefing. We believe that
it is crucial that we defend the viability of a two-State
solution to the Palestinian question and, as Mr. McCully
said, we have no time to waste. There is a very real
danger that such a solution may soon be out of reach
altogether. It is very worrying to see the destruction
of Palestinian homes, the expansion of settlements and
the serious humanitarian situation, which is not in Gaza
alone. The stagnation in the peace process, which has
lasted so long, continues to undermine trust between the
parties. it is vital that we begin to create the possibility
of the prospect of peace if we are to resolve the conflict
before it is too late.

We are all familiar with the main causes of the
breakdown in the peace process - the settlements
policy and the use of violence - and we condemn
the violence, acts of terror and incitement to violence
regardless of their origin. Nor can we overlook the
importance of solving the intra-Palestinian rivalries if
we are to deal with the stagnated peace process. Spain
would like to emphasize its full support for the French
initiative for convening an international conference
that would enable us to relaunch the peace process.
My country is already participating actively in the
preparatory work for it; for example, we just took part
in a meeting held in Stockholm of a working group on
civil society.

It is essential that measures be taken to restore
trust, and we are pleased to see that some small steps
have been taken in that direction, such as the agreement
announced just two days ago, on 13 September,
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the
repayment of electricity costs. It is a small step, but
one in the right direction. Similarly, the international
community must take advantage of synergies between
the various initiatives - the proposals of the Quartet,
the French initiative and the Arab Peace Initiative. As
the Secretary-General rightly pointed out, the general
debate in the General Assembly begins next week,
during which a meeting ofthe Quartet will be held, after
a preparatory meeting in Paris, as well as a meeting
of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee. We hope that all of
these events and meetings will help to encourage the
parties to return to the negotiating table.

