Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for
having given us the opportunity to participate in this
meeting to discuss the present situation and the
challenges facing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) in the light of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/200).

Allow me also to thank Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Haiti, for his statement and above all for his
praiseworthy work as head of the Mission. My
delegation would like to align itself with the statement
made by the representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, to which we would just like
to add some brief additional comments.

As we have said on previous occasions, we
believe that the presence of MINUSTAH prevented the
tragedy of the earthquake from giving rise to incidents
that would have further worsened the situation of the
Haitian population, because it served as a fundamental
stabilizing element. We consider that MINUSTAH
should continue to be a factor for the permanent
consolidation of a climate of security and stability that
will help to build the institutional capacity of the
Haitian State, which is necessary to ensure the start of
a new phase of peacebuilding and economic and social
development in Haiti.

Consideration of the future role of MINUSTAH is
linked to the planning of assistance, reconstruction and
development in Haiti. In that regard, we believe that
two basic principles need to be respected. First of all,
we consider that it is the Government and the people of
Haiti that must decide their own future. Secondly, we
are convinced that the United Nations has a central role
to play in coordinating international assistance to Haiti.
Thus, while we are still analysing the details of
its content, we welcome the Secretary-General's latest
report, especially the idea that MINUSTAH should
adopt a comprehensive approach in the five priority
areas indicated in the report. We believe that this
integrated approach will respect the principles I
mentioned, especially with regard to electoral and
humanitarian assistance, where we believe the
Organization's coordinating role is essential.

In addition, we share the Secretary-General's idea
of reconfiguring the military component of the Mission
so that as the situation evolves there will be a larger
number of military engineers to contribute to
reconstruction work.

Regarding the strengthening of the Mission's
police component, I would like to recall that since
before the earthquake Argentina, together with other
countries of the Americas, was actively encouraging
regional police cooperation with Haiti in order to help
develop the institutional capacities of the Haitian State.
We also believe that this cooperation mechanism
should continue within MINUSTAH, because that
would enhance the Mission's contribution to the
professional training of the Haitian National Police.

Argentina announced a significant contribution at
the recent donors conference for Haiti. That is in
addition to our efforts to help build human capital in
Haiti. For example, we are considering the possibility
of cooperation in education and in the recovery of
cultural assets. We are also working on strengthening
and expanding the triangular South-South cooperation
programme for the production of one's own fresh
food - the Pro-Huerta project - which prior to the
earthquake consisted of a grass-roots social network
with more than 80,000 participants, 1,823 promoters
and a Haitian technical team of 23 agronomists. We
hope to reach a million participants in the programme
throughout Haiti within five years, giving the people of
Haiti the wherewithal to build their own future.

Let me conclude by saying that we are working in
Haiti in the hope that the day will come when the
Mission's work will be finished and the presence of the
United Nations and the international community will
no longer be necessary because the people of Haiti will
be able to take full charge of their own destiny. There
is an urgent need to make progress in the post-
earthquake reconstruction of Haiti, at the same time
working to build the country's institutional capacity
and improve coordination with international
cooperation to bring it into line with the priorities of
the Government of Haiti and to increase its
effectiveness and visibility. We believe that the United
Nations has a fundamental role to play in that respect.

