The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.

Earlier this month, in Washington, DC,
Secretary of State Clinton hosted the most recent
meeting of the Quartet. At that meeting, the Quartet
principals welcomed plans for dialogue among the
parties and discussed ways to support them. We have
worked closely with our international partners,
including the Quartet, to support the parties as they
take steps to re-engage and rebuild communications.
We should all support that effort, help to create a
conducive climate and avoid any initiatives that
distract from the pursuit of peace.

On 17 April, we saw the beginning of a dialogue,
when senior Palestinian officials delivered the first
letter in an exchange with Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu. In a joint statement issued following the
meeting, the parties said, "Both sides hope the

exchange of letters will help find a way to advance
peace". The United States shares that hope and views
the exchange as a positive step that builds on the
Jordanian-hosted talks and the statements issued by the
Quartet since last September.

At its most recent meeting, the Quartet also
focused on the importance of fostering continued
international support for the Palestinian Authority's
important institution-building efforts. In order to
realize a future where Palestinians live in a sovereign
State of their own, we must vigorously support the
difficult steps needed to build the institutions and
capacities of a future Palestinian State. We welcome
the actions taken by the parties to resolve the
outstanding issues related to tax and revenue collection
and urge their prompt conclusion. While the parties
address these difficult issues, the international
community must continue to play a vital role in support
of their efforts.

The United States echoes the Quartet's call for
continued international support for institution-building
by the Palestinian Authority, including for
contributions towards the $1.1 billion required to meet
the Palestinian Authority's 2012 recurrent financing
requirements. That funding is essential to preserve and
build upon the Palestinian Authority's institutional
gains and to expand economic opportunities for the
Palestinian people.

As we look to improve the financial situation on
one side, we must do our utmost to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation on both sides. International
partners should urge the parties to refrain from
provocative and unhelpful actions, including in
Jerusalem, that undermine trust, cause delay or threaten
to derail prospects for a negotiated settlement. Lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians requires both
parties to take meaningful steps.

Provocative actions, including rocket fire from
Gaza, should be unanimously condemned. Such attacks
are unacceptable and serve as a constant reminder of
the serious threat posed to civilians by the illegal
trafficking of weapons to Gaza. The Palestinians must
continue efforts on security cooperation, strengthening
public institutions and ending incitement. Any
Palestinian Government must accept the principles
established by the Quartet, which are the building
blocks of an independent Palestinian State: renouncing
violence, recognizing Israel and accepting previous
agreements. We likewise urge Israel to continue and to
step up its efforts to deter, confront and prosecute anti-
Palestinian violence and extremist hate crimes.

Let me also reiterate that we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity. We
continue to oppose any effort to legalize outposts. The
fate of existing settlements must be dealt with by the
parties along with the other permanent status issues.

I will now turn to the situation in Syria, where the
threat to international peace and security is both urgent
and grave. The scale of the Al-Assad regime's
murderous campaign is shocking, with 10,000 Syrians
killed and tens of thousands injured and imprisoned,
widespread torture and an ever-worsening crisis of
displaced persons and refugees. The conflict is also
destabilizing Syria's neighbours. In Jordan, Turkey and
Lebanon, there are already tens of thousands of Syrian
refugees. Turkey and Lebanon have recently seen
deadly violence spill across their borders.

The United States continues to support the
international humanitarian response to the crisis in
Syria, providing more than $33 million in assistance,
much of it channelled through United Nations agencies
and programmes. We will continue to support those in
greatest need.

Two days ago, the Council authorized the United
Nations Supervision Mission in Syria charged with
monitoring compliance with the full set of
commitments and obligations laid out in Joint Special
Envoy Kofi Annan's six-point plan. We welcome the
positive statements from various Syrian opposition
figures and groups about this new Mission,
understanding how desperate the Syrian people are for
assistance and, ultimately, for political change.

Syrians have said that they hope this mission can
help restrain the regime's brutality and that it will help
them uphold their rights to express themselves freely,
but we are all sober in our expectations. The regime's
long track record is one of dependable deceit and
deception. The United Nations Mission is therefore
unusually risky and dangerous. The Syrian regime
should make no mistake. We will be watching its
actions day and night. We will work to ensure that
there will be consequences should the Syrian regime
continue to ignore this Council's decisions, press ahead
with its murderous rampage and flout the will of the
international community.

Let me conclude by reiterating the United States'
appreciation to the United Nations personnel, both
military and civilian, who will comprise this new
mission. The United States urges the Government of
Syria to seize this chance for a peaceful political
solution to the crisis before it is too late.

I resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

