Mr. Bartho (Slovakia): On behalf of the Slovak
delegation I would also like to congratulate the
Indonesian presidency of the Council for the
articulated concept paper and also for the well prepared
Presidential Statement, which harmoniously elaborates
on this important topic, which was so notably
developed by the unanimous adoption of Council
resolution 1631 (2005) during Romania's Council
presidency in October 2005, was further explored by
the Greek presidency in September 2006 and was
elaborated later in the context of conflict resolution in
Africa and Europe, where regional organizations play
an important role.

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement that will
be delivered later on by Portugal on behalf of the
European Union.

It goes without saying that no two regional or
intergovernmental organizations are the same. It is,
therefore, necessary to identify areas where possible
cooperation with the appropriate organizations could
be effectively enhanced and implemented. Calls for the
establishment of mechanisms that would allow regional
and intergovernmental organizations to present their
key findings from their peacebuilding or post-conflict
missions, thus involving them proactively in dealing
with collective responses to the peace and security
challenges of today, are not new. The creation of such
mechanisms would provide a flexible, effective and
regular flow of up-to-date information between the
United Nations and the regional organizations, which
would certainly contribute to more complimentary and
coordinated actions on both sides and exclude
duplicated actions and efforts. Such cooperation,
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, should be intensified both at the high
level and at the expert level. The goal should be to
establish efficient partnerships and an equitable
division of labour that reflects the comparative
advantage of each organization involved in conflict
prevention and peacekeeping. Slovakia welcomes the
personal involvement of the Secretary-General in this
respect, and we look forward to his report with
recommendations pursuant to the presidential
statement of 28 March 2007 (S/PRST/2007/7).

Like others, Slovakia acknowledges the primary
responsibility of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security. At the same time,
there are many advantages to choosing regional and
subregional organizations in the prevention or
resolution of conflict, such as local ownership,
leverage over parties or deeper understanding of the
region concerned, which has been proven in particular
in Africa. Therefore, Slovakia fully supports additional
close and operational cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the field of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Here, we would like to commend the
African Union and subregional organizations such as
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
and the Southern African Development Community for
their role in numerous peace initiatives and in the
peaceful settlement of disputes in Africa.

As a member of the European Union (EU), we
would also like to praise the positive developments
with regard to the triangular cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and the European
Union. We look forward in particular to the EU's
contribution to addressing the regional dimension of
the Darfur crisis by deploying a bridging military
operation in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central
African Republic in the framework of the European
Security and Defence Policy.

We welcome the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1769 (2007), which moves the partnership
and cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union to a new, unprecedented level.
Deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur will undoubtedly
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union for years to come. We would
like to stress that the success of this particular
cooperative effort will be crucial in bringing hope to
the people of Darfur and contributing to a lasting
solution to the Darfur conflict. Slovakia underlines the
need to further intensify the efforts of all stakeholders
in order to ensure deployment of an effective hybrid
operation on the ground as soon as possible.

As we have said on previous occasions, we fully
share the call for a pragmatic and action-oriented
approach towards cooperation, regardless of the agenda
item concerned. Based on our direct experience from
chairing the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I would like to say
few words about its work in the context of this
thematic debate. Council members will recall that in
February 2007 we discussed ways to enhance the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by affirming
the Council's determination to promote increased
multilateral cooperation, particularly with international
intergovernmental organizations. In this context, the
1540 Committee has undertaken a range of outreach
activities with regional and international
intergovernmental organizations, such as the
Organization of American States, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization. All of those organizations play
crucial roles in the implementation process, especially
through their guidelines, practical experience and
lessons learned in the areas covered by resolution 1540
(2004) and through their assistance programmes to
facilitate the implementation of that resolution.

The activities undertaken to date demonstrate the
growing cooperation and interaction between the 1540
Committee and those organizations in pursuing the
common goal of the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. It is also acknowledged that the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States
is a long-term process that will require continuous
efforts at the national, regional and international levels,
including enhancing capacity-building and assistance
by States and other members of the international
community. To that end, the Committee places special
emphasis on promoting opportunities for international
cooperation and assistance with all regional and
subregional organizations that have experience and
resources in any area covered by the resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006).

