Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me first express
my thanks to the Peruvian presidency for convening
today's important debate on youth, peace and security.
I would also like to express gratitude to the briefers for
the reports and the study (see S/2018/86) presented to
the Security Council.

The Georgian delegation aligns itself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union. However, I would like to add the following
remarks in my national capacity.

Young people represent the majority of the
population in regions affected by wars and armed
conflicts today. Yet the same young people can
actively contribute to the peace and security of their
communities and societies, and they do, but their work
and voices need greater recognition and empowerment
from our side. Examples of young people's contribution
to the prevention of violent conflicts in different
parts of the world speak to the potential of youth in
promoting the concept of sustaining peace. To fully use
their potential, we share the view cited in the progress
study on the follow-up to resolution 2250 (2015), aimed
at expanding youth participation and engagement.

Georgia considers youth to be one of the major

driving forces in building and maintaining peace,
as well as in conflict prevention and transformation
processes. With that in mind, the Government of
Georgia facilitates the engagement of youth in public
diplomacy and confidence-building projects, including
supporting access to quality education for conflict-
affected youth. One of the latest peace initiatives of
my Government - A Step to a Better Future - seeks
to ease access for residents of the occupied regions
of Georgia - Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/
South Ossetia - to all levels of education, including
vocational, available in the rest of the country. But for
this endeavour to succeed, it is vital that the issue of
flagrant violations of human rights of the population of
the occupied regions be addressed, namely, restrictions
of freedom ofmovement, kidnappings and killings. Just
three weeks ago, in this very Chamber, I spoke about
the most recent brutal example of this: the torture and
killing of a young ethnic Georgian, Archil Tatunashvili
(see S/PV.8218).

As long as Georgia's regions of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia remain under illegal
foreign military occupation, my Government is being
prevented from exercising its duties and responsibilities
in the territories. The so-called law on the legal status of
foreign citizens, introduced in 2016 by the occupation
regimes, deprive local Georgians, including youth, from
the possibility of fully participating in almost every
aspect oflife and from having a say in decision-making
processes that directly affect them and their existence.
Young people of ethnic Georgian origin in both regions
are continuously deprived of basic human rights,
including the right to freedom of movement and, most
important, the right to receive education in their native
language. They are targets of ethnically based violence
and other forms of discrimination on ethnic grounds.

Against that backdrop, while we reaffirm our
commitment to promoting the engagement of youth in
decision-making processes, we call for the international
community's increased attention in order to protect
young people's rights in the occupied regions ofGeorgia
and in other conflict-affected areas around the world as
a matter of principle.

