Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, let me congratulate
the newly elected members of the Security Council and
wish them every success.

Developments in the Middle East remain a high
priority on the global agenda and continue to affect
Turkey in many ways. The Palestinian question still
lies at the heart of the challenges in the region and
undermines the prospects for lasting regional and global
peace and stability. The situation in Palestine remains
a major source of concern to us for humanitarian
and political reasons alike. The immediate needs of
Palestine in general, and Gaza in particular, constitute a
priority for the international community. The situation
in Gaza remains fragile and returning to the status quo
is not an option. Further steps should be taken to sustain
the current ceasefire. The Palestinian Government of
National Consensus should operate in Gaza without
obstacle, and the illegal blockade must be lifted.

The need to find a negotiated political settlement
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on two States
living side by side in peace and security within the
pre-l967 borders and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative, remains an urgent priority. Palestinian
unity is also imperative to reach a lasting solution. We
should all support President Abbas and the Palestinian
Government of National Consensus.

Israelis have enjoyed their statehood since 1948,
whereas Palestinians have been denied such an inherent
right for years. That historical injustice should be
remedied. Further expansion of the illegal settlements,
settler violence, arrests, forced displacement, house
demolitions, excessive use of force against civilians,
military raids and incursions, disrespectful and illegal
acts targeting the holy sites, and attempts to change
the historical status quo of Al-Haram Al-Sharif
demonstrate the insincerity of Israel about the peace
process. We strongly condemn those provocative acts
and will continue to voice our concern in international
forums.

It is time for the international community to renew
its engagement in seeking a solution to the problem. In
that regard, we welcome Sweden's recognition of the
State of Palestine and the resolutions adopted by the
European Parliament and the national parliaments of
some European countries. The ongoing positive trend
in Europe demonstrates that it is no longer an option
to maintain the status quo. Having said this, we were
disappointed by the recent failure of the Security Council
to adopt a draft resolution (S/2014/916) that would
have paved the way for a solution. The Council missed
another opportunity to fulfil its primary responsibility
vis-a-vis international peace and security.

The subsequent decision of the State of Palestine
to accede to international conventions and protocols,
including the Rome Statute, is a sovereign decision and
should be respected. On the other hand, the decision
of Israel to withhold the tax revenues of Palestine
as a reaction to that step is unacceptable and runs
counter to its obligations. Turkey will maintain its
support for finding a just, comprehensive and lasting
solution to the conflict and the establishment of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We reaffirmed our commitment to this vision during
President Abbas's recent official visit to Turkey.

Turkey is gravely concerned by the continuing
deterioration of the situation in Syria. We increasingly
feel the strain of the current state of chaos due to
the grave humanitarian and security situation on
the ground. Instability in the region, and Daesh in
particular, continue to represent a national security
threat for us. As the crisis enters its fifth year, the
international community shows signs of Syrian fatigue.
The focus is shifting from addressing the root causes
of the crisis towards dealing with its side effects. In
Syria, the regime, which has taken advantage of the
international community's preoccupation with Daesh,
has significantly increased its attacks on cities and
civilians. It tries to portray itself as a partner in the
fight against Daesh and tests the determination of the
international community.
The extent and scope of destruction in Syria are
unprecedented. With each passing day, the humanitarian
toll gets worse. The situation in the north of Syria,
particularly in Aleppo, keeps deteriorating, which may
lead to another large-scale population exodus. Three
million Syrians are in neighbouring countries; half of
those are in Turkey. In the face of the enormity of this
challenge, I must reiterate that active and meaningful
burden-sharing is the collective responsibility of the
international community. The international community
needs a comprehensive and coordinated strategy
with political, security and humanitarian pillars to
re-establish stability in Syria. A comprehensive strategy
to protect the population from the regime's attacks and
to accommodate large-scale refugee movements is
necessary. Unless the international community makes
the conflict in Syria a common priority and addresses
the root cause of the problem through a comprehensive
plan and a strategy to reach a genuine political transition,
we will continue to face the threat of extremism and all
kinds of other problems in the region and elsewhere.

We will continue to support any endeavour to
stop the bloodshed in Syria. In that regard, we support
Special Envoy De Mistura's efforts. From the security
perspective on the matter, I also need to highlight
that the destruction of the chemical stockpiles in
Syria should not be perceived as accomplished. The
international community and the Security Council
should remain seized of the matter.

Let me conclude by reiterating that our strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full solidarity with the Palestinian
people will continue.

