I thank Indonesia for convening this open debate, as well as Secretary- General Antonio Guterres, former Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and Sarah Cliffe, Director of the Center on International Cooperation at New York University, for their briefings. Today I would like to discuss the activities undertaken by the Government of Colombia to respond effectively to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and to continue making decisive efforts towards peacebuilding. I also wish to share our vision of the important role that the Peacebuilding Commission is playing and the challenges it faces in the midst of the pandemic. My country firmly believes that our response to the situation we currently face must be guided by the principles of solidarity, inclusion and respect for human rights. COVID-19 is not only a public health emergency; it is also a socioeconomic one, affecting the most vulnerable around the globe. In this regard, we must ensure the protection of citizens' lives by strengthening the response capacity of our health institutions and by offering economic alternatives. Like other countries, Colombia is facing monumental challenges. My Government has implemented comprehensive measures to safeguard public health, provide support to the most vulnerable, safeguard jobs, protect productive sectors and guarantee the well-being of our citizens. In the context of the pandemic, Colombia is proceeding with its firm commitment to implementing the terms of the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We have continued to make progress in the areas of work under the Peace with Legality policy. Its implementation is a priority for the Government of President Duque Marquez. Among the main challenges that this situation has brought to light in a country such as Colombia is finding a balance between health care and economic activity. Efforts to foster social cohesion and resilience, as well as empowering local communities in all sectors by effectively supporting initiatives by women, young people and other key actors, are important in meeting the socioeconomic challenges resulting from the pandemic. In Colombia, all the agencies in charge of implementing the policy on peace with legality have adopted measures for the prevention, care of and mitigation of the risks posed by COVID-19. The beneficiaries of those measures include ex-combatants, victims and farmers committed to the comprehensive national programme for the substitution of illicit crops. We also continue to work hard in the area of the approval, financing and execution of development projects in the 170 municipalities most affected by violence and poverty, in which development plans with a territorial approach are being carried out. The stabilization efforts undertaken in those municipalities are financed mainly through the national budget, complemented by other public and private funds as well as international cooperation. The international community remains committed to providing support and has expressed its confidence in the results achieved. I would like to underline that the Government has placed special emphasis on the participation of women in the consolidation of peace. The implementation of that policy offers women, particularly rural women, better living conditions that translate into their empowerment and economic autonomy, as well as the creation of workspaces in conditions of dignity and equality, with the aim of breaking the cycles of violence that violate women's rights. I would highlight in particular the work being done by the gender group on the approval of productive projects within the framework of the reintegration processes set out in the 2016 agreement. With regard to gender violence, in the context of the pandemic the Government has worked to mitigate the impacts of COVID-19 on women's rights, including specific guidelines to prevent and address such violence. I would like to highlight the role of the Peacebuilding Commission during these months. Colombia, in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Commission, is convinced that the Commission has made clear the added value that its convening power brings to the table, and, as such, we have met to discuss and advance peacebuilding priorities in the framework of the pandemic. The lessons shared in the Commission represent a vital input for the decisions that the Security Council must take and the work that it must carry out at this difficult time for humankind. In that context, the commitment of international financial organizations and public and private donors is key in order to ensure the smooth flow of resources and information in order to achieve a more effective response. We need to reach a global consensus with the international financial institutions in order to increase the resources necessary to reduce payments on emerging countries' debt and contribute to their development. Financing for peacebuilding is linked to development and addressing the root causes of conflict. Without economic growth, countries emerging from conflict situations and now facing the crisis resulting from the pandemic cannot generate enough opportunities for their citizens. For that reason, coordinated work among Governments and all the United Nations institutions on the ground is essential. In the case of Colombia, we have a country team of extraordinary professionalism in addition to the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. Cooperation on the part of the Mission and the country team with the Government has been very positive and constructive over the years. It should be stressed that international donor funds can never be enough for a country in the process of peacebuilding that is also facing a pandemic. Such funds work better as catalysts than as ongoing sources of funding. I want to emphasize that peacebuilding is not an easy task even in normal times. Reaching an agreement is only an initial step. Achieving the transformations necessary to make those agreements a reality is the difficult, lengthy and most challenging part. In that respect, neither individual countries nor the United Nations system can ignore the implications of complex contexts such as the pandemic or a socioeconomic crisis, which could threaten peace and security. This is a time for multilateral cooperation and international solidarity. We have to aim for two goals: humanitarian care and economic recovery. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the commitment of the Government of President Ivan Duque Marquez to the construction of a peace with legality. The support of the United Nations is decisive in order to achieve development in the territories most affected by violence and poverty. In the midst of the current global crisis, we will spare no effort to continue to dedicate all possible resources to achieving the results that our citizens deserve.
