Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan takes a
firm and consistent position on the issue before us. We
have always opposed the use of any type of weapons of
mass destruction in any circumstances by anyone. My
country and my people are very engaged in and have
always supported the fight against such atrocities.

We fully endorse the need to continue the work
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), which
remains a restaining and arbitration mechanism with
no alternative. In view of the continued incidents of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria and the existence of
undisclosed crimes, we are confident that the mandate
of the JIM. must be maintained and continued.

We respect the position of our colleagues who
support the extension of JIM's mandate. We are aware
that the Mechanism lost its momentum and expertise
potential in the past year because ofa delayed extension,
two months after the initial completion of its mandate.
We would not like to see a similar situation this year. At
the same time, we consider it logical that once we are
close to the date of the report, there is merit in seeing
and evaluating the outcome of the work of the JIM. It
is also necessary to extend the work of the Mechanism,
taking into account any existing challenges and
difficulties that it has encountered, if any.

It is regrettable that we are not able to bring
together common approaches and visions on the issue,
especially with regard to when and how to preserve and
improve the work of the Mechanism. On the other hand,
there is no doubt that members of the Council have
similar views on the urgency of the work of the JIM.
We therefore have to work with greater political will to
find the desired compromise. We are not supportive of
today's action, especially at a time when the Council
does not have unity or agreement on the issue. The
contrary positions, which are known to all parties, have
led us to predictable results. In the current situation,
we could not take the position of either side, since
doing so would not solve the problem in the end. Only
unity and mutual compromise can lead us to a mutually
acceptable solution of the issue, which we did not see in
the current situation.
In that regard, my country abstained in the voting
and encourages the Council to speak with one voice
against current challenges. We remain convinced that
the mandate of the JIM. will be renewed before its
expiration date, especially when we hear a consensus
on the necessity to do so.

