Ms. Honore Braithwaite: I would like to express
my gratitude to the People's Republic of China for
convening today's meeting on Haiti in its capacity as
President of the Security Council.

(spoke in French)

I take this opportunity to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Haiti.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would also like in particular to thank all of those
countries that contribute troops and police personnel
to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), as well as all the Member States
that work in partnership with Haiti in the process of
consolidating stability in Haiti.
(spoke in English)

A little less than three months before the closure of
MINUSTAH and the transition to a smaller peacekeeping
mission - the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) - Haiti remains on the
path towards stabilization and democratic consolidation.

As I highlighted during my previous briefing
(see S/PV.7920), the near-completion of the electoral
cycle earlier this year has opened up political space
for the new Government to start addressing the many
challenges facing the country, using this unique
opportunity to tackle the root causes of instability,
poverty, exclusion and impunity. Since then, initial
steps aimed at overcoming longstanding problems in the
areas of governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
development have been taken.

The Administration, under President Jovenel Moise
and Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant, has reiterated
the President's campaign promise to transform and
modernize the State to better meet the needs ofthe people
and fulfil their rights and to embark on an institutional
reform process involving all sectors of society. To
that end, a Government programme was adopted that
is built around priorities in security, justice, energy,
education, health, agriculture and decentralization,
with an emphasis on accountability and transparency
as well as the fight against corruption, a condition
sine qua non for the restoration of trust between the
citizens and the State as well as for economic growth
and human development.

While these commitments have yet to be further
nurtured by concrete measures, the executive has
launched its flagship development programme, the
"Caravane du changement" initiative, in five of Haiti's
10 departments, so as to enhance the State's service
delivery and improve the living conditions of the
population, primarily in rural areas. The programme
is considered to be the backbone of the Government's
economic growth and development strategy and is
centred on the revitalization of agricultural production
and investment in public infrastructure, with a view
to increasing market access and improving basic
social services.

In this post-electoral climate, with political
polarization significantly reduced and in the context
of an improved relationship between the executive and
the legislature, a joint legislative agenda was adopted,
for the first time in 10 years. This has set the stage for
strengthened collaboration between these two branches
of power, which is necessary for the implementation
of the ambitious reform agenda. Furthermore, the
Government has started to take difficult decisions and
reduced the State subsidy on petroleum and gasoline,
aiming at decreasing fiscal pressure and opening the
space for other public investments, while Parliament
has commenced the review of key legislation to improve
the investment climate, reinforce governance structures
and restore State institutions.

Looking ahead, for the country to make full use of
the window of opportunity that emerged following the
electoral process, additional measures will be needed
to consolidate the security and stabilization gains of
the past few years, create greater social and political
cohesion and truly reinforce State institutions so that
they can meet the needs of the Haitian people.

In this respect, I am encouraged by President
Moise's campaign pledge to launch a broad-based
national dialogue with the objective of forging a common
vision for progress and to articulate an institutional
reform agenda with priorities that address the most
pressing socioeconomic and political challenges. Such
a dialogue process would require comprehensive action
by all actors, including State institutions, political
parties, the private sector and civil society, to establish
a forward-looking agenda able to deliver tangible
results. I am also encouraged by the calls from a broad
cross-section of Haitian society for reforms to simplify
the electoral cycle, establish a permanent electoral
council and strengthen legal oversight bodies, among
other things, with a view to stabilizing the country's
democratic institutions and reforming its governance.

With regard to institutional strengthening and
reforms, I wish to reiterate my call on all actors,
executive and legislature, to move swiftly to fully restore
the judiciary and bolster its independence through the
filling of key positions, as a first step, without further
delay. It is troubling that the third branch of power has
still not been brought to full functioning. Key positions
in the Office ofthe Ombudsperson and the constitutional
council have also to be filled as a matter of priority
in order to foster the rule of law and the enjoyment of
human rights. The absence of tangible progress in the
field of the rule of law has negative impacts on people's
lives and their human rights, on the investment climate
and on economic growth. It is in this context that I
repeat my plea for resolute action to finally modernize
the penal system through the adoption of the criminal
code and the criminal procedure code, both now

before Parliament.
Without a properly functioning justice system,
the Haitian National Police (HNP) cannot effectively
deliver security for all Haitian citizens, and domestic
and international investments in the national police
force will not develop to their full potential.

As the national police grows in strength and
performance, all efforts must aim to create the necessary
framework for the effective delivery of justice and the
rule of law. This includes the State's responsibility to
guarantee and preserve the apolitical and independent
character of both the judiciary and the national police.
It also includes the need for continued prioritization by
the Government of institutional development and the
professionalization of the national police. The provision
of adequate financial resources for the police and for
the prisons administration for the implementation of
the 2017-2021 HNP strategic development plan will
serve as one indicator of the Government's commitment
to achieving this goal, amid its determination to
reconstitute a national defence force.

While the security situation remains relatively
stable, including in the areas from which MINUSTAH
has withdrawn its troops during the last three months,
the resolute implementation of the reforms and plans
for inclusive dialogue is all the more important so as
to sustainably consolidate the gains registered thus far
and pave the way for the transition from MINUSTAH
to MINUJUSTH.

Ultimately, Haiti's security, political, social and
development agenda can be shaped only by the national
authorities and the Haitian people themselves, and
the responsibility for the further consolidation of the
stabilization gains rests with the Haitian people. Much-
needed donor support can assist and complement
Haitian-led efforts where needed and desired. In this
context, I commend the Government of Haiti for the
leadership demonstrated to set the development agenda
and reinvigorate the aid-coordination architecture. This
continuous leadership will be indispensable to translate
the Government's vision into action and to align
donor support behind clearly articulated strategies
and deliverables.

With this in mind, MINUSTAH's drawdown
and transition process have been designed, in close
coordination with the national authorities, to ensure
a progressive and orderly transfer of security and
civilian tasks to the State institutions. As MINUSTAH
transitions to MINUJUSTH with its specific focus on
the rule of law, police development and human rights,
a joint United Nations country team-MINUSTAH
transition plan has been brought to near-completion.
The plan has identified residual stabilization needs
and priority areas for the continued engagement of
MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country team and the
donor community, as peacekeeping in Haiti disengages
from certain areas, including decentralization, border
management, juvenile justice and certain specialized
policing areas.

As MINUSTAH continues the implementation
of its integrated drawdown plan until the Mission's
closure, on 15 October, and ensures an orderly transition
of core mandates to MINUJUSTH, the partnership
of the international community with Haiti as well as
continued and coordinated support for Haiti's reform
agenda will be critical.

I therefore thank all of Haiti's international partners
and friends for remaining steadfast in their financial and
political support to Haiti and for the their belief in the
country's ability to lay foundations for lasting change,
sustainable development and stability that benefits all
segments of the society. It is in that spirit that I call on
Haiti's partners to continue optimizing their support for
the Haitian authorities and the Haitian people to fully
seize the opportunity that they themselves have created.

Lastly, I wish to thank all my colleagues in
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team
for their dedication and commitment during this
demanding period of change for Haiti and the United
Nations system in the country.

