Mr. Mminele (South Africa): Mr. President, South
Africa wishes to congratulate you and the delegation
of Uruguay on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We also thank you for organizing this timely
debate, which is of continuing relevance.

States bear the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, in accordance with their legal obligations
under international law. However, the international
community today is increasingly being challenged by
the changing nature of conflicts, which have become
asymmetrical and are motivated by the goal of targeting
the civilian population, which is the most vulnerable in
times of armed conflict.

This debate is useful in evaluating our reaction
to these circumstances and ascertaining whether the
available tools in our arsenal are effective in responding
to our collective responsibility. It is therefore critical that
in responding to and countering this extreme violence,
we ensure that we ourselves are not the perpetrators of
acts that bring suffering and death to the very civilians
whom we are trying to protect.

In adding our voice to today's timely debate, my
delegation wishes to make the following three points.
First, the protection of civilians could best be
achieved by the Security Council strengthening and
investing greater efforts in prevention and finding
political solutions to conflicts. Palestine, Libya and
Syria are glaring examples of the untold suffering
that civilians experience as a consequence of the
Council's inability to find political solutions to
these conflicts. The selective application and abuse
of protection-of-civilians mandates undermine the
credibility of the international community in pursuing
this goal. Furthermore, opting for a military solution,
including by arming members of the opposition, blurs
the distinction between civilian and combatant and
subsequently makes the pacific settlement of disputes
a less attractive alternative.

Secondly, we wish to underline that while it remains
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their borders, armed opposition groups must also
bear responsibility for ensuring that unarmed civilians
are protected. The Council should ensure that failure by
both State and non-State actors to uphold that principle
does not go unpunished. Ensuring accountability
for the most serious crimes, in particular those of
international concern, is a very important aspect of
ensuring the credibility of the protection of civilians
and is key to delivering global justice. Strengthening
accountability is therefore an essential element in
enhancing compliance by the parties to armed conflict
with their international obligations.

Last but not least, South Africa holds the view that
peacekeepers should be deployed in support of political
or peace processes. However, should political or peace
processes be obstructed and non-military protection
tools be inadequate, peacekeeping missions with an
explicit mandate to protect civilians must play their
part in the protection of civilians, including through the
use of force. The deployment of the Force Intervention
Brigade of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a

credible example of the success that can be achieved
through the use of force against those who obstruct the
peace.

As highlighted in the report of the High-Level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446),
the three principles of United Nations peacekeeping
should not be an excuse for failure to protect civilians
or defend the missions proactively, and there should
be flexibility in interpreting these principles to ensure
that peacekeepers enforce their mandate. This would,
however, require that peacekeeping missions be
adequately resourced and provided with the requisite
mandate and capabilities to implement their mandate.
Additionally, the United Nations, through the use of
Chapter VIII, could rely on the comparative advantage
of regional arrangements in advancing the protection
of civilians in conflict situations, as demonstrated in
Somalia and Darfur.

In conclusion, preventative measures, the promotion
and protection of human rights and support for
development within a stable environment ultimately
forms the best long-term strategy for the protection and,
indeed, prosperity of civilians under the responsibility
of States.

It is my delegation's hope that this thematic
discussion will result in concrete actions, particularly
by the Council, which is entrusted with the maintenance
of international peace and security.

