Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the United
States presidency for drawing attention to the issue
of peacekeeping's successful performance and
effectiveness. We thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix and Ms. Blakemore for their comprehensive
and informative briefings.

Kazakhstan is fully committed to strengthening and
improving United Nations peacekeeping capabilities
through well-defined, clear and achievable mandates,
the appointment of highly qualified and competent
personnel from various disciplines and the provision
of adequate equipment and funding resources. My
delegation would like to make some observations and
recommendations on some key points.

Today we are at a crossroads, facing unprecedented
challenges that demand transformative changes
involving reforms, innovative approaches and, most
of all, new yardsticks for measuring performance
in every sector of United Nations peacekeeping. The
effectiveness of peacekeeping is being questioned,
particularly with regard to the many problems that
it is encountering, and which teach many important
lessons with regard to decisions on how and when
to deploy peacekeepers and the kind of structures
and streamlining that are required to support United
Nations peacekeeping. It is in that regard that the road
maps outlined in the reports of the Panel on United
Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809) and the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), on the peacebuilding architecture,
together with resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-
General's plan of action, deserve full consideration.

Effectiveness can also be measured not just
in its ability to bring conflicts to an end but also in
how it sets the stage for lasting peace and sustainable
development. It is in that regard that Kazakhstan has
proposed an innovative threefold strategy for preventing
and addressing conflicts, which combines a security-
development nexus with revamped regional and
whole-of-system approaches to enhancing efficiency
and accountability.

Where mandates are concerned, it can be difficult
to assess performance because of the expansive scope
of the objectives that some mandates encompass.
Some of the tasks involved are defined differently by
different Member States and the mandates of individual
peace operations often make demands that go beyond
reasonable expectations. More realistic goals would
help to improve the effectiveness of United Nations
missions, reduce human suffering, prevent violent
conflict beyond States' borders and promote conflict
resolution. Another factor is the evolution of situations
over time, which requires ongoing monitoring
throughout the peacekeeping cycle so that policies can
be modified, strategies adapted and exits planned.

In addition, the success of peacekeeping missions'
operations can be measured by mandate performance,
and the degree to which they facilitate the resolution
and containment of conflict and limit casualties. Results
can also be evaluated at the strategic level in terms of
political stability rather than the implementation of
purely operational and tactical measures. Performance
assessment should also include the use of technology
to enhance mandate implementation, including the
protection of civilians, interoperability as a prerequisite
for effective operations, information sharing, medical
support, camp and installation security and mobile
communications and information platforms. We must
also strive for effects-based and performance-focused
standards if we are to have measurable, indicator-
driven reporting. Investigations into any kind of
malpractice should be transparent and available to all.
The potential ofthe Peacekeeping Capability Readiness
System, which is a valuable tool with a unique database
of Member States' peacekeeping capabilities and
deficiencies, should be fully employed.

There are several stakeholders in peace operations.
Different actors have different goals or assign different
priorities to shared goals, which is why the two need
to be able to converge. Police-contributing countries
and troop-contributing countries (TCCs) also face the
dilemma of simultaneously balancing the safety of
their own United Nations personnel with the protection
of civilians.

Improving the accountability of United Nations
peacekeepers is an ongoing challenge. While most give
heroic service, some in the field lack equipment or have
exhibited poor performance and blatant misconduct,
especially where sexual exploitation and abuse
are concerned. Such deficiencies require stringent
organizational accountability measures aimed at
ending all impunity. In order to make peacekeepers
more effective, the whole United Nations system must
be accountable.

The United Nations should also strengthen
its cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations through a comprehensive strategy for
conflict prevention and resolution, with investments
in development, as we mentioned in connection to our
threefold strategy. We fully support building new and
comprehensive partnerships with the African Union, the
European Union, the Organization of American States,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the League of
Arab States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and
other structures and groups of countries for resolving
regional and country-specific conflicts with a view to
enhancing peacekeeping performance.

We are confident that the active involvement
and engagement of new countries in United Nations
peacekeeping, including through co-deployments, can
bring fresh vigour, new blood and greater efficiency
to peace operations. Kazakhstan is committed
to increasing its contribution to United Nations
peacekeeping operations by co-deploying its unit
with that of India to the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and deploying more officers to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. We are also working
on certification by the United Nations of the courses
of the KAZCENT peacekeeping training centre,
which has been recognized for reaching the highest
international standards. Furthermore, bringing new
TCCs into United Nations peacekeeping enhances the
credibility and effectiveness of United Nations missions
and promotes cooperation and collective responsibility
among countries, regional organizations and the world
community as a whole.

Lastly, Kazakhstan stands ready to work on
increasing the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
through a concerted multilateral effort.

