Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend my sincere thanks to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his valuable briefing. I would also
like to thank the presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important meeting.

At present, the world faces great changes and
transformations in the structure of the international
system and with regard to the concept of regional and
international security, as well as with regard to the
policies guiding regional and international relations.
Ongoing instability in certain regions has led to great
changes in the type of security threats we face. For
example, terrorist groups take advantage of chaos
and instability to transform into global groups that
threaten all regions without exception. Increasing
globalization and technological progress have also
served to create complex, intertwined threats that go
beyond the territory of a single State or region - such
as cyberthreats - which will threaten global security
unless we work collectively to address them with
creative methods.

The concept of security has therefore changed
overall. It is no longer tied just to military or State
security as it once was. It is therefore no longer enough
to focus on regional security alone, as it too is linked
to political, economic and developmental issues that
require a comprehensive, global perspective as well
as mutual reliance among regional and international
organizations, such as the United Nations. That in turn
requires efforts on all levels, with a view to setting
out clear strategies and charting courses of action that
we can take to face the current threats to international
peace and security.

Cooperation among regional and international
organizations has become an important prerequisite
to face all sorts of challenges, whether regional or
international. In that context, some organizations - such
as the League of Arab States, the European Union and
the African Union, as well as many other organizations
in Asia and Latin America - serve as very useful
models that should be followed in collectively
achieving regional security. The League of Arab States
is also among the regional organizations that serves as
an important political forum for settling conflicts and
launching mediation efforts and political processes.
The European Union, too, plays an extremely effective
role in mediation and in responding to crises in various
geographical regions, including the Middle East and
the African continent. The African Union also faces
grave security threats on the African continent.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, especially when it comes to peacekeeping
operations, has contributed greatly to maintaining
international peace and security, alleviating the burden
on the United Nations and implementing resolutions of
the Security Council. In that context, I should like to
emphasize the importance of subregional cooperation
in facing terrorist threats, which are pervasive in
certain regions. Such cooperation has proved useful,
in particular in the cases in the Lake Chad Basin
and Benin, as well as in addressing terrorist groups
associated with Boko Haram. Utilizing multinational
forces and good military coordination also play an
important role in facing the threats posed by that and
other terrorist groups.

Regional organizations have comparative
advantages in their own geographic regions, as well
as strong networks with extensive knowledge of their
respective regions. Geographical proximity also makes
those organizations more responsive to the needs of
their regions, as well as more active as partners in
determining the causes and solutions to the various
crises. On the other hand, many regional organizations
continue to lack certain important strategic and
executive capabilities necessary to facing security
threats, in particular terrorism, violent extremism and
transnational organized crime. They need to be given
adequate tools and means to carry out preventive
diplomacy and provide early warning, so as to prevent
and settle conflicts in a timely way.

In that regard, the United Nations can play a very
important role in supporting regional organizations,
which are indispensable in facing many conflict
situations. We would like to stress the importance of
the role of the Organization and of using the Charter of
the United Nations to respond to international security
threats. The United Nations should lead regional
and international coordination with subregional and
civil society organizations alike. That places great
responsibility on the United Nations to set up the
necessary partnerships and play a greater role in
providing the necessary means to regional organizations
so that they can adequately and promptly respond to
security threats and to adapt in the best way possible to
the various changes and geopolitical transformations.
In that regard, we would like to suggest reconsideration
of a permanent mechanism of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, which
would hold regular meetings with a view to promoting
cooperation among such organizations and to expand
the scope of dialogue and exchanges on lessons learned,
including achieving consensus on dealing with different
international peace and security issues. We hope that
the Security Council and the Secretariat will look into
a way of discussing and launching such a mechanism.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the importance
of the role of regional organizations for two main
reasons. First, at the regional level, cooperation between
the countries of a given region that are members of the
same organizations would positively influence peace in
the entire region. Secondly, regional organizations that
face security challenges are part of the global security
structure, which now relies on the efforts of those
organizations, as well as of international organizations.
While regions are the source of many security threats,
they are also capable of providing solutions to threats
that could have extremely dangerous regional and
international repercussions if left unchecked.

I would also like to underscore the fact that
bridging the gaps between the regional organizations
and the United Nations would increase the chances of
success in dealing with world crises at a time when
those organizations require the necessary support to
complement the United Nations role in international
peace and security. That makes the link between
regional and world security a complementary and
interdependent relationship.

