Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for your able presidency
of the Security Council this month, as well as the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladinov, for his briefing this morning.
I would also like to welcome the new members of the
Security Council: Kuwait, the Netherlands, Poland,
Equatorial Guinea and Cote d'Ivoire to which I wish
every success.

This meeting coincides with regional and
international developments of paramount importance
regarding the Middle East. The region is still suffering
from crises and tensions. This year began with a situation
that has resulted in the international community having
to make difficult choices and face challenges that
require all States to uphold international legitimacy,
especially the resolutions of the Security Council.
Jordan attaches great importance to these meetings,
as we play a regional and international leading role
in seeking peaceful and lasting solutions to regional
crises, and are making efforts to create conditions
conducive to finding those solutions.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is still the main
source of instability in the region. We have repeatedly
stressed that the Palestinian question is the key to peace
and stability in the Middle East. Failure to achieve a
comprehensive and just settlement on the basis of the
Arab Peace Initiative and resolutions of international
legitimacy will significantly contribute to tensions and
the continuation of violence in the region. We stress that
the implementation of Security Council resolutions is
the only way to address the challenges in the region and
create the conditions necessary for achieving balance
in the region.

Jerusalem, the home of Muslim and Christian
holy sites, is at the heart of the solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict. The international community
considers the situation in Jerusalem as one of the
final status issues which must be addressed through
negotiations, based on resolutions of international
legitimacy. It reaffirmed that these constants cannot
be changed through unilateral decisions. Jordan has
repeatedly stressed that we cannot accept any decisions
regarding Jerusalem that fall outside ofa comprehensive
settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

In that context, members of the League of Arab
States, the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation and the
United Nations have stated clearly that we must address
the United States decision to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and relocate its Embassy to
Jerusalem. Jordan will maintain its engagement with
the international community to confront and reject
any attempt to change the legal and historic status of
Jerusalem, and rejects any imposition of fait accompli.
His Majesty King Abdullah 11, who is the Custodian
of Islamic and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, has
stressed that Jerusalem must be the holy city of peace
for the followers of the three heavenly religions. It is
unacceptable to change the legal status of Jerusalem
and such attempts stoke the emotions of Muslims and
Christians alike.

Jordan stresses the importance of cooperation as a
tool in finding new political prospects to confront all
the challenges that we are witnessing in the region.
The achievement of a two-State solution and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State on
the basis of 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, represent the only way to restore security
and stability to the region. Jordan emphasizes that
comprehensive and just peace is the Arab strategic
choice based on the Arab Peace Initiative, which
was adopted by all Arab States, supported by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and confirmed
at the latest Summit of the League of Arab States, in
March 2017. The Initiative addresses all final status
issues, including the issue of Palestinian refugees.

In that regard, we stress the importance of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in providing
basic health, rescue and education services to millions
of Palestinian refugees. Such services are closely
connected to stability and security in the region.
We call on the international community to urgently
increase its support to UNRWA in order to provide it
with adequate, sustained and predictable funding.

On the crisis in Syria, the priority remains finding
a political settlement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and efforts undertaken in Geneva to achieve unity,
stability and security in Syria. Jordan underscores its
support for the Geneva operation under the auspices of
the United Nations, and hopes that the current ninth round
of talks in Vienna will lead to tangible results towards
achieving peace and stability in Syria so as to create
conditions that support the political track. We stress
the importance of taking measures to build confidence
among the Syrian parties, and the need to decrease
tensions and violence and maintain all achievements
within a framework of de-escalation. We support the
efforts made by international humanitarian agencies
in Syria to ensure the provision of humanitarian aid
throughout the country in a quick and secure manner,
and we welcome the resolution which extends for one
year the cross-border humanitarian assistance.

We have made great strides in weakening terrorist
groups in the region. However, concerted efforts,
joined cooperation and coordination are still needed
to overcome the challenge posed by terrorists, both
at the regional and international levels. We stress
the importance of sustaining the efforts to roll back
those organizations of misguided terrorists. Finding
diplomatic, peaceful and just solutions to the crisis in
the region is the only way to overcome the despair we
are witnessing. Through that avenue, we will be able to
ahieve development and prosperity and bring about a
better future for all the peoples ofthe region, especially
the young people who aspire to live in an environment
free of conflicts and crises, an environment that
provides them with a better life.

