Mr. Heusgen (Germany): When coming to the Chamber this morning, I walked with our colleague from South Sudan, who was in a very enthusiastic mood. I asked him why he is in such a good mood. He said, "well, do we not have a fantastic result here?" I said, "well, it was the third deadline that was finally met." He said, "well, better late than never." I agreed with that, but we have to recall that where we are today is where we were back in 2016, and in 2016 we also thought that we had a solution for the problem. I think therefore that we would be very well advised if we stay a bit wary. Let me also recognize that the leaders, this time, I would say, put the interests of the country and the people first. We all have to recognize that fact, and we have done so. But, as I said, we have to remain worried. There is still no Government. I would also urge here, through the Ambassador, that the promise be kept that 35 per cent of ministers will be women. I heard someone say with that with regard to the governors, we are not there yet. I would also urge the Government and the parties to see to it that 35 per cent of the governors are women. The second part of the agreement that has not been implemented yet involves the transitional security arrangements. I would recall what David Shearer said with respect to those arrangements: that in that area we are dangerously lacking and that we must make every effort to ensure that the process works well, that the arrangements are put together properly and that the proper training is provided, in particular with regard to readiness to counter sexual violence. Again, as I said, we need to be worried. Reports of the International Committee of the Red Cross have noted that the fresh regional violence has erupted and that hundreds of civilians had to flee in Jonglei state. There was a great deal of violence, and that is, by the way, additional proof of the fact that climate change has a direct effect on security, because, as we also heard from the Special Representative, floods destroyed crops and livelihoods and led to communal violence. So what remains to be done? First, and I agree with the programme that David Shearer presented, impunity has to be addressed. There must be a continuing fight against sexual violence; we need to have accountability in that respect. Ms. Sunday also underlined this issue. With respect to corruption, financial accountability and transparency are key. However, I would also like, because members all sit on the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, to look at the report of the Panel of Experts. The Panel reports regularly to the Sanctions Committee about the lack of transparency with regard to the funds released for the practical implementation of the peace agreement. It would be good if there were not this lack of transparency and the funds actually went into the training camps in the containment areas. We heard from Ms. Sunday about the situation on the ground in the training areas. The Panel of Experts also tracks the illicit exploitation of and trade in the natural resources of Sudan and has noted the lack of oversight of where the funds come from and where they go. South Sudan is a rich country, but at the same time, as we heard from the representative of the United Kingdom and other countries, including Germany, millions are spent every year to support the country. So I think that what we can demand is actually that there be more financial oversight and transparency. Just to give the Council one concrete example from the public report of the Panel of Experts, the Ministry of Petroleum does not publish the names of the companies bidding to buy South Sudan's crude oil. We know the crude oil, of course, is the country's key source of income. So concerning impunity, the fight against corruption and ending exclusion, I can only subscribe to what Ms. Sunday said with regard to the need for a greater role to be played by civil society and also freedom of the press; that is key for a functioning State. Concerning the future of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), again, we have to be careful that there not be a repeat of what happened in 2016, so I think we should keep the mandate as is. UNMISS must continue to support the peace process. Here I would also add my voice to those who have asked the Government of South Sudan not to put any restrictions on the movement of peacekeepers. On the mandate, the first priority needs to be the protection of civilians, and therefore I also support what Mr. Shearer said with regard to the mobility of peacekeepers and the support for the rule of law. On the sanctions regime, we must look at it to see if the lists have been updated, but I would warn again against getting rid of the sanctions. The sanctions were imposed for a reason; to achieve reconciliation, we need accountability. We must not allow impunity for the many crimes have been committed, including violations of human rights, violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations with regard to sexual violence. So my plea is to continue with the good work being done by the Sanctions Committee. Last but not least, let me also add my voice to those who have thanked Mr. Shearer and, through him, the entire UNMISS team and all humanitarian actors. We thank Betty Sunday and, through her, all of civil society for their brave work. They are the one who have suffered the most; women and children were the victims of thisconflict, which lasted for too long. I would also like to thank the African Union, the regional organizations, South Africa and the Community of Sant'Egidio, which is doing an important job. Germany will continue to support the country through development aid. Just a few weeks ago we releaseda$5 million contribution to the UNMISS/United Nations country team reconciliation, stabilization and resilience trust fund, which supports community-based programmes, addresses underlying causes of conflict and provides socioeconomic incentives for peace; we would like to encourage others to join us.
