Mr. Danon (Israel): I wish to say to my colleague
from Germany that I agree with him that it is about time
that we leave statements aside and speak directly. It is
really easy to speak about both sides showing restraint;
but rockets are flying into our cities. The last rocket that
landed in Israel landed in in my community in Israel,
where I live, 100 feet from my house and from where
I am raising my children. So it is comfortable to come
and speak about ideas and implementation, but once
rockets start flying into our cities, we will defend our
people. That is the first thing we will do, and then we
will talk. We will continue to have a dialogue. But the
first thing we are committed to doing is to defend our
people and to defend our children, who last night had
to sleep in shelters because of the rockets coming from
Gaza. We are determined to do whatever is necessary to
protect our people, even ifit means burying the leaders
of Hamas in the tunnels of Gaza.

I want to challenge my colleague from Germany.
Next month, Germany will preside over the Security
Council, so perhaps we should have a closed meeting,
without cameras. He could call on both sides. We can
leave our statements at our Missions and come here and
talk. We are here to talk. We will continue to defend our
people, but at the same time, we are here to talk.

On Monday, 25 March, at 5 a.m., Hamas fired a
long-range rocket from Gaza into Israel. The rocket
travelled more than 120 kilometres past Tel Aviv
and landed directly on a private home in the farming
community of Mishmeret. The home was completely
destroyed. Neighbouring houses and cars sustained
damage, and seven civilians, including a grandmother,
a baby - her grandchild - and two other children
were injured. This was an act of terror for which the
Hamas terrorist organization is responsible. Hamas
terrorists manufactured this long-range rocket, filling
it with steel bullets and metal fragments in order to
maximize the damage. They fired it from the centre
of a Palestinian civilian area in Rafa and sent it into a
civilian area populated by families in Israel. On either
side, and from start to finish, Hamas deliberately placed
innocent people in the line of fire, making it guilty ofa
double war crime.

Throughout the day, Hamas continued to fire
more than 130 rockets into Israel. In response to these
sustained terrorist attacks, Israel took swift action,
targeting Hamas military infrastructure in Gaza.
Israel will continue to act forcefully so long as these
attacks continue.

For 12 years, since 2007, Hamas has fired more
than 12,000 rockets and mortars into Israel; that is
1,000 rockets and mortars per year, launched from
civilian areas into civilian areas. Hamas's stated goal
in firing rockets and mortars into Israel is to destroy
my country, but its other goal is to distract the attention
of the world, and our attention, from its oppressive rule
of Gaza. Over the past week, Hamas arrested, beat up
and shot at Palestinian protesters demonstrating against
the terrorist regime. People did not see it on CNN or the
BBC, people did not hear about it; but they were killing
people on the streets of Gaza.
We heard nothing from the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. We heard nothing from the so-called Human
Rights Council, which did not even mention Hamas
in its recent report of the independent international
commission of inquiry on the protests in the occupied
Palestinian territory, under agenda item 7. Instead, it
blamed Israel for all of the ills in Gaza. These bodies
simply reaffirmed what has always been true: for the
United Nations, all people deserve human rights, except
for the people of Israel. And it is the Palestinian people
in Gaza who are paying a heavy price for the crimes
of their leadership. Ask the Palestinian representative
what he really thinks about the Hamas regime in Gaza,
about the way it handles the Palestinian people in Gaza.

We have entered a new reality. Hamas has gained
the ability to launch long-range rockets deep into Israel,
past Tel Aviv and into Mishmeret. For me, the terror
attack on Mishmeret, where the most recent rocket
landed, was too close to home, because Mishmeret
is my place of residence. It is where my family lives
and where I am raising my children. I know the family
whose home was hit; my house is only a few hundred
feet away. Imagine if a rocket was fired at your home.
Think about it targeting your kids. Now imagine that
the terrorists who launched the attack said it was an
accident, as Hamas did; you would never accept that.
You would not think twice about taking action. Just
think about a rocket in Paris, in Lima, in Berlin, in
any capital. If a rocket landed tomorrow morning and
someone said, no, it was an accident, you would put
your people first, and you would likely have the support
of this body behind you.

So let me be very clear. Monday's events were no
accident. Hamas committed a heinous crime against
Israel, a deliberate and direct act of terror against our
people, just like every one of the 12,000 attacks before
it. We will not hesitate to take action.

Israel's expectations of the international community
are twofold. The Security Council should issue a clear
condemnation of Hamas and its prompt designation
as a terrorist organization. The United Nations must
condemn Hamas and its terrorism against Israel
unequivocally, and the Security Council must designate
Hamas as a terrorist organization.

Twelve thousand rockets and mortars should be
enough evidence to warrant such a designation. Some
countries will, as we heard over the past hour, claim
the moral high ground by telling Israel to exercise
maximum restraint. They will try to rationalize the
attack with the argument of "both sides". I do not see
both sides. I see a terror organization and I see a country
that is defending its people. Make no mistake. We will
not accept a reality in which our children become the
targets of Hamas. We are determined to protect our
people. If the terror attacks continue, the leaders of
Hamas will feel the might ofthe Israeli Defence Forces.
They will be buried in the tunnels of Gaza.

