Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to welcome the President
of the Transitional Federal Government, His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, and to thank
him for his presence. It reaffirms his commitment to
the struggle to resolve the conflict that has devastated
his country for many years. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, for presenting the report before us
(S/2012/283) and for his tireless work as head of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia.

Over several months, we have seen encouraging
signs and important and positive developments in
Somalia, in particular in the context of its situation in
recent years. We acknowledge that the coming months
represent a possible turning point for the future of
Somalia, and hence for the entire Horn of Africa region.

Guatemala welcomes the efforts made to date,
which have the potential to launch a new phase in the
quest for stability and peace. From our own past
experiences, we understand the importance of acting
decisively and resolutely and of not tolerating any
impediment that could overturn the set goals. Allow me
to make a few specific comments.

On the implementation of the road map, my
delegation believes concluding the drafting and the
adoption of the new constitution to be a priority. The
adoption of the constitution is also a starting point for
national reconciliation. We commend efforts to
establish the Constituent Assembly, which is a
fundamental requirement for the process to succeed.
The new interim constitution should reflect the
aspirations of all Somali people and must meet
international standards of human rights, including the
rights of women and children.

The election of the members of the Constituent
Assembly and the new parliament is of paramount
importance. The credibility and legitimacy of those
bodies depend on it. Members must represent the broad
diversity of the Somali people.

Guatemala considers it essential to end the
transitional period on 20 August, in line with the road
map and as reaffirmed in Garoowe Conferences I and II
and Gaalkacyo. We agree with the Special
Representative of Secretary-General that the transition
should be Somali-led. At the same time, the people of
Somalia must know that that the international
community, and especially the Security Council, will
support them throughout the peace process.

Like other delegations, we take note of the joint
letter from the United Nations, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Resolution 2036 (2012) reaffirms the decision of the
Security Council to take action against internal and
external actors involved in actions aimed at
undermining the peace process. My delegation will
support all actions necessary to ensure the full
implementation of the road map and to end the
transition by 20 August. There can be no more
extensions.

On the security strategy, we believe that the peace
process largely depends on the successful expansion of
the security strategy across Somalia. We believe that
the strategic coordination and expanded operations of
AMISOM. are already showing positive results, and
hope for its timely deployment to the sectors outlined
in paragraph 91 of the Secretary-General's report. We
fully support the expansion and implementation of
stabilization plans to the recovered areas. The
establishment of local administrations capable of
providing basic services to their population will be
essential. We are grateful to all international partners
for their continued support to Somalia, in particular to
the troop-contributing countries for their sacrifices, and
to donor countries.

To ensure that the political process continues, we
must redouble our efforts to end terrorism. Despite the
successful military operations of AMISOM, Al-Shabaab
is still a threat, attacking innocent Somalis and others.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden
continues to pose a serious threat to maritime safety
and economic development of countries in the region.
We reiterate that piracy is a consequence of the
challenges facing Somalia on land. It is therefore
important that the Security Council support Somalia in
addressing the underlying causes of piracy. Although
the number of acts of piracy has decreased, thanks to
the concrete measures taken, it is disturbing to note
that criminal activity is still entrenched, as mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General, and that there
are still many cases of piracy and hostage-taking, even
beyond the coast of Somalia.
On the humanitarian situation, although we are
pleased that Somalia is no longer suffering from
famine, the situation remains fragile. We hope that by
improving the security situation, conditions conducive
to undertaking unhindered humanitarian activities will
increase, especially considering that Al-Shabaab
continues to prevent several humanitarian organizations
from working in the areas it controls, which
significantly hampers the provision of assistance to
people in need. The international community needs to
show greater solidarity with the people of Somalia
regarding the provision of humanitarian assistance.

We remain concerned in particular by the plight
of Somali women and children, many of whom are
vulnerable to higher levels of sexual violence because
of their gender. We urge the international community to
continue to provide vital assistance to these and others
in need in Somalia and its neighbours.

Finally, we commend the Government of Turkey
and the Secretary-General for organizing the next
conference in Istanbul at such a crucial moment for
Somalia. We will be represented at the meeting.

