Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for convening this meeting on the
situation in Timor-Leste. I would like also to thank
Under-Secretary-General J can-Marie Guehenno for his
introduction of the special report of the Secretary-
General.

Let me join previous speakers in expressing my
sincere condolences to the families of the five
peacekeepers from the Republic of Korea who lost
their precious lives last week in the course of their
service to the cause of peace in Timor-Leste.

I will focus my statement today on the question
of the adjustment to the downsizing plan for the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET). Up to now, international involvement in
Timor-Leste has been a success story. A great deal of
effort has been expended, and much has been achieved
in keeping the peace and building the nation. It is
important that we continue to make steady efforts
towards the successful completion of UNMISET's
mandate by June of next year, as scheduled.

The Government of Japan is concerned, however,
as is the Secretary-General, over some changes we
have come to witness in the internal security situation
in Timor-Leste since November and December last. We
also recognize the need, in general, to adjust the
configuration of the peacekeeping mission to changes
in the security environment, both for the successful
achievement of its mandate and for the safety and
security of the peacekeepers.

As for the observations and proposals contained
in the special report of the Secretary-General, my
Government shares his assessment that the Timorese
police force still lacks the capacity to cope effectively
with civil disturbances or incidents by armed groups of
such magnitude as recently erupted in Timor-Leste. We
therefore consider it desirable to take special measures
in the police sector, and we support the proposals for
enhancing the international civilian police presence and
for increasing assistance to the Timorese police force.

On the other hand, there are apparently different
views among the Governments concerned on the
proposed measures relating to the military component
of UNMISET. Such differences seem to arise from the
disparate assessments of the recent incidents and the
security situation in the border area, as well as the
possible roles that the Timorese defence force may
play. If the downsizing plan is to be modified as
proposed, troop-contributing countries will have to
adjust their deployment schedule. This will not be an
easy task, and it will require a considerable amount of
time and effort on their part. Should the international
involvement in the field be prolonged longer than
necessary, it would not only be undesirable for the
international community, but could also impede the
self-reliance of Timor-Leste. My Government hopes
that an early decision which takes these factors into
consideration will be made in a manner acceptable to
all concerned.

My Government fully supports the
recommendation that UNMISET should promote better
relations with the people of Timor-Leste and greater
public information capabilities in order to enhance
understanding of the military component's role and to
counter potential misinformation campaigns. In this
context, I wish to note that the Japanese engineering
unit has endeavoured to establish good relations with
the Timorese people through various civil assistance
efforts, public information events and training for the
local population. We will continue such efforts.

Lastly, I would like to stress that, as the
Secretary-General has rightly pointed out, lasting
stability depends on the strong political commitment of
the Timor-Leste leadership to the rule of law and on its
continuing efforts to strengthen governance. So long as
the leaders of Timor-Leste make such earnest efforts on
their own, it is incumbent upon the international
community to continue to assist them. The Government
of Japan, for its part, is determined to continue to
extend as much assistance as it can to the consolidation
of peace in Timor-Leste.

