Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura
for his comprehensive and objective briefing. We
assure him of our full support. I also thank Mr. John
Ging for his instructive briefing on the catastrophic
humanitarian situation in Syria.

I will start with our concerns about the situation on
the ground, particularly the ongoing offensive in south-
western Syria. I will then touch on the extremely dire
humanitarian situation. Finally, I will emphasize that
the situation makes it even more essential to launch an
inclusive political process capable of uniting Syrians.

The relentless logic of military operations continues
in Syria. For the past week we have seen the regime
resume its attacks on the opposition in south-western
Syria, in a region inhabited by 700,000 civilians. There
have been several air attacks on the city of Dar'a since
23 June. This relentless strategy, which represents the
worst possible outcome for the civilian population,
is sadly familiar. As in Damascus, Homs, Aleppo or
eastern Ghouta, the goal of the air attacks is to force
the opposition groups to surrender using methods of
war that are contrary to humanitarian law. Another
operation in southern Syria is paving the way for new
sieges that will starve out the population and result
in more forced displacements and restrictions on
humanitarian assistance. Moreover, that offensive is
in an extremely sensitive border area and could have
direct consequences for the security and stability of
Israel and Jordan. In that connection, I would like to
recall France's commitment to the security of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force, in which the
Blue Helmets operate under difficult conditions in
the Golan Heights, and which should be maintained at
all times. Another wave of refugees could destabilize
neighbouring countries for the long-term, particularly
Jordan, which has already taken in so many Syrians.

These developments are all the more worrying
given that the diversity of the forces present in south-
western Syria presents a real risk of regional escalation.
The territories targeted in the offensive are part of the
de-escalation zone in south-western Syria established
by the United States, Russia and Jordan in July 2017.
France therefore calls on everyone, beginning with the
Russians, to honour their commitments in order to put
an immediate end to the offensive. Russia must honour
the agreement reached a year ago and immediately
ensure the cessation of hostilities.

In this troubling context, the continuing
catastrophic humanitarian situation is deplorable. In
Idlib, eastern Ghouta and elsewhere, the humanitarian
situation continues to be particularly alarming. Very
rarely do convoys have access to the population, while
the needs of the population are immense. The regime
is taking on a particularly grave responsibility in that
regard. The systematic and deliberate obstruction of
humanitarian aid is unacceptable, especially the Syrian
regime's systematic removal of medical materials
from convoys, including vaccines for children. The
influx of displaced persons renders the situation even
more critical, particularly in Idlib. All the parties
must guarantee total and unhindered humanitarian
access, coordinated by the United Nations, and, finally,
medical infrastructure and personnel, which are still
being attacked, must be protected.

I welcome the Secretary-General's report on
humanitarian cross-border assistance (S/2018/617 and S/2018/619). Cross-border assistance continues to play a
vital role in enabling aid to be sent along the most direct
routes. The mechanism is transparent, effective and
fully dedicated to the people in need. The neighbouring
countries have given the mechanism their unequivocal
support and call for it to continue. It is therefore our
responsibility to ensure that it is preserved.

Considering the risk of the fatigue over this
issue that peeps through here and there, we must all
realize that we cannot turn away in the face of the
continuing military operations and humanitarian
disaster in Syria. We must be particularly careful not
to let the potential next chapter of the Syrian tragedy,
the regional expansion of the conflict, be written.
These problems make launching a credible political
process more urgent and necessary than ever. It may
be too soon for a Syrian Dayton agreement, but we are
seeing the first encouraging signs of a true political
process. The road map is clear. We must fully support
the efforts of the United Nations in Geneva to promote
areas of convergence among the primary parties in the
Syrian crisis.

In that regard, the discussion on 18 June between
Mr. de Mistura and the three Astana guarantors,
followed by another on 25 June with the members of
the Small Group of the Global Coalition, should enable
the launch of a constructive dialogue with a view to
reaching a lasting and credible political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). The short-term
goal is the establishment of a constitutional committee.
We are encouraged by the willingness of the parties
to work constructively for the establishment of such a
committee, composed of one third members designated
by the regime, one third opposition members and one
third independents. This is a modest but necessary stage
that is showing initial progress of a kind we have not
seen for months and that could potentially be a turning
point towards a true political process. We hope that is
the case. That is why we are encouraging the Special
Envoy to continue to work actively on appointing the
50 independent representatives in order to ensure that
neither the regime nor the opposition has a majority.
We urge him to define the modalities of work for the
committee as soon as possible.

The demanding path towards a political solution
based on an intra-Syrian agreement also requires the
holding of free and transparent elections, organized and
monitored by the United Nations, enabling all Syrians,
in Syria and abroad, to have a voice, and with the active
participation of women in the political process. In that
connection, France supports a 30 per cent minimum
participation rate of women in the process.

Those two elements - the constitutional aspect and

the elections - require a neutral, secure and impartial
framework for the Syrians to express themselves freely
that is guaranteed by confidence-building measures.
That is the very aim of the efforts under way by France
and its partners to ensure coordination between the
Small Group of the Global Coalition and the Astana
process. Our goal is not to create a process devoid of
substance but to bring together the efforts of the parties
with leverage in Syria to better support the mediation
of the Special Envoy.

During the debate the day before yesterday (see S/PV.8293), the Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Director of the Middle East and North
Africa Department, Mr. Sergey Vershinin, advocated
a political settlement of the Syrian crisis through
constructive dialogue. Based on the shared conviction
that there can be no military solution to the Syrian
conflict, let us be mindful of working jointly for a
lasting political solution.

It is high time that we unite behind the United
Nations process in Geneva. That is in the interests of us
all, above all the Syrians. In that regard, France is ready
to engage with the Russian Federation and all actors
with leverage, whether on the ground, on the economic
front or in international bodies, in order for the United
Nations mediation to succeed. We believe that today
that is possible. Let us get to work. There is no time
to lose.

