Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for having organized this important debate.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, the end of the Second
World War and the victory of our peoples over fascism.
The twentieth century was marked by two World Wars
that brought untold sorrow to humankind. The worst
of human nature surfaced in utmost brutality, in a time
in which intellectual thinking, cultural refinement and
scientific progress had achieved unparalleled heights in
the history of humankind, leading to the establishment
of a new type of relations among the nations and peoples
of the world. The United Nations was the response to
the grim realities of the past. The Charter embodies
the international community's conception of this new
type of relations, including the end of colonialism
and the right of all peoples to self-determination and
independence.

The Preamble of the Charter outlines how the
peoples of the world should live in peace and harmony.
It makes far-reaching declarations of purpose by
embodying a comprehensive programme for maintaining
international peace and security. The peoples of
the United Nations expressed their determination
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war - a declaration that, unfortunately, remains far
from fulfilled. The United Nations has nonetheless
played a crucial role in the maintenance of international
peace and security, by promoting friendlier relations
among nations and cooperation in solving international
problems, and in codifying international law as the basis
for the peaceful coexistence of States - an objective of
international relations in which the United Nations has
attained remarkable success.

In today's world, as armed conflicts
proliferate 4 mainly intra-State conflicts, due to
political, social or economic exclusion, to religious,
racial or tribal intolerance, or to sheer disrespect for
basic human rights - the United Nations is faced with
the necessity to adapt its strategies for the maintenance
of peace and security. In fact, we say with regret that in
the 70 years of its existence, the United Nations has not
been able to realize the vision of its founders - to save
future generations from the scourge of war - since
war and violent conflict continue to be part of the daily
lives of millions of people.

The peoples of the United Nations reaffirmed
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations, large and small. Those are
fundamental precepts for maintaining international
peace and security. Since the foundation of the United
Nations, and under its impulse, the world has witnessed
outstanding advancement in this respect. Many
countries have made remarkable civilizational progress
in promoting the value and dignity of the human person
and conferred equal rights to men and women, while
processes of national emancipation from colonialism
and regional integration have tended to harmonize
relations between large and small nations.

The United Nations remains the main rampart for
the protection and promotion of human rights. Its work
promoting respect for human rights and the codification
of international human rights law is a significant
contribution to this important fight for human dignity
and, consequently, for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Another issue on which the peoples of the United
Nations put special emphasis is establishing conditions
for maintaining justice and respect for obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international
law. The Charter established the principles that make up
the foundation of contemporary international relations:
respect for State sovereignty and territorial integrity,
peaceful settlement of international disputes, and
non-interference in other countries' internal affairs.
However, these principles, which are enshrined in the
Charter, are violated time and again, with countries
continuing to interfere in other countries' internal
affairs, violating the Charter and thus threatening
international peace and security.

The promotion of social progress and better
standards of living in larger freedom are fundamental
instances determined by the peoples of the United
Nations. Indeed, endemic poverty, social and economic
exclusion and the denial of fundamental freedoms
constitute today an explosive cocktail and a real threat
to peace and security. Development, well-being and
democracy are pillars ofpeaceful and inclusive societies.
The nexus of peace and development is central in the
building of inclusive and peaceful societies, which
are crucial elements for the maintenance of peace and
security.

The peoples of the United Nations also decided
to practice tolerance and live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours. However, of all the
proclamations contained in the Charter, this one has met
with the most failure. In current conflicts - intra-State
and asymmetric - intolerance and hatred are directed
against others for being different, against the neighbour
because of differences of race, tribe, clan, religion or
even gender. Intolerance has become a deadly threat
to peace. This feature is present even in affluent,
democratic and participative societies, which have great
difficulties in tolerating and integrating communities of
different origin. That gives rise to dangerous situations
that are real threats to peace. Terrorism today - the
most egregious form of intolerance - together with
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters should
be a wake-up call to us all as to how we manage the
integration of communities of foreign origin.

The peoples of the United Nations also pledged
to unite in the maintenance of international peace and
security, thus giving the Organization the necessary
leverage to act in crisis situations that represent threats
to peace and security by conferring on the Security
Council the primary responsibility to act on their
behalf in carrying out its duties. This demonstration
of confidence in the Security Council means that its
decisions must not be based on partisan or private
interests, but correspond to the real objective of
attaining peace based on consensus and consent
by the international community. It follows that the
Security Council is accountable to the entire United
Nations membership, which is a commitment that, in
our view, calls for a reform of the Council to make
it more democratic in its methods of work and more
representative in its membership. It also calls for reform
of the veto power and for the review of the Council's
relationship with the wider United Nations membership.

The peoples of the United Nations demand that
armed force not be used save in the common interest,
which is a proclamation that barely corresponds to the
realities of contemporary international life. Too often,
threats of the use of force, actual use of military force
out of common interest and unilateral military action
based on inaccurate assessments and miscalculations
account for wider consequences for many countries and
the international community at large. Member States
should accept, apply and adhere to the United Nations
principles and operational methods to ensure that force
should be used only in situations of imminent threat to
peace and after all options for peaceful settlement have
been exhausted.

Finally, in their proclamation, the peoples of the
United Nation pledged to employ the international
machinery for the promotion of the economic and
social advancement of all peoples. The contemporary
and multifaceted world in which we live calls for a
multilateral approach and greater unity of purpose
among Member States to tackle global challenges.
This is the cornerstone for ensuring lasting peace and
prosperity for present and future generations.

As a peace-loving country and member of the
Security Council, Angola greatly values the action of
the United Nations. In this connection, it is important
to mention the decisive role played by the Security
Council in condemning and isolating the apartheid
regime, which was a major source of conflict in
Southern African and a serious threat to international
peace and security. Through its actions, the Security
Council significantly contributed to the fight forjustice,
equality and social progress of the peoples of Southern
Africa and to their struggle to put an end to apartheid
and colonialism in the region.

Forty years ago, Angola was in the front line in
applying Security Council resolutions concerning the
struggle against apartheid and for the emancipation of
the peoples of Southern Africa. It paid a very high price
in terms of loss of human lives and material destruction,
having had to face the apartheid regime's military
aggression for many years. We value the important
contribution by the international community and the
pivotal role of the Security Council in that process.

We commend the vital role the United Nations plays
in ensuring that Member States uphold the principles
and purposes stipulated in the Charter. The United
Nations has our full support in the work of promoting
cooperation in maintaining international peace and
security and in being the central forum for harmonizing
the actions of nations in the attainment of our common
goals.

In conclusion, we wish once again to commend the
initiative of the presidency of China in giving us this
opportunity to discuss and take stock of our action in the
Council at this time when the international community
is facing challenges that are comparable to those it
faced 70 years ago. We therefore wish to reflect on and
seek new ways to deal with those growing threats.

