Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I would like begin my
remarks by welcoming all the esteemed dignitaries -
President Mbeki, Mr. Gambari, Mr. Menkerios and
Mr. Bassole - who have briefed the Council today. We
appreciate their hard work and thank them for sharing
their valuable insights and recommendations with us.
The Sudan is at a crossroads, not only
geographically but also politically. How developments
unfold in the months ahead will have implications far
and wide. The United Nations and the international
community have invested heavily in bringing peace to
the Sudan, and that effort has yielded significant
dividends. Important progress has been made with the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA), and such crucial milestones as the
Abyei decision and the recent national and presidential
elections have been met. The Sudan and Chad have
normalized their relations and, in Darfur, a political
process has been set in motion, with specific
mechanisms to address outstanding issues.

All these efforts in the right direction
notwithstanding, it is also clear that, be it in Darfur or
Southern Sudan, the situation overall remains fragile
and volatile. Armed clashes and widespread violence
are perpetuating insecurity, which in turn is driving
displacement and criminality. Much remains to be done
to achieve a stable state of security.

Turkey is committed to the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of the Sudan. On
the other hand, Turkey has lent its full support to the
CPA since its inception. In the coming months, the
body politic in the Sudan and the Council's attention
will focus largely on ensuring the full implementation
of the CPA and on addressing post-referendum
arrangements. In that context, we believe that the
United Nations will continue to have a central role to
play not only in helping to build mutual trust and
confidence between the parties, but also in assisting
them in their negotiations and giving support, if
requested, for the referendums and popular
consultation processes. The United Nations continued
presence after the referendums will also be vital in
helping the Sudan to move forward.

On the other hand, while they are not comparable,
it is clear that CPA implementation, peace and peace
efforts in Darfur are separate but not separable
processes. Stagnation in one invariably impedes
progress in the other. Therefore, while there is no
direct linkage, every effort should be made to create a
mutually reinforcing and positive relationship between
the CPA and the Doha peace process.

As concerns Darfur, the Doha process is vital,
since security cannot realistically be attained in the
absence of a comprehensive political settlement.
International pressure must be applied on rebel groups
to participate constructively in Doha. They must not be
allowed to bide their time and hedge their bets on the
possibility of the CPA's unravelling. A clear
pronouncement to rebel groups that the Doha peace
process is not an open-ended one and that there is no
alternative to peace talks would be useful.

Be it with regard to the CPA or the Doha process,
it is also crucial to ensure that, in tandem with
restoring mutual trust and confidence, the right

incentives remain in place. In Doha, the parties must be
able to perceive win-win situations where their genuine
grievances and rational expectations are being duly met
with meaningful and fair compromise package
solutions. In the context of the CPA, both parties need
to understand that, regardless of the results of the
referendums and popular consultations, they are bound
to live together. This interdependence is a reality that
has, unfortunately, been drawn out by simplistic
interpretations of the CPA. It is counterproductive to
present the potential outcome of the referendum in the
South as a foregone conclusion. Both sides must be
allowed to make their case, as envisaged in the CPA. In
this vein, it must be made clear once again that the
referendum in the South does not imply finality, but is
part of a larger process that has to be managed very
carefully.

In that connection, as my British colleague
mentioned, the leadership of the Council has a strategic
context, and we must make sure that the United
Nations involvement in the Sudan is not in any way
seen to prejudge the outcome of the referendum.

Meanwhile, whether they are ensured by the
United Nations, the Government of the Sudan or the
Government of Southern Sudan, the protection of
civilians and humanitarian assistance should be given
the highest priority. In taking the process forward,
continuing to cultivate national ownership of the
problems at hand, including at the grass-roots level,
will also be crucial since, ultimately, whether in Darfur
or with regard to the CPA, genuine solutions to existing
problems can be found only by the Sudanese
themselves.

Finally, it will be important to effectively take
into consideration the many regional dynamics in play.
Successfully incorporating regional approaches and
addressing concerns, whether of neighbours or
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, into the
solutions that are being worked on in the Sudan will
help prevent larger problems from emerging later in the
process. In this regard, Turkey continues to believe that
the report of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur is, as a whole, extremely important. That report,
in particular in its findings and recommendations,
constitutes a point of reference for all parties in the
conflict in the Sudan. Based on the report, continued
active leadership on the part of the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel will be vital to
ensuring peace and stability in the Sudan.

I will conclude by making the observation that
the CPA has been supported by the international
community because it has brought peace to the Sudan.
The true test for the CPA and the parties will be about
not whether a specific outcome is reached in the
referendum, but whether peace can be sustained. That,
of course, will largely depend on the choices that the
parties to the CPA will make. Those choices will also
shape the response of the international community to
developments in 2011.

The United Nations and the Security Council,
together with the international community, must ensure
that the choices made now are those that favour peace,
stability, harmony and prosperity through compromise,
mutual respect and understanding. The Council and the
international community should ensure the full
implementation of the CPA while also demonstrating
political wisdom, foresight and flexibility when the
greater good requires it. Ultimately, the goal is to
provide a framework through which the peaceful
coexistence of North and South can be assured in the
long term, in whatever shape or form it best suits the
hopes of the Sudanese people.

