Mr. Wetland (Norway): The absence of resumed
real peace negotiations between Israel and the
Palestinians is not tenable. Both parties have
responsibilities to achieve a comprehensive, just and
durable peace in the Middle East. Hostilities directed
against civilians in southern Israel continue from the
Gaza Strip and Sinai. This is totally unacceptable.
Nevertheless, the expansion of Israeli settlements in
the West Bank persists and is presently the most severe
impediment to peace.

Israel has to respond to the international
community's continuous call for compliance with
international law and to abide by its international
obligations. We cannot accept the encirclement of East
Jerusalem by settlements, which is cutting off any
future capital of a Palestinian State and fragmenting
the Palestinian territory. Israeli settlements are illegal
under international and Israeli law and should be
demolished, as ruled by the Israeli High Court.
Current actions on the ground are not compatible
with the peace negotiations for the achievement of a
two-State solution to the conflict. These unlawful and
unilateral acts aimed at changing the situation on the
ground and pre-empting the outcome of negotiations
simply must stop. Both the territory and the borders are
to be decided through negotiations, as are other final
status issues.

The settlement expansion is currently inciting the
Palestinian side to respond by internationalizing the
conflict. It is also increasingly provoking public
opinion and contributes to isolating Israel within the
region and beyond. European leaders are constantly
being asked why nothing is being done to hold Israel
accountable. This threatens the stability of the
Palestinian Authority and Palestinian State-building
efforts. It may trigger waves of uncontrolled unrest in
the area and lead to a breakdown of the current security
mechanisms.

The donor support group for the Palestinian
territory met on 21 March in Brussels to address the
challenges to the Palestinian economy. It called for
increased budget support by donors to meet the
anticipated deficit in the recurrent budget. It also called
on both Israel and the Palestinian Authority to
implement improvements in the tax collection and
transfer mechanism. The donor group also called for
increased economic access for Palestinian authorities
and investors in the area that is still under Israeli
administration, which constitutes around 43 per cent of
the West Bank.

Important progress has been made in facilitating
the import of goods to Gaza, thereby improving living
conditions. However, more needs to be done if Gaza is
to realize its full economic and social potential. Within
the framework of resolution 1860 (2009), further steps
should be taken to lift the closure while taking security
challenges into account.

Finally, I should like to say a few words on Syria.
The cessation of violence remains incomplete. The
discredited Syrian authorities must immediately
withdraw their security forces and heavy weapons back
from populated areas to the barracks. Norway fully
supports Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan's efforts to
stop the bloodshed in Syria and to facilitate a political
transition towards democracy. We welcome the
adoption of resolution 2043 (2012) and the deployment
of up to 300 military observers and civilian experts to
monitor the full implementation of Mr. Annan's
six-point proposal. We hope that these efforts will
contribute positively and create conditions for a
meaningful political transition in Syria.

