I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing and Ms. Wafa Mustafa for her presentation. I extend a warm welcome to the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, Bashar Ja'afari, and the Permanent Representative of Iran, Majid Takht Ravanchi. Let me start by strongly condemning the recent terrorist attack in Azaz, which killed eight people and injured more than 80 others, including women and children. This attack is a clear sign that the terrorist groups have been taking advantage of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic to regroup and strike again. My delegation reiterates that the efforts of the international community and the Syrian Government to fight terrorism should continue, in compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law, in tandem with the equally important fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. The Niger reiterates its support for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria, as called for by the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy Geir Pedersen, to enable an all- out effort against the COVID-19 pandemic. The Russia-Turkey ceasefire agreement of 6 March is still holding and has helped reduce hostilities in north-west Syria, despite some breaches observed in the deconfliction zone. We call upon the Syrian parties, with the facilitation of Special Envoy Pedersen, to build on that synergy in order to progress towards a comprehensive ceasefire. My delegation remains persuaded that there can be no military solution to the Syrian crisis. The only viable way to resolve the crisis is a permanent political solution, inspired and owned by the Syrians themselves, with the support of the United Nations, and in line with resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we are hoping to see real progress at the next Constitutional Committee meeting in August. We call on all parties involved to show openness and willingness to negotiate in good faith for the sake of lasting peace in Syria. The United Nations must lend all necessary support to that process, in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015). The Niger takes note of the recent legislative elections in Syria. However, we insist on the necessity of any political process being inclusive of all Syrians in order to guarantee the integrity and legitimacy of the institutions that would result from such an exercise. As cases of COVID-19 are on the rise in Syria, my delegation echoes the Special Envoy's call to all parties to consider releasing detainees and take significant steps to clarify the whereabouts of missing persons. Such steps can foster confidence between the parties as they prepare for the next round of political talks. We also call for a humanitarian waiver or suspension of unilateral economic sanctions that can undermine Syria's capacity to respond to the pandemic. The current unilateral sanctions are affecting Syria's economy, and the spread of COVID-19 will worsen the situation not only for Syria, but also for its neighbours, as it is the case with Lebanon, which is hosting millions of Syrian refugees amid a severe economic crisis. The consequences of the collapse of the Syrian economy are affecting Syrians, irrespective of whether they are in government-controlled or other areas. To conclude, it is high time for the Security Council members to stop politicizing this crisis and find even the smallest common denominator in order to support and advance the political process in Syria. The accusations by some and the denials by others will not only fail to advance the search for a political solution but will also prolong the suffering of Syrians.
