The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
express my deepest thanks to you, Mr. President, for
having organized the present meeting. We are gathered
here to uphold our commitment to the population of the
Sahel at a time when the needs are immense.

This meeting of the Security Council follows my
visit to Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso and Chad last month
with the President of the African Union Commission,
the President of the World Bank, the President of
the African Development Bank and the European
Commissioner for Development. We visited those
countries to demonstrate our solidarity, underscore
the links between peace and development, and make a
commitment to continue our support.

During that visit, the World Bank and the European
Union pledged to provide more than $8.2 billion to the
region. We will hear in some detail today how those
funds will be disbursed. In addition, we will hear a
briefing by my Special Envoy, Mr. Romano Prodi, on
the progress we have made in the implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. The
representative of the African Union, Mr.Tete Antonio,
will present the point of view of the continent on all of
these elements.

At every stop during the visit, I had in-depth
exchanges with national leaders, who are working to
meet the challenges and find solutions.

(spoke in English)

We took an important first step in Mali at the regional
meeting. African ministers as well as regional and
international organizations and financial institutions
came together to improve coordination and address
the Sahel's fragility. They welcomed the African
Development Bank's establishment of an action fund,
which will help jump-start underfunded projects and
contribute to longer-term development. Going forward,
the ministers will meet twice a year to calibrate
responses to the Sahel's challenges.

I also had a very moving visit to Timbuktu. People
there are struggling to recover from human rights
abuses and upheaval. I was given an opportunity to
view the cultural treasures that had been damaged in
the attacks. This was a terrible loss for Mali and for
our common global heritage, but with UNESCO's help,
we are moving to safeguard that heritage. I condemn
all attacks against places of worship and call for
reconciliation and accountability.

We must continue to strengthen the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. Mali has made progress toward re-establishing
constitutional order. The first round of legislative
elections was conducted in an orderly manner. But the
political process between the Government and armed
groups has been delayed. I remain concerned about the
security situation in the north.

Across the region, terrorist acts, the trafficking of
arms, drugs and people and other transnational forms
of organized crime, are threatening security. We must
do more to address the food crises that plague the
Sahel. We also have to improve conditions in migrants'
communities of origin while also generating more
legal opportunities for migrants to work abroad. The
Sahel's vast size and long, porous borders mean that
such challenges can be addressed successfully only if
the countries of the region work together. The United
Nations will continue its efforts to promote security,
good governance and resilience.

I came back from the visit with a clear sense that
we need to do much more to fight poverty, empower
women, provide employment opportunities for young
people and ensure that all the people of the Sahel have
what they need to build a better future. I look forward
to hearing the views of Council members on how we
can achieve that, and I count on all partners to live up
to their promises so that this important vision can break
the cycle of poverty and insecurity and usher in an era
of prosperity and stability for all.

