Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly congratulate you and to
express my profound gratitude for the commendable
initiative on the part of Burkina Faso, as President of
the Security Council for the month of December, to
organize, under the agenda item entitled "Peace and
security in Africa", an open debate on the subject of
drug trafficking as a threat to international security.
This timely initiative and those that will emerge over
the next three weeks crown the work completed by our
sister Republic of Burkina Faso over the past 24
months in the Security Council.

The issue of drug trafficking is one of great
urgency and is at the very heart of the concerns of the
international community. That is why my country,
Senegal, attaches particular interest to today's debate.
The importance that we attach to the consideration of
the issue of drug trafficking reflects the scale of the
multiple and multiform threats to which this scourge
exposes us. It goes without saying that drug trafficking
involves well structured international networks that
have ramifications in almost all parts of the world and
carry out activities so dangerous that they undermine
the authority of States and endanger the lives and
wellbeing of thousands of human beings.

Beyond drug addiction, which is just one of this
scourge's countless devastating effects and which
poses a genuine problem to public health, the problem
also has disastrous economic and financial
consequences. The profits of illicit trafficking, which
are often laundered so that they can be invested in the
legal economy, pose a real economic problem. In
particular, the weakening of control by public
authorities over the economy when significant sums of
illegally obtained money are put into the financial
system is a major cause for concern, in particular for
developing countries. This threat is all the more
worrying in that it has now been established that drug
trafficking goes hand in hand with a number of other
criminal activities which, in turn, fuel transnational
organized crime.

Today, there can be no doubt that the substantial
profits at stake in drug trafficking attract numerous
criminal groups that rely upon it as the principal source
of funding for their activities. The danger is so great,
as many reports of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have stated, that a link has been established
between drug trafficking and the funding of armed
conflicts and terrorism in many regions. The
connections between drug trafficking and other
criminal activities, such as money-laundering,
corruption, arms trafficking, trafficking in human
beings and terrorism, reflects the magnitude and
complexity of this scourge, which, without a doubt, is a
serious threat to international peace and security.

Stepping up international efforts to fight drug
trafficking and related activities has led, among other

09-6381]
things, to the improvement of the international legal
framework in this area. While the 1988 United Nations
Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, known as the Vienna
Convention, was the first international response to the
proliferation of this scourge, the adoption of
international instruments for the fight against
organized transnational crime and corruption would
allow us to repress these related criminal activities.
Those include specifically the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
known as the Palermo Convention of 2000, and the
United Nations Convention against Corruption of 2003.
In the same vein, several initiatives and commitments
have been undertaken at the regional, subregional and
national levels to curb the phenomenon.

Despite all the efforts made in that regard to fight
drug trafficking, we must acknowledge, as part of our
condemnation of it, that that evil remains undiminished
and a source of great concern. Worse, the phenomenon
has become even more complex, given that the
criminal networks involved in that illicit trafficking
make use of developments in the area of information
and communications technologies to enhance their
organization. Thus, those criminals, who have vast
resources, are not lacking in imagination and
sophisticated methods to deceive the vigilance of the
most effective control systems.

My delegation remains deeply concerned about
the surge in drug trafficking. Our concern is even
greater since Africa, in particular West Africa, is today
becoming the hub of international drug trafficking. The
numbers speak for themselves. According to the 2008
report of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, entitled "Drug trafficking as a security threat in
West Africa", the amount of cocaine seized per year in
the region is estimated at around 50 tons.

While it appears clearly in that report that the
drug cartels of Latin America are preying on West
Africa, the primary reason is to be found in the
institutional weaknesses of certain States in the
subregion. Those States must be helped as they are
burdened by the weight of poverty and, moreover, are
experiencing political instability. Thus, drug trafficking
throws a spark into a region that is already highly
flammable and poses a real threat to security.

Although Africa does not produce such drugs, it
suffers more seriously the consequences and

implications of the illicit trafficking in those products,
which could weaken its already fragile economy and
poison its working population, primarily made up of
young people. Thus, we need to urgently step up our
efforts to address the underlying causes of that region's
vulnerability. It is therefore necessary to provide
technical assistance in order to develop and strengthen
the national capacities of those countries so that they
can more effectively prevent and fight drug trafficking
and organized transnational crime in general.

In that regard, I welcome the project entitled the
West Africa Coast Initiative, led by the United Nations
Office for West Africa in partnership with UNODC and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which
seeks to strengthen capacities with regard to applying
the law in four pilot countries, namely, Cote d'Ivoire,
Guinea-Bissau, Sierra Leone and Liberia. The Initiative
is consonant with the goals of the Economic
Community of West African States Plan of Action
against drug trafficking, adopted in October 2008.

However, so as to take into account the full extent
of the fight against the drug scourge and its various
aspects, our actions must not be limited to simply
strengthening national capacities in the area of
regulation and monitoring. It must also seek to tackle
the problems related to the poverty, underdevelopment
and political and social instability that encourage the
spread of that evil.

Since drug trafficking is a transnational
phenomenon, a synergy of actions at the regional and
international levels is also necessary to confront it
effectively and lastingly. Clearly, that entails
strengthening and improving international cooperation,
especially in the areas of mutual and police assistance
and the exchange of information, and also, in
particular, coordinating the actions of all entities and
bodies involved in the fight.

