Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
personally, Mr. President, and China for organizing this
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his continued leadership on that
critical issue.
On a warm spring evening just over two weeks
ago, families packed into one of the largest parks in
Lahore, Gulshan- i-Iqbal. It was Easter Sunday and the
crowd included Christians celebrating the holiday. At
around 6.30 p.m., a suicide bomber walked through the
gates and blew himself up near a children's swing set.
Seventy-five people were killed, including 29 kids. At
least 300 were wounded. At a hospital later, a woman
named Nasreen Bibi was waiting for an update on her
wounded two-year-old daughter and she told a reporter,
"We werejust here to have a nice evening and enjoy the
weather. What kind of people target little children in a
park?"

That horrific attack occurred less than a week after
three bombs exploded in Brussels, killing 32 innocent
people. A day before, that a bomb in Istanbul killed
four tourists. This past Saturday, a suicide bomber
targeted a restaurant in Mogadishu, killing at least
three Somalis at lunchtime. Those attacks remind us
that the threat posed by terrorists is not limited to one
country or one region; it is not limited to members of
just one faith. The thousands of Muslim victims attest
to that. Even in the Lahore attack the vast majority of
victims were Muslims. And the threat contained to any
one battlefield; rather the enemy seeks to attack all of
us wherever it can.

Our response to that threat must be just as
comprehensive and far-reaching as their ambition. That
is why the Security Council has met so frequently to
address different elements of the threat and to build a
more comprehensive approach to effectively counter
terrorism. In the past two years, we have adopted
resolutions to counter Da'esh in Syria, Iraq and Libya to
cut off the flow of foreign terrorist fighters to and from
conflict zones and to target key funding sources for
terrorist groups, such as oil, antiquities and kidnapping.

We have also importantly expanded the conversation
beyond diplomats by convening the first-ever Security
Council meeting of Interior Ministers to strengthen
border security (see S/PV.7453) and the first ever session
of Finance Ministers (see S/PV.7587) to restrict Da'esh
access to funds. In the General Assembly, we will
begin negotiations in June on how to better implement
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
informed by the Secretary-General's important Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Those are key
steps, but this is a long-term battle and more must be
done. We have to double down on efforts to prevent
terrorism groups from recruiting, radicalizing and
inspiring others to their cause by better addressing key
drivers of violent extremism.

Violent extremist groups purport to offer an
alternative to corrupt or authoritarian regimes, an
antidote to cultural marginalization, and a path of
greater purity. We must counter their propaganda and
expose the hollowness and hypocrisy of those claims,
while engaging those communities most susceptible to
their advances.

At the same time, the international community
must also take every measure to degrade and destroy
the terrorist groups that threaten our collective security.
That goal has been at the heart ofthe Council measures I
described earlier. On the battlefield, coalition air strikes
have targeted Da'esh forces, its cash-storage sites, its
energy infrastructure and other revenue-generating
facilities. Recent military advances, such as those
in Iraq and Nigeria against Da'esh and Boko Haram,
respectively, have dealt further blows to terrorist groups.
As we remain on the offensive, we must continue to
strengthen our defence, including through increased
information-sharing and international cooperation, so
as to further disrupt those groups' access to foreign
terrorist fighters and revenue. Such cooperation is also
essential to preventing terrorist access to chemical
weapons through collaborative efforts such as resolution
1540 (2004), whose tools we must strengthen through
the comprehensive review process.

Let us be clear, though, that this shared commitment
to preventing terrorist access to chemical weapons in
no way lessens our determination to identify the State
actors responsible for their use. There is no mistaking
the severity of the terrorist threat, the barbarism of its
perpetrators or the need to employ every tool in our
respective arsenals. However, let us be clear: doing so
need not and cannot require the abandoning of the core
convictions enshrined in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights.

Let us consider one of the issues that have been
raised today. There is no doubt that terrorist groups
have become dangerously adept at using the Internet
and communications technologies to propagate their
hateful messages, recruit adherence and urge followers
to violence. That is why all Governments must work
together to target the online criminal activities that
facilitate terrorism, such as illicit money transfers,
attack planning and coordination, criminal solicitation
and the provision of material support to terrorist
groups. It is also why Governments must work closely
with private companies, which define the terms under
which they will allow customers to use their services.
Such targeted efforts must not be conflated with
calls to restrict access or censor the Internet or even,
as some have suggested, to effectively shut down
whole corners of the web. Such measures would not
advance our security. Recruitment and radicalization
to violence continue to occur through person-to-person
interaction. Such restrictions would cut off the free
flow of information and alternative ideas and would
therefore restrict one of the best antidotes available
to the hate and lies propagated by terrorist groups. As
President Obama has said,

"Ideologies are not defeated with guns. They
are defeated by better ideas - a more attractive
and compelling vision."

The challenge before us is real. We must use the
Internet as effectively as our adversaries do in order
to highlight that vision and to reveal the fallacies of
their ideologies. Imposing wide-ranging limits on
the Internet, though, would mean abandoning our
foundational commitments to freedom of expression
and opinion. Here in the United States, incitement
to eminent violence is not protected speech, but
most content on even the most vitriolic websites and
social media accounts is protected from Government
suppression by our Constitution, and that is by design.
As Supreme Court Justice Robert Jackson put it,
"Freedom to differ is not limited to things that do not
matter much. That would be a mere shadow of freedom."
Justice Louis Brandeis argued,

"Freedom to think as you will and to speak as
you think are means indispensable to the discovery
and spread of political truth."

It is the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
Al-Qaida that are most afraid of the truth. Depriving
people of opportunities to discuss, debate and express
themselves online is not going to increase our security.
It will increase division among different countries
and different people and between citizens and their
Government.

The threat that terrorists like Da'esh pose to all of
our citizens is clear, and the urgency with which we
must counter them could not be greater. But in today's
debate we must recognize not only the danger they
pose to our safety and security, but the danger that
we might overreact, to the detriment of our societies
and to our security. We must not deprive our citizens
of core freedoms like expression, peaceful assembly,
association or religionjust because terrorists have taken
advantage of them. Doing so would fall precisely into
their trap. The international community's victory over
terrorism will come through its determined efforts to
counter violent extremism and to defeat terrorist groups.

The terrorists in the Lahore park I described earlier
were targeting Christians, and they hoped to drive a
wedge between them and their Muslim neighbours.
However, in the days that followed, that did not happen.
Instead of being driven apart, Pakistanis of all faiths
came together to queue up in long lines to donate blood at
hospitals and to voice outrage and solidarity. A canteen
owner who had been serving food near the bombings
said, "It is wrong this is happening. Christians are like
our brothers and sisters." Their reaction mirrored the
shows of solidarity witnessed after other recent attacks
and points to the final reason why these terrorists will
never win. However despicable and barbaric, their
attacks do not leave us scattered in fear. Rather, as I
think this Council has proven, they unite us ever tighter
in our determination to defeat them.

