Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me first commend you, Sir,
for convening this meeting on such an important theme
with the appropriate timing and format. As your concept
note (S/2017/574, annex) indicates, there is a continuity
of discussions and relevant documents on the issue, and
focus should now be placed on implementation. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General and Commissioner
Chergui for their briefings.

Today's topic is strategic in relation to the
stabilization of the African continent and beyond. As
a Mediterranean country with a historical relationship
with Africa, Italy is acutely aware ofthe need to enhance
African capacities in the areas of peace and security. In
the context of the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, signed on 19 April, the Secretary-General
spoke of the mechanisms to finance African Union
peace operations, and the report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the same subject
marked the outset of a strategic partnership between
the two organizations.

The African Union has taken on important
responsibilities in recent years and shown the
willingness to take on more. We support African
ambitions with regard to the development of the African
Union Peace and Security Architecture, the African
Union Peace Fund and the African Standby Force and
its rapid-deployment capability.

African Union peace operations often have
comparative advantages. In that respect, Italy supports
the mechanism set out in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/454) for joint planning and mandating African
Union peace operations. The mechanism provides for
African ownership, while preserving the prerogatives
of the Security Council. The African Union-United
Nations cooperation has been extensively tested in the
African Union Mission in Somalia and in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.

I also recall the potential of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, referred to by the
Minister of Senegal, the revitalization ofwhich we deem
essential for the entire region, and the establishment
of the Group of Five for the Sahel force to combat
terrorism, which, in our view, can effectively cooperate
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and the European Union
missions deployed in the region. We underscore once
again the importance of that innovative operation and
of the need for the Council to ensure that it receives
all the necessary support in our joint endeavour against
violent extremism in the region. In that regard, I
also underscore that the recently established unified
command of the European Union missions in Somalia,
the Central African Republic and Mali reinforces the
European Union's strategic role as a coordination
partner to the United Nations, the African Union and
the African forces.

In that respect, I would like to align myself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

Enhanced strategic cooperation with the African
Union is the main way towards smart and cost-effectiv
peace operations. We welcome the commitment
undertaken by the African Union Summit in July 2016
to contribute 25 per cent of the cost of African Union

peace operations by 2020 and encourage the African
partners under the leadership of Mr. Kaberuka to
finalize its operative arrangements. We believe that
it is important to note that that commitment would
significantly increase the financial contribution of
Africa to peace operations.

The various options to provide financial support
envisaged in the report of the Secretary-General can
be chosen on a case-by-case basis. I would like to
recall that, already in 2008, the report (see S/2008/813)
prepared by the panel of experts chaired by former
Prime Minister Romano Prodi called for predictable
and sustainable financial support to United Nations-
approved African Union peacekeeping missions.
We are therefore in favour of exploring the use of
assessed contributions, provided that the appropriate
set of requirements in terms of troop quality, training,
equipment and high-accountability standards is met.

Predictability as to financing is essential but not
the exclusive way to strengthen African capabilities.
Equipment, technological innovation and, first and
foremost, training and institution-building are crucial
to enhancing the effectiveness of African efforts to
prevent and manage conflicts and to build peace. Italy
stands ready to strengthen its engagement in capacity-
building with regard to police and military units in
African Union missions, as it is already doing through
many centres, such as the Center of Excellence for
Stability Police Units in Vicenza, and contribute to
devising new training skills tailored to African needs.

The interconnected nature of current threats to
peace and stability is evident in Africa more than
in other areas of the world. Terrorist organizations,
transnational organized crime, human trafficking,
climate change and food insecurity are all common
elements in most of the crises that we are witnessing
in the continent. Therefore, given the horizontal and
evolving nature of the threats, it is clear that the United
Nations cannot and should not tackle them on its own.
A renewed and enhanced partnership with regional and
subregional organizations based on Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations and on the principle
of subsidiarity is essential. Thanks to the coordinated
action of subregional organizations, developments in
some parts of the African continent are, in our view, a
clear indicator of the potential of that approach.

In the longer-term, tackling the root causes of
African instability is the only sustainable solution.
Italy will continue and intensify its efforts bilaterally
within the European Union and the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to help Africa embark
upon a path of sustainable economic growth. We will
also continue to provide specific mediation expertise
through Italian non-governmental entities, as we are
doing in the Central African Republic.

In conclusion, so as to achieve those ambitious
and important goals, the Security Council has to
show its readiness in embracing the innovative spirit
that the terms of the relationship with Africa require
today. Ultimately, what is at stake is the idea itself of
constructive multilateralism, which we as members of
the United Nations and of the Council should uphold and
advance by showing the necessary political leadership.

