Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Tiirk for his comprehensive briefing
to the Council this morning. New Zealand welcomes
the ongoing progress with the peace process on the
Papua New Guinea island of Bougainville, and we are
grateful to the United Nations Political Office in
Bougainville (UNPOB) for its useful role in that effort.
I should also say that we very much appreciate the
support provided by the Department of Political Affairs
and its staff at the New York end.

While it is encouraging that Bougainville factions
have met to discuss the final fate of the weapons that
have been contained, we would have hoped that an
unambiguous decision to immediately destroy the
weapons could have been made. We encourage all
parties to expedite a final decision to destroy the
contained weapons and thus to conclude the
disarmament process on the island.

We are mindful that the Government of Papua
New Guinea has requested the United Nations to
continue to play a constructive role in the peace
process. It is of key importance, as the peace process
progresses, to ensure that all Bougainvilleans have a
say in setting the agenda for the process. Too often in
the recent past, the views of former combatants have
been given disproportionate weight. An ongoing
United Nations political presence should therefore be
structured in such a way so as to ensure that the voices
of all Bougainvilleans are heard.

The main concern for the vast majority of
Bougainvilleans is the improvement of their social and
economic conditions. New Zealand, along with
Australia and other donors, has made significant
investments in the development of the island. We
encourage enhanced engagement by United Nations
funds and programmes to complement those efforts.

Should the Council approve a continued United
Nations political presence, the size of that mission
should be reflective of the needs on the ground at
present, and Council members will want to weigh
carefully the views that have been put to them today on
that point.

