The President: I thank Mr. Antonio for his
statement.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2014/532, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, Australia, Chad,
Chile, Jordan, Luxembourg, Nigeria, the Republic of
Korea and Rwanda.

I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2167 (2014).

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Rwanda.

I wish to thank all present for being here today.
I would like to thank our briefers; the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Ban Ki-moon; the Deputy
Secretary-General of the European External Action
Service, Mr. Maciej Popowski; and the Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
Ambassador Tete Antonio.
I wish also to recognize the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Tariq Fatemi, Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Special Assistant to the Prime
Minister of Pakistan, and His Excellency Mr. Urmas
Paet, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia, who will
join us later.

Unfortunately, owing to unforeseen last-minute
circumstances, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Rwanda, cannot
be here today, and she asked that I pass on her sincere
apologies and regrets to all Council members and other
representatives.

As Rwanda comes close to the end of its presidency
of the Council, I would like to say that we saved the
best for last. Indeed, I can think of no better way in
which to end Rwanda's presidency than with this open
debate and the adoption of resolution 2167 (2014),
which is intended to bear fruit in concrete ways to
strengthen coordination among partners and regional
and subregional organizations, so as to ensure a
comprehensive strategy for effective responses to
threats to international peace and security.

In our assessment, we believe that this is an
opportune time to hold this debate on the evolution
of the United Nations and regional partnerships in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
especially in peacekeeping. As peace is shared, so are
the consequences of insecurity and conflicts in the
global world in which we live today.

Indeed, the framers of the Charter of the United
Nations had foreseen the need for coordination and
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
agreements in the maintenance of peace and security,
as set out in its Chapter VIII. The spirit of the Charter
has been transformed into action today with an evident
engagement on the part of regional organizations
in international peace operations. The challenge we
have today is to promote the positive evolution of
these kinds of partnerships so that they move from ad
hoc partnerships to more structured frameworks for
partnership.

We have learned from the tragic failures in Rwanda
and Srebrenica, 20 years ago, that rapid regional
engagement and response mechanisms are essential in
a world where political will and defence budgets are
both declining. There is an obvious need for rapid
responses to often-unpredictable violent conflicts, and
partnerships with regional organizations in Africa and
elsewhere are fundamental in achieving this endeavour.
Acknowledging the benefits of peacekeeping
partnerships, the Security Council has adopted
various resolutions and presidential statements on
the subject, with the last one being resolution 2033
(2012), which requested the Secretary-General to
conduct, in consultation with the African Union, a
comprehensive analysis of the lessons learned from
practical cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU), in particular with regard to
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the African Union Mission in
Somalia.

The issue has not been discussed since then,
despite the fact that the Council has continued to
rely on partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations to support peacekeeping efforts. When
it comes to the African continent, it is clear that the
AU and regional organizations often have political
legitimacy, the advantage of proximity and access to
African capabilities. Partners bring funding, experience
and logistical capabilities as well as political leverage
in specific cases. All of these comparative advantages
have come into play in various forms in support of
African peace-support operations to date, but largely
on an ad hoc basis.

This forum therefore offers an opportunity to
explore ways in which regional partners can best
bring their comparative advantages to United Nations
peacekeeping and how their operational capacities can
be enhanced and supported, so that they may share the
peacekeeping burden and, ultimately, make operations
more effective at the strategic, operational and tactical
levels.

Over the past decade, African countries, with the
support of international partners, have engaged in
a collective effort to develop regional capacities for
peace-support operations, as per the creation of the
AU Peace and Security Commission and the African
Standby Force. As a result of those efforts as well as
of bilateral support to Member States, there has been a
steady improvement in African capacities to respond to
crisis situations through the deployment of increasingly
larger and more complex peace-support operations.

UNAMID is no longer a one-of-a-kind partnership.
In Mali, Somalia, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, the United Nations has worked with
organizations including the African Union, the
Economic Community of Central African States, the
Economic Community of West African States, and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the Southern African Development Community and
the East African Community as well as the European
Union in various peacekeeping models.

Rwanda today is proud to have been part of such
operations for the past 10 years, including the transitions
from the African Union Mission in the Sudan to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, which is one of the largest peacekeeping
operations in the world to date; from the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali; and soon from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

With an already large presence in the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), Rwanda recently
deployed another battalion alongside IGAD, which
has deployed a robust force of three battalions under
UNMISS command in order to protect civilians and
IGAD monitors in the face of escalating violence. We
are currently in talks to deploy two military helicopters
in support of the IGAD and UNMISS operations.

We want to also give special thanks to all of our
partners, especially the United States, for their valuable
support. While great things have been achieved through
these and other partnerships, there are lessons to be
taken and room for improvement, the fact remains that
the AU has often struggled when it comes to operational
capacities, which highlights the importance of matching
resources to mandates.

Mandated missions must have adequate funds and
other necessary resources, including troops that are
appropriately prepared. Just last Friday, we convened
an informative meeting of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations to discuss the issue of troop
and police preparedness. We recognized the steps taken
by African leaders at the Malabo Summit last month, as
well as those taken by the African Union Commission
to operationalize the African capacity for immediate
response to crises.

The East African Community aims to have full
operationalization of its stand-by force by December
2014, and we commend the East African Community
for this remarkable achievement and its efforts to
generate the required contributions. We invite all
regional and subregional organizations to accelerate the
establishment of such stand-by arrangement systems.

I believe that resolution 2167 (2014) will help the
Council to address many of those challenges as we
forge ahead, including how organizations will pull their
resources together and allocate roles and responsibilities
and how we can streamline coordination processes
and frameworks. It lays out measurable requests and
recommendations that can provide benchmarks for
progress and evaluation, including from political,
operational and financial perspectives. On a larger,
longer-term scale, in paragraph 28 the resolution

"[r]equests the Secretary-General, in close
consultation with the AU Commission and EU
to produce, not later than 31 March 2015, an
assessment report and recommendations on the
progress of the partnerships between the United
Nations and relevant regional organizations in
peacekeeping operations".

On financial cooperation and support, the
resolution recognizes that one major constraint facing
some regional organizations, in particular the AU, in
effectively carrying out the mandate of maintaining
regional peace and security is securing predicable,
sustainable and flexible resources. Rwanda therefore
welcomes the steps taken by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission to generate resources from
within AU member States in support of peace support
operations, but we also urge external partners to
seriously consider the capacity in which they can assist
regional organizations.

In particular, consideration should be given to the
findings contained in the 2008 joint AU-United Nations
report on AU peacekeeping operations, otherwise
known as the Prodi panel report (see S/2008/8l3),
which established that a peace support operation that
is eventually to be transferred to the United Nations
should be sponsored by the United Nations from
the beginning, through assessed contributions for
six months before being handed over to the United
Nations. That will truly limit inadequate funding
and unpredictable resource capacity. The AU is
currently very active in peacekeeping operations that
are mandated by the Security Council and that have
transitioned or are in the process of transitioning to
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Today is another step towards better structuring
and elaborating on the burden-sharing needs among
African States, regional and subregional organizations
and partners, including the AU, the EU and the United
Nations. Resolution 2167 (2014) and today's discussion
display the resolve of the international community to
establish more predictable frameworks and working
relationships when it comes to integrated peacekeeping
operations. We must help each other to build up our
unique abilities so that together we can forge a collective
security system for a safer and more secure world.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to the members of the Council.


