Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The delegation of
Botswana is deeply troubled by the large-scale fighting in
Tajikistan. The parties are clearly unwilling to meet the
conditions set out in the resolutions of the Security

 

Council. It is regrettable that the situation in Tajikistan
remains what it was six months ago, when the Council last
reviewed the mandate of the United Nations Mission of
Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT). In other words, there
has been no meaningful progress in the inter-Tajik peace
talks, despite the stated intentions of the parties to resolve
their differences through political dialogue. It is disturbing
indeed that the hostilities are reported to have reached new
levels of intensity since the civil war ended in 1992.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us. UNMOT is doing a good job under
very trying conditions, but we do not believe that now is
the time to withdraw the Mission, as this would be likely
to aggravate the situation in Tajikistan and adversely affect
the peace and stability of the whole region. The resolution,
however, rightly puts the parties on notice, in very clear
language, that the extension of UNMOT's mandate is
contingent upon the respect by the parties for the Tehran
Agreement, an effective cease-fire and progress in the peace
talks. The parties must understand that UNMOT's mandate
cannot be extended indefinitely. Its extension depends on
the cooperation of the parties themselves and on their
demonstrable commitment to work towards the political
settlement of their differences.

It is our hope that the parties will take serious note of
paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, which expresses the
intention of the Council to review the future commitment
of the United Nations in Tajikistan at the end of the next
mandate period, should the prospects for a lasting peace not
have improved. This is in line with the Secretary-General's
statement, in paragraph 29 of his report, that if the
prospects for a comprehensive peace settlement have not
improved by the next review period, the Council will have
to consider alternative options for the future of UNMOT,
including the possibility of its withdrawal.

Finally, my delegation wishes to welcome the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Tajikistan, Mr. Merrem. We wish him every success in his
new job.

