Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China.
At the outset, I would like to point out that, for
the Group of 77 and China, the Security Council is not
the forum for discussing matters that fall within the
purview of the General Assembly. The Charter of the
United Nations clearly sets out the roles and
responsibilities of the principal organs of the United
Nations, as do the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, which is the chief deliberative, policy-
making and representative organ of the United Nations.

Like the Non-Aligned Movement, we wish to
reiterate our concern over the encroachment by the
Security Council on the functions and powers of the
General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council. We see the Security Council infringing on
issues that traditionally fall outside of its competence
and assuming for itself norm-setting powers that are
solely within the purview of the General Assembly.
Discussing matters such as procurement is contrary to
Article 24 of the Charter, which clearly sets out the
primary responsibility of the Council.

This meeting comes at a time when the rest of the
membership of the United Nations is actively engaged
in a process led by the Secretary-General and the
President of the General Assembly to reform and
strengthen the United Nations. The fundamental
principle underpinning that collective effort is that the
United Nations is an intergovernmental body in which
the voice of each and every Member State must be
heard and respected, irrespective of the contributions
made to the budget of the Organization.

All Member States of the United Nations are
required to contribute resources to the Organization on
the basis of their capacity to pay. The fact that there
may be a difference in the levels of monetary
contribution to the Organization does not imply any
difference in the decision-making role of Member
States in the United Nations.

The Group of 77 and China has always supported
the Secretary-General's efforts to reform the United
Nations. We have always called for greater transparency
and accountability within the Organization, as well as
for more effective utilization of its resources.

Procurement policies and practices fall under the
purview of the General Assembly and are discussed on
a regular basis in that body. The Assembly has always
considered reports of the oversight bodies on
procurement and on the audited financial statements of
peacekeeping operations. In fact, in the past few years,
decisive action by the General Assembly has led to
substantial reforms of the procurement system. The
report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) that is being discussed here today was
requested by members of the Group of 77 and China,
and we still expect it to be formally introduced in and
considered by the General Assembly.

Therefore, the insinuation that developing
countries might somehow be tolerant of corruption,
mismanagement and fraud is wrong. The Group of 77
and China always expects the Secretary-General to
take immediate action in cases of corruption, fraud or
any wrongdoing within the Organization. We believe
that staff should be held accountable for any
wrongdoing, irrespective of their nationality or
seniority. We wish to ensure that any disciplinary
action meets due process, in accordance with the basic
principles of justice and fairness, and that it is in line
with the rules and regulations of the Organization. That
is why we believe that today's debate undermines the
General Assembly, particularly the oversight function
that belongs to all Member States.

We are aware that, when the Security Council has
assumed for itself the function of overseeing a
programme - such as the oil-for-food programme,
which was created, managed and overseen by the
Council - the experience has not been satisfactory. It
was the General Assembly that had to institute additional
safeguards such as the newly created Ethics Office, the
whistleblower programme and the strengthening of the
OIOS following the erroneous perception of
widespread corruption and mismanagement within the
United Nations.

Throughout the process of United Nations
reform, the Group of 77 and China, representing more
than two thirds of the United Nations membership, has
always been ready to engage in constructive dialogue
with Member States from all regions of the world. For
us, the United Nations matters. We represent
developing countries that look to the United Nations to
assist them in development and to help our people
respond to the permanent threat of underdevelopment.
We believe in the need for security. However, security
without development will always be unattainable.

