Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the Minister
for his remarks. I join others in welcoming Assistant

Secretary-General Zerihoun, Ambassador Apakan and
Ambassador Sajdik back to the Security Council, and I
thank them for their sobering briefings today.

As those briefings have told us so clearly, the word
ceasefire is losing its meaning in eastern Ukraine.
Since the start of 2016, it has been broken thousands
of times. Those violations are causing almost daily
casualties. Weapons banned under the ceasefire
are being put to deadly use on the battlefield. The
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission personnel, charged
with monitoring the ceasefire, are being harassed and
threatened, and worse. People are dying, and those in
need are going hungry.

To illustrate how empty the word ceasefire has
become: just yesterday, tragically, four civilians were
killed. And in response to those harrowing deaths in
Olenivka, all we have seen is just claim and counter-
claim, That is not good enough. All sides have an
obligation to uphold the ceasefire. They all have a duty
to protect civilians, especially the vulnerable. What we
need to see is a real, meaningful commitment to the
ceasefire by all sides. That is the only way to stop the
killings. That is the only way for the Minsk agreements
to succeed. A ceasefire is the bedrock for Minsk.
Without it, all the other measures will falter.

All sides have a role to play, but we should be
under no illusions as to where the vast majority of
responsibility lies. It falls squarely at the door of the
Russian-backed separatists. The Special Monitoring
Mission has repeatedly made that clear. It is the
separatists who are harassing OSCE monitors. It is
separatists who risk escalating the febrile situation. And
it is the separatists who are receiving troops, equipment
and weapons from their Russian allies.

The continued support from the Russian Federation
has sustained the instability in eastern Ukraine. Russia's
so-called humanitarian convoys cross the border
with no regard for Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial
integrity or independence. They do so without any
inspection. We therefore call on Russia to prove that
they have nothing to hide and allow international
access to those convoys. While Russia's support for the
separatists fuelled this crisis, Russia's influence can
also bring about a conclusion to the madness. We call
on Russia to use its influence for good, to bring the
separatists to heel, so that they respect the ceasefire
and withdraw banned weapons, so that they allow
unhindered access to the Special Monitoring Mission,
and so that international humanitarian agencies can
finally access all areas of separatist-held territory. It
is almost meaningless to discuss any other aspect of
Minsk until that has happened.

What we are discussing today - the death, the
suffering - these are all the bloody consequence of
Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea two years ago.
That act of aggression went against every treaty, every
international commitment, that Russia has ever made.
It went against all the rules and norms of international
behaviour in the modern world. Our position on that
act of aggression will never waiver: Russia must return
Crimea to Ukraine. Until it does, it will continue to face
the consequences of its illegal actions.

Over the past two years, the human rights situation
in Crimea has deteriorated. For minorities and
political opponents, life under the de facto authorities
is now characterized by arrests, ill treatment, torture
and intimidation. The Crimean Tartar community
has been particularly affected. The banning of their
representative institution this week is just the latest in a
series of attacks on their community, their organizations
and their way of life.

In the light of the evidence found in United Nations
and OSCE human rights reporting, it is perhaps
unsurprising that Russia has consistently denied access
to international human rights organizations, save for
the solitary Council of Europe mission in January.
One of the recommendations from that mission, which
reported back to the Council of Europe Secretary
General this month, called on Russia to open up Crimea
to international human rights monitoring mechanisms.
We repeat that call today. Russia must grant such access
to enable a proper assessment of the situation.

Let me conclude with this final point. Through
its actions in Crimea and through its support to the
separatists, Russia has brought chaos to Ukraine. In
that chaos, thousands of lives have been lost, including
those four civilians only yesterday. No matter who fired
the shells that killed those poor people, it is clear that,
without Russia's actions, they would not have been
exposed to the horrific violence that claimed their lives.
I therefore end by once again calling on Russia to fulfil
its commitments under the Minsk agreements and to
allow Ukraine to regain control of its sovereign territory.
That can happen only if there is a stable ceasefire.

