Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing. I
should also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
most recent report on piracy (S/2012/783).

The international community has made
sustained efforts to combat piracy, and the integrated
multidimensional approach we have pursued together,
in partnership with the private sector, has borne fruit.
The number of pirate attacks is dropping rapidly, and
pirates are holding fewer hostages. The United Nations
and the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia deserve special thanks for building bridges
among the key actors to facilitate this progress.

While the situation has improved dramatically, even
one hostage is indeed too many. We express our deepest
sympathy for kidnapped seafarers and the suffering of
their families, and we call for their immediate release.
We note in particular the crew of the M. V Iceberg, who
were long ago abandoned and have been in captivity
for almost three years. We also support the shipping
industry's provision of all necessary assistance to
seafarers after their release.

Effectively countering piracy requires action on
multiple fronts. Identifying and apprehending the
criminal conspirators who lead, manage and finance
the pirate enterprise is central to our efforts. Those
individuals are ultimately responsible for hostage-taking
and other piracy-related threats to seafarers. We are
working in close coordination with our international
partners to connect and promote information sharing
among law enforcement communities, intelligence
agencies and financial experts in order to prosecute
pirate conspirators and disrupt their operations. In
addition, specifically in the Somalia context, the
international community can do more to enhance
Somali capacity and encourage their active involvement
in efforts to prosecute and incarcerate suspected pirates.

We continue to support the work of the United
Nations-managed Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of
States Countering Piracy offthe Coast ofSomalia, which
has funded, among other projects, the construction
of prisons, the training of judicial officials and the
purchase of equipment for law enforcement in Somalia.
We appreciate the important work under way by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United
Nations Development Programme and others to assist
Somalia and States of the region in conducting piracy
prosecutions, as well as in building and responsibly
operating suitable and sufficient prisons.

Among others, we thank the Government of
Seychelles for its willingness to host a regional
prosecution centre, contingent upon the establishment
of an effective post-trial transfer framework. We
welcome the opening, this year, of its regional
anti-piracy prosecution and intelligence coordination
centre. We also thank the Government of Kenya for its
recent prosecutorial efforts, and we note its pioneering
use of technology to cope with the logistical challenges
such cases present.

Somalia must do its part as well. Having completed
its transition, adopted a new provisional Constitution
and elected a new Parliament and President, Somalia
is poised to take greater action to counter piracy. In
particular, we urge the new Somali authorities to adopt
and enact appropriate anti-piracy legislation. The
establishment of a Somali exclusive economic zone,
consistent with the Convention on the Law of the Sea,
is also needed.

As the international community works to put pirate
financiers and facilitators out of business and help to
bring them to justice on land, the shipping industry
should continue to make merchant ships harder targets
to attack at sea. Clearly, preventing pirate attacks is
a more effective and efficient way to protect human
life and property than interrupting attacks in progress
or rescuing hostages after an attack. There are not
enough naval forces to maintain a sufficient presence
throughout the high-risk ocean areas to deter and defeat
all pirate attacks.

The routine implementation of best management
practices and the responsible use of armed security
personnel are vital adjuncts to national and coalition
naval patrols. We know that applying best management
practices on vessels transiting high-risk waters
greatly reduces the likelihood of a successful attack.
Furthermore, to date not a single ship employing
privately contracted armed security personnel has
been successfully pirated. For certain ships determined
to be at high risk, onboard armed security, including
privately contracted personnel, can be a helpful and
appropriate defensive measure, if so assessed by the
vessel's operators.

The United States has mandated the deployment
of best management practices on United States-
flagged vessels sailing in high-risk waters. We have
also established requirements and guidance for United
States ships when the owner or operator determines that
armed security is needed. We will continue to work with
fellow International Maritime Organization member
States, along with labour and industry representatives,
on the development of appropriate standards.

The international community, in partnership with
the private sector, has made impressive strides towards
reducing the scourge of piracy. But our gains are not
irreversible, and we cannot let up. We look forward
to continued cooperation with, and support from, our
international partners, action by private industry and
a sustained commitment by the Security Council to
ensure that seafarers are protected, that international
commerce is no longer threatened and that the guilty
are brought to justice.

