Mr. Kolby (Norway): 1, too, would like to thank
Ambassador Ryan and his team for their excellent
performance during the month of their presidency. I
would also like to welcome the Foreign Minister of
Liberia to this important meeting.

I congratulate the Panel on the detailed and well-
documented report that has been put together on
Liberia's implementation of the sanctions regime
imposed six months ago. The report is a very good
example of how we all want an expert panel to
function: to compile facts independently, assess the
activities on the ground and make concrete
recommendations as to how a sanctions regime can be
made more efficient, or possibly strengthened.

The positive aspect of the report before us is
obvious. The sanctions have indeed had an impact. Six
months ago there were active hostilities in all three
Mano River countries. Today there are what the Panel
terms significant signs of improvement in the region.
There have been conciliatory meetings between
officials of the three countries and preparations are
under way for a top-level meeting between the
Presidents of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. In
Sierra Leone, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) is
in dialogue with the Government; there are plans for
elections next year; and the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) force is in the process of
extending its control over the whole country. These are
indeed welcome developments which should be taken
into account when we consider the follow-up of the
report of the Panel.

However, I think everyone is aware that the
situation in Sierra Leone is still volatile. The country
might again be drawn into conflict. The many armed
non-State groups in the area, particularly at the
junction of the borders of Liberia, Guinea and Sierra
Leone, still obtain weapons from various sources.
Among them, the RUF still has access to rich diamond
fields. The actions of both the RUF and the other
groups operating in these border areas could easily
destabilize the region again.

For this reason, it seems right that the Panel
report recommends that the sanctions on arms and
diamonds be continued. The Council must be satisfied
that Liberia has complied with the key demands of
resolution 1343 (2001) before the sanctions regime is
lifted. Unfortunately, this is not yet the case. Although
the diamond embargo seems to be working, Liberia
maintains its relationship with the RUF. RUF fighters
are still active in Liberia, and a steady flow of new
weapons continues to enter into the country. In this
flouting of the sanctions lies the possibility of renewed
destabilization of the Mano River countries.

In this context, Norway finds the Panel's
recommendations on extending the sanctions regime to
include other revenue generating areas worth a closer
study by the Council. This goes, for instance, for the
timber industry, which is a source of revenue for the
Government and, unfortunately, a source of revenue for
sanctions-busting. Extending the sanctions now or at a
later stage to such sources of income for the Liberian
regime might close the loopholes that still obviously
exist.

However, we must make every effort to ensure
that existing and possible extended sanctions do not
inflict further hardship and suffering on the Liberian
civilian population. It is a prime concern for the
Norwegian Government that negative humanitarian
consequences of sanctions be minimized as much as
possible. As we understand the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, existing
sanctions have not yet had a direct negative
humanitarian impact on the Liberian population,
beyond the already difficult circumstances in the
country. We must do everything possible to avoid new
burdens for the population. The sanctions have so far
been targeted at the Liberian regime's ability to aid and
sustain the civil war in Sierra Leone through its support
for the RUF. That should also be our focus in further
deliberations on this issue, while we pay attention to
the possible humanitarian consequences of sanctions.

Let me also add that Norway fully supports a
renewal of the mandate of the Panel of Experts for two
more periods in 2002. As I mentioned at the outset, the
Panel has been functioning in the way we want an
expert panel to function. Its assessment missions to the
area should therefore continue next year in order to
pursue our monitoring of compliance with the
sanctions.
I have a question that I would like to ask the
Panel. There has been mention in the press lately of
possible links between rough diamonds and Bin Laden
and his network. Would it be possible for the Panel to
comment on this information? Has the Panel come
across information which points in that direction?

