Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It is always a
pleasure to see you preside over the Security Council,
Mr. President. We are also pleased that Deputy
Secretary-General, Louise Frechette, has also joined us
this morning. We particularly wish to express our
appreciation for the Security Council's positive
response to our request for an emergency meeting on
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait. We are pleased
by the decision of the Council to begin this meeting by
first hearing the views of the wider United Nations
membership.

We come before the Council because we believe
that the Council is being asked to consider a matter that
has important repercussions for the entire United
Nations. According to the Preamble to the Charter, the
United Nations was founded with the explicit
determination "to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war". We are here to voice our concerns
regarding the possibility that the United Nations is now
being asked to consider proposals that open up the
possibility of a war against a Member State.

The situation between Iraq and Kuwait must be
addressed comprehensively by the United Nations so as
to allow the Security Council to lift sanctions against
Iraq, which continue to have dire humanitarian
consequences. Iraq should comply with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the provisions
relating to the repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third-
country nationals and the return of all Kuwaiti
property. All Member States are bound by Security
Council resolutions, and no Member should be
exempted from carrying out obligations as determined
by the Council.

We therefore welcome the announcement by the
Government of Iraq to allow United Nations weapons
inspectors to return without any conditions. We believe
this offers the prospect for a peaceful resolution of this
matter. We would urge the Security Council to allow
the inspectors to return to Iraq as soon as possible.

We called for this meeting to offer our
encouragement to the Security Council to seize this
opportunity, which could possibly lead to a lasting
peaceful solution to the long-standing matter between
Iraq and Kuwait.

During the general debate of the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly, the Foreign Ministers
of the Non-Aligned Movement were seized with the
debate on Iraq. They welcomed the decision by the
Government of Iraq to allow the unconditional return
of weapons inspectors in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. They further stated that

"in this regard, we wish to encourage Iraq and the
United Nations to intensify their efforts in search
of a lasting, just and comprehensive solution to
all outstanding issues between them in
accordance with the relevant United Nations
Security Council resolutions."

The Ministers reaffirmed respect for the
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Iraq and Kuwait, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. They
emphasized the need for a peaceful solution of the
issue of Iraq in a way that preserves the authority and
credibility of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, as well as peace and stability in the
region. The Ministers also reiterated the Non-Aligned
Movement's firm rejection of any type of unilateral
action against any Member State of the United Nations.

We welcome the agreement of 1 October 2002
between the Government of Iraq, the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) on the practical arrangements
necessary for the immediate resumption of inspections,
in accordance with the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The timetable for the
return of the inspectors that has been presented to the
Security Council by Mr. Hans Blix, Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC, and Mr. ElBaradei, Director
General of the IAEA, is also welcomed. It would
therefore be inconsistent with the spirit and letter of the
United Nations Charter if the Security Council were to
authorize the use of military force against Iraq at a time
when Iraq has indicated its willingness to abide by the
Security Council's resolutions.

In our View, the way has now been cleared for the
immediate return of the United Nations weapons
inspectors to Iraq. We have full confidence that Mr.
Blix and the United Nations inspectors will undertake
their duties with utmost professionalism. We hope that
the Security Council shares our confidence in the
abilities and credibility of UNMOVIC and the IAEA in
carrying out this task. We urge the Council to allow the
United Nations inspectors to return to Iraq to resume
their important work without delay. It would be tragic
if the Council were to prejudge the work of the
inspectors before they set foot in Iraq. There will be
enough time for the Council to review the work of the
inspectors since Mr. Blix and his team are required to
report progress to the Council.
We have followed with interest the public
discussion on the elements for a possible resolution on
Iraq. It has been brought to our attention that the
significant consultations are limited to the permanent
members of the Security Council and their capitals.
There have even been suggestions that permanent
members should be given new and exclusive roles in
dealing with the resolution of the Iraqi issue.

It has always been a source of comfort and
satisfaction for those of us who are not in the Security
Council that there are ten elected members who we
chose to represent our views. We believe that these
elected members have their own special role to play in
the Council's deliberations, because they bring
credibility and balance to decision-making within the
Council. We are therefore concerned if elected
members are excluded from consultations on the most
pressing issues before the Council. This is can only
lead to the erosion of the authority and legitimacy of
the Security Council as a whole.

The Security Council represents our collective
security concerns and should ultimately be accountable
to the entire United Nations. The maintenance of
international peace and security is a core function of
the United Nations. Therefore, the Security Council
cannot be party to increasing the humanitarian
suffering of civilians who are caught up in conflict
situations. Nor can the Council allow itself to agree to
decisions that will subject and condemn large numbers
of innocent civilians to conditions of war in efforts to
enforce its resolutions. Through the United Nations
Charter, we adopted a system of collective security, and
we now have to act with resolve to protect our rules-
based system of international relations. The norms and
fundamental principles of international law must be our
basis to establish the conditions for peace, justice and
human dignity.

The Security Council should ensure that there is
consistency in the way it acts to enforce its own
decisions and avoid subjectivity and vagueness in its
resolutions. The Council should be explicit and clearly
define the objectives of its resolutions and set clear,
implementable benchmarks for compliance. This would
facilitate the efforts by Member States to fully comply
with their obligations.

Open-ended sanctions regimes imposed by the
Security Council are counterproductive insofar as they
exacerbate the humanitarian situation. In Iraq, 11 years
of sanctions have brought endless suffering to the
ordinary people. We hope that the Security Council
will dispatch the inspectors to Iraq as soon as possible
and allow the people of Iraq to focus their attention on
rebuilding their country.

