Mr. Simonovic': I appreciate this opportunity to
deliver to the Security Council, on behalf of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, this statement on the
protection of civilians in situations of armed conflict.

For the purposes of today's debate, I would like
to focus on the issue of accountability in the context
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/376), and to
highlight some key examples from specific country
situations to illustrate practical ways by which the
protection of civilians can be strengthened.

Despite efforts to restore calm in Syria, the situation
deteriorates relentlessly. The Government of Syria has
the obligation to ensure that civilians are adequately
protected. Its use of heavy weapons and indiscriminate
shelling of civilian areas cannot be justified and must
cease immediately. These attacks may amount to crimes
against humanity and other international crimes. Both
Government and opposition forces have been involved
in actions that have harmed civilians. Those responsible
must be held accountable, including for attacks against
United Nations observers.

I reiterate my call for the Security Council to refer
the case of Syria to the International Criminal Court. A
prompt referral would serve to remind the actors in Syria
that they will be held to account for their failure to abide
by international human rights and humanitarian law and
to protect civilians. The international community must
assume its responsibilities and act in unison to prevent
further violations. Actions that directly contribute to
escalating the Violence, such as providing arms, can
only result in more civilians being killed and injured.

Commissions ofinquiry are important mechanisms
for promoting accountability for serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law where
national authorities fail to take appropriate action. The
Commission of Inquiry on Syria continues its work
under its mandate from the Human Rights Council. I
welcome the Security Council's increased practice of
referring to the findings of commissions of inquiry
established by other bodies. The Council can play an
important role in enhancing the impact of the work of
commissions, by requesting States and other actors to
cooperate with them, making more consistent use of the
information and analysis that they produce, ensuring
the protection of persons who cooperate with them
and, indeed, by establishing them itself. Justice and
protection of Victims can be advanced by supporting
the implementation of their recommendations and
by considering specific follow-up actions aimed at
ensuring accountability. My Office stands ready to
assist the Council in this area.

As the Council considers further responses to the
situation in Syria, it is worth looking at measures that
have been taken to strengthen the protection of civilians
in situations where more robust international action has
been mandated.

Under-Secretary-General Amos has already
referred to the civilian casualty tracking analysis
and response cell to be established in Somalia by the
African Union Mission in that country. In Afghanistan,
where conflict-related violence continues to exact a
heavy toll on the civilian population, especially women
and children, a civilian casualty mitigation mechanism
by the International Security Assistance Force is
being used to track incidents in which international
forces have been responsible for civilian deaths and
injuries. Such mechanisms can be an effective means to
document incidents that result in civilian casualties, to
launch investigations and to provide remedies to some
victims.

My Office is advocating for the creation of a
similar mechanism within the Afghan security forces
as an effective means of increasing civilian protection
and accountability during the transition to full Afghan
control of security. That would allow Afghan forces to
perform accurate, professional and timely investigations
into all incidents of civilian casualties caused by them
and to reduce re-occurrences.

Enhancing accountability requires a strong and
sustained commitment from the United Nations itself
to ensure that human rights lie at the heart of its
activities. The human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security
forces is an example of the Organization taking its
responsibilities seriously. It seeks to ensure that the
Organization does not provide support to security
forces involved in serious human rights violations, and
acts to reduce the risk of violations.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
implementation of the due diligence policy has led
to some tangible improvements in the behaviour of
the troops of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo. The United Nations Joint
Human Rights Office supports the implementation of
the policy through a profiling project created in 2010 to
identify and profile individuals in the security services
allegedly responsible for Violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. The information
gathered on alleged perpetrators in the security services
ofthe Democratic Republic ofthe Congo provides a key
tool to assess risks of violence against civilians.

Today, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) released a report on the shocking armed
attacks on Lou Nuer and Murle communities that took
place in Jonglei state in December 2011 and January
2012. The report speaks about brutal killings of men,
women and children - some of them by machete. It
speaks about abductions of women and children and
calls for their immediate release, for accountability
and for strengthening of the justice system. In March,
to tackle the preponderance of small arms in those
communities and the likelihood of retaliatory violence,
the Government launched a programme to disarm
civilians in Jonglei. Concerned about the protection
risks associated with forced disarmament, UNMISS
persuaded the Government to embark upon a voluntary
disarmament exercise conducted with cooperation from
community leaders. Integrated monitoring teams, often
led by human rights officers, have undertaken more
than 60 missions to the areas where disarmament is
taking place to monitor conduct of the process by South
Sudanese forces.

With that disarmament programme under way in
South Sudan, let me join the calls made today for the
adoption of a global arms trade treaty. The supply of
weapons to conflict zones is directly harming civilians.
The effort to address this problem is key to strengthening
the protection of civilians around the world.

There are a number of other country situations that
continue to concern us. Israel's illegal blockade of the
Gaza Strip has been in place for five years and has led
to severe restrictions of basic rights, such as the rights
to food, health care and education. More than half of
Gaza's 1.6 million people are children. Protecting
civilians in Gaza requires that Israel lift its blockade.
It also requires that all sides distinguish between
combatants and civilians and avoid provocations, such
as border incursions and targeted killings, which too
often lead to destruction, injury and death, as witnessed
over the past week.

I am seriously concerned by the reported deaths and
injuries of civilians resulting from counter-terrorism
operations carried out in Yemen, but also in Pakistan
and Somalia. Many of those casualties have resulted
from the use of armed drones. I share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General with respect to the
lack of transparency regarding the circumstances in
which armed drones are used.

Allow me to conclude. The human rights monitoring
and protection work undertaken by the United Nations
is essential to safeguard civilians in armed conflict and
elsewhere. I urge the Council to continue to include
explicit provisions on protection and accountability in
its resolutions. Where missions receive monitoring and
other human rights mandates, they should be given the
necessary material and personnel resources to carry out
their duties effectively. The vast terrain and security
environment in which they are often deployed may
require helicopters and armoured personnel carriers.
Appropriate human rights training should be provided
to all peacekeepers to prepare them for their duties. The
United Nations should also consider making greater use
of new technologies, such as satellite imagery, in the
protection of civilians. It is our responsibility to protect
the lives of civilians using every tool available to us.

