Ms. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark,
Mr. Per Stig Moller, for his initiative of convening this
debate on the subject of post-conflict peacebuilding. I
commend the very helpful non-paper distributed by the
Danish Permanent Mission on that important issue. I
would also like to acknowledge the presence among us
of Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette and of
Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank.

One cannot justifiably participate in a debate of
this nature without taking at least a quick look at what
the Security Council, as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has
done so far. In the wake of the demand for
peacekeeping in the recent past, as well as the tendency
of some cultures to slip back into conflict soon after a
peacekeeping mission or the cessation of hostilities,
peacebuilding has become an increasingly important
burden for the Council and for the United Nations in
general.

As we all now know, one of the most talked-
about proposals in the Organization in recent times,
originating from the Secretary-General's report "In
larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all", is that of establishing a
Peacebuilding Commission. Not surprisingly, the
proposal has received wide support throughout the
United Nations. It is the belief of the delegation of
Indonesia that discussions such as this not only
underline the importance of peacebuilding, but will
strengthen the international effort to mobilize the ideas
and structures that will be needed to implement it.

It is obvious that, as difficult as peacekeeping is, it
does not hold the subtleties and challenges that
peacebuilding entails. We cannot mandate peacebuilding
in the same sense as the Council might mandate a
peacekeeping mission, or impose regulations of peace in
the same sense as we might rules of engagement.
Peacebuilding is a political exigency that must be fine-
tuned and implemented as an art. Just as the practice of
peacekeeping emerged with complex multidimensional
mandates, peacebuilding can succeed only if it proceeds
from a multidimensional and comprehensive perspective.
In our view, therefore, the first and most important factor
for such success is serious institutional planning.
While there will always be variations in local
cultures and environments that must be taken into
consideration in particular mandates, peacebuilding has
one luxury that peacekeeping does not. That factor is
time. Since peacebuilding would usually follow a
period of peacekeeping, it should benefit from the time
lag that the cessation of hostilities or a peacekeeping
mission provides. This means that, for that particular
country or environment, peacebuilding preparation, at
its most multidimensional and comprehensive best,
ought to commence once peacekeeping is under way.

It is not debatable that, if peacebuilding is to
succeed, there must be a deep sense of ownership and
capacity among local actors. Indeed, no matter what
else is attempted or provided, it is only the investment
of local participation, ideas and energy that can imbue
a peacebuilding effort not only with legitimacy, but
with "building" tools as well. Programme planners
must determine from the beginning what means might
best be used to ensure such local ownership, and
advantage must be taken of available time to advance a
clear, realistic and inclusive peacebuilding strategy.

With reference to the issue of content, therefore,
my delegation is of the view that peacebuilding
should be structured as part of a broader development
agenda. In the best-case scheme, that agenda would
include the provision of such elements as physical
infrastructure and education that would continue from
where such peacekeeping programmes as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration may have left off. A
well-grounded approach of that nature, tied into the
expectations of peace and stability, would convey the
important message that the international community is
determined to see that the peacebuilding process is an
investment in the future.

In the view of my delegation, a significant
component of that broader agenda is the rule of law. It
is of the utmost importance that provision be made for
the structures of a viable legal and judicial order and
the protection of human rights. Those structures are
crucial towards ensuring that all social, political and
economic processes are governed by the rule of law. It
is obvious that a scenario such as that involves timely,
sustained and well-targeted resources. We share the
view that, while high levels of aid do not guarantee
success, the absence or inadequacy of aid would make
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts a time-wasting
Charade.

Similarly, it is increasingly recognized that focusing
narrowly on country-level peacebuilding efforts is
unlikely to yield significant changes in peacebuilding
outcomes, especially in the regions where conflict has
interlocking political, security and economic dynamics.
Planning for peacebuilding must be cognizant of such
situations - as we have seen in West Africa and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - and broader
strategies must be prepared in order to respond to them.

In that connection, let me point out that there is
growing evidence that the failure to address
international trade in conflict goods helps to sustain
criminal economic networks in post-conflict
environments, thereby significantly reducing the
impact of in-country peacebuilding strategies. The
steady global trade in small arms and light weapons,
for instance, compounds the difficulties of country-
based disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) strategies. A peacebuilding strategy that does
not take those interlocking factors into account would
obviously be a tremendous waste of resources.

As I have indicated, my delegation is very much
in favour of adequate and advanced planning for
peacebuilding, but this must apply not only to funding
and material, but also to the deployment of the required
civilian personnel. To this end, my delegation would
like to see a pool of such trained personnel made
available and a comprehensive database of
peacebuilding experts maintained by the Secretariat.

Finally, let me reiterate my hope that this
welcome debate will enrich peacebuilding thinking at
the United Nations in general, and in the Peacebuilding
Commission in particular.

