Mr. Fulci: First of all, allow me to express to you
my sincere congratulations for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September, and
allow me to wish you all the best in your very delicate
endeavour.

Italy subscribes totally and strongly to the statement
made by the Representative of Finland, Ambassador Rasi,
on behalf of the European Union. Like many previous
speakers, we are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting, also as a proof to the world that
the Council acts in full transparency when faced with
major crises.

I have asked for the floor to testify to the deep
emotions and sense of horror that the massacres under
way in East Timor have stirred in all Italians. Day after
day, images of brutality, murder, arson and looting are
invading our homes through the small screen. Their
impact on civil and human conscience is enormous. These
images immediately recall similar scenes in Somalia,
Rwanda, Bosnia and Kosovo.

A great country like Indonesia, with its long tradition
of tolerance and solidarity, cannot, simply cannot, allow
these atrocities against innocent and defenceless civilians
to continue. Action to stop them is needed now,
immediately. Like many others, we make a strong appeal
to our Indonesian friends to allow basic humanitarian
considerations to prevail over all else. But we also appeal
to the international community. It cannot remain

 

indifferent and powerless before the tragic events in East
Timor.
The time has come for the United Nations to act. It
was the United Nations-brokered Agreement of 5 May that
led to a democratic and free referendum. It was the United
Nations that acted as a guarantor of this referendum. It is
now the United Nations - and specifically the Security
Council, to whom we have delegated primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security -
that must help to restore peace and order in East Timor. It
can be done.

Faced by the risk of a similar tragedy, this Council on
Good Friday of two years ago authorized in less than 24
hours the dispatch to Albania of a multinational force set up
by a coalition of the willing. At that time, an enormous
potential humanitarian disaster was averted, thanks to that
swift action of the Security Council. A similar prompt
initiative is needed now. Inaction or late action by the
Council would further undermine the credibility of this vital
institution in the eyes of the people of the world.

We know that a good-will coalition is already in the
making, at the initiative of Australia. As the Italian Prime
Minister announced yesterday, Italy stands ready to make
its contribution to this endeavour.

But for the Council to act swiftly, the consent of
Indonesia is urgently needed. Given the gravity of the
situation, Italy adds its voice to the strong appeal of the
Secretary-General and many Member States for this consent
to be given.

One final word: we firmly believe that all those who
have ordered or perpetrated atrocities in East Timor should
be brought to justice by the Indonesian authorities.
Everybody - everybody on every corner of this planet -
must be aware that the culture of impunity no longer exists.

