Mr. Belle (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes, for the
realistic and detailed report on his mission to the two
countries being considered.

First, I wish to make some comments on the
situation in Somalia. Belgium is still very concerned
about the insecurity and the humanitarian situation in
Mogadishu and in other regions of the country. The
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people and
the abduction of humanitarian workers - who were
later released - are sad and recent examples. The
security situation and bureaucratic and other obstacles
are hindering the delivery of assistance and the
movement of humanitarian workers in Somalia. In that
context, Belgium appeals to the Somali authorities to
do everything they can to facilitate the access to
humanitarian assistance.

While stressing the primary responsibility of the
Transitional Federal Government, Belgium calls upon
all parties immediately to ensure the protection of
civilians, especially of children and women. It also
recalls their obligation to respect international
humanitarian law. Belgium commends the
Government's authorization of a mission from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mrs. Louise Arbour, to investigate
violations of human rights in Somalia.

In more general terms, it is essential that an
inclusive dialogue and political process for
reconciliation be established in order to consolidate the
transitional federal institutions, to re-establish the
authority of the State and to stabilize the country in a
way that will endure.

The success of the national reconciliation
congress announced by the Government is thus of vital
importance. For the time being, it requires that the
ceasefire be consolidated and that the situation in the
region of Mogadishu be stabilized, which necessitates
efforts by all parties to emerge from the cycle of
violence.

Finally, in the meantime we must support the
deployment of the African Union mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) to contribute to stabilization in the country
and to support the political process.
Allow me now to make a few comments on
Uganda. The security and humanitarian situation in

northern Uganda has improved, and we can only
welcome that fact. Many of the displaced persons have
already returned home. However, there are almost
1 million people in camps, and thus a major challenge
remains. It is important that the Government make
every necessary effort to continue the improvement in
the security situation in the north of the country.

The Government, in partnership with the
international community, must provide what
Mr. Holmes has described as a three-pronged
humanitarian effort - assist people in the displaced
persons camps, help those who are returning home, and
help those who have already returned home. Those
efforts will be achieved only if there is a complete
resolution of the problem of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA). It is thus clear that only a comprehensive
peace agreement can truly convince all those who are
displaced that it is possible to return home.

Therefore, the Security Council must continue to
encourage the Juba talks. On that point, we must
commend the agreement between the Government and
the LRA on extending the ceasefire until the end of
June and on the relaunching of the peace talks in Juba
last 26 April. Thanks to the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Chissano, those
discussions progressed and an agreement was reached
on the protection of the LRA leadership.

Difficult discussions will now be launched on the
agenda item concerning reconciliation and
responsibility. I wish to close on that point. The
principal leaders of the LRA would like the
International Criminal Court to suspend the arrest
warrants against them, and they are making that a
precondition of a peace agreement. The Government,
on the other hand, would prefer to have a peace
agreement in hand before committing to anything with
regard to the LRA or to the International Criminal
Court.

On this point, the Security Council reiterated last
March the fact that those who seriously violate human
rights and international humanitarian law must be
brought to justice. My delegation believes that the
parties must continue their talks on this issue in order
to reach a solution that respects this absolute
requirement. If any form of justice other than the
International Criminal Court were to be pursued, it
would have to satisfy minimum conditions and respect
the principle of complementarity, in accordance with
the Rome Statute.

In any case, for my delegation impunity is not an
option.

