Ms. Ojiambo (Kenya): I wish to express my
sincere appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this important debate. I thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs; Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for
their statements earlier today.

When conflict erupts, its major victims are
civilians, mainly women and children. My delegation
therefore welcomes the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2010/579) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, which provides contemporary guiding
principles on the matter.

Eleven years ago, the Council addressed the
protection of civilians in armed conflict as a thematic
issue for the first time. Since then, the adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and other related resolutions,
such as 1296 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1738 (2006) and
1894 (2009), as well as the endorsement of the aide-
memoire (see S/PRST/2010/25, annex) and the
establishment of the Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians bear testimony to the Council's continued
commitment to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

However, continual cases, such as those
involving the mass rape of women and children by
rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
are stark reminders that action to stop such violations
needs to be taken now. Therefore, today's debate
provides us with yet another opportunity to reflect on
the progress made, the challenges we face and the steps
we need to take to address this recurring problem while
renewing our political will and resolve to rally support
for the protection of those helpless civilians who so
often find themselves trapped in conflict situations.

The question of protection deserves deeper
reflection owing to its complex and multifaceted
nature. It involves enhanced compliance with
international humanitarian law by all parties to a
conflict, making more effective use of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, improving humanitarian access
and strengthening accountability for violations. It is
therefore imperative that this critical issue be
addressed while taking into account all of those
underlying considerations.

The task of protecting civilians is currently
enshrined in the mandates of a number of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The first such mandate
was authorized to provide protection to civilians more
than a decade ago in Sierra Leone, where amputations
were the order of the day. At present, the majority of
United Nations peacekeeping missions operate with
such mandates. However, there are real challenges in
their implementation and the Council needs to provide
peacekeeping missions with clear, realistic guidelines
and achievable mandates. It is prudent that aspects of
the protection of civilians be included in
predeployment training.

Additionally, at the operational level, presence
equals protection. The abuse of civilians in armed
conflict most often takes place in areas that are
inaccessible to peacekeeping contingents. Therefore,
there is a need to ensure that adequate capacity and
resources are made available to peacekeepers so as to
enable them to cover areas where civilians are under
imminent threat of physical violence, while ensuring
that they conduct their tasks without prejudice to the
primary responsibility of the host nation to protect
civilians. That can be achieved only through the
deployment of more armed personnel than is the case
in many missions today.

Sexual violence is no longer a simple by-product
of armed conflict. It is being used as a weapon of war,
aimed at dehumanizing and instilling fear in civilians
in situations of armed conflict. Whether carried out by
non-State armed groups or Government security forces
in conflict and post-conflict situations, it is to some
extent designed to achieve political and military
objectives. The adoptions of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) addressing the impact of war on
women, resolution 1820 (2008) calling for the
cessation of all acts of sexual violence against
civilians, and resolution 1888 (2009) establishing the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict are efforts that
are expected to give new impetus to the protection of
civilians in conflict. As the United Nations considers a
new configuration in the Sudan, the issue of protection
of civilians should remain pivotal.

Parties to a conflict have obligations under
international humanitarian law to protect civilians. It is
regrettable that many non-State armed groups do not
understand that such law exists and, hence, have no
regard for it. The Council needs to enhance compliance
by consistently calling on all parties to adhere to their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
especially in exercise of the principles of distinction
and proportionality. Additionally, the Council needs to
apply targeted measures against parties who routinely
violate their legal obligations to respect civilians.

The Council must further ensure that
investigations into alleged violations of civilians in
armed conflict are conducted in a timely manner, with
commensurate consequences for violators. That will
not only promote accountability among the various
actors, but also demonstrate the Council's intolerance
for impunity as part of a comprehensive approach to
ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice
through national or international legislation and that
victims are granted redress.

Providing unhindered humanitarian access during
conflicts is a fundamental prerequisite for ensuring
life-saving assistance. It is therefore important for
peacekeeping missions to provide a secure
environment to facilitate humanitarian access to
civilians, including displaced persons. While current
efforts to enhance the capacity of peacekeeping
missions to provide protection to humanitarian service
providers are commendable, significant challenges
remain. The Council should therefore address that
aspect during the authorization of mandates,
consistently condemn all acts of violence against
humanitarian workers, and call on parties to a conflict
to comply with their obligation to protect such
personnel and their consignments.

I wish to conclude by reaffirming Kenya's
commitment to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and to guaranteeing their rights in conformity
with international humanitarian law. As the Council
may be aware, Kenya clearly understands the effect of
failures to provide that protection, as we are currently
providing shelter to close to 1 million refugees from
Somalia, which is a war-torn country. Considering the
fact that civilians continue to be subjected to
indiscriminate attacks and other violations by parties to
conflict, and taking into account that they comprise the
vast majority of casualties, we all need to work
consistently towards enhancing their protection.

