Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to join the delegations that have already spoken in
thanking Mr. Annabi for his oral briefing and the
Secretariat for the report on the situation in Tajikistan.

 

Stability in Tajikistan is important not only for the
Tajik people but also for the whole of the region. We note
that in particularly difficult and often dangerous conditions,
the United Nations, with the assistance of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), has been
able to set Tajikistan on the path of concord and
democracy.

Of course, all is not perfect, far from it; much remains
to be done. As Mr. Annabi has noted, the legislative
elections were marked by incidents, and the reintegration of
combatants from the opposition side still requires a great
deal of time and effort. However, we should salute the
progress that has been made. Tajikistan has had its first-
ever multi-party elections, and the great majority of the
deputies are newcomers who are not from the military but
from professional or political circles. The proportion of
women in the new Assembly has risen from 2.5 to 15 per
cent. In short, this new parliament could become a driving
force in the democratic process.

While these elections represented a major step forward
in the implementation of the peace agreement, the military
protocol has not been fully implemented, in particular the
provisions regarding disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of combatants. Thus we need to persist in the
action under way, while adapting it to the new conditions
prevailing in Tajikistan. This is why France supports the
proposal of the Secretary-General to create a small United
Nations office, similar to those that the United Nations
established in the Central African Republic and in Guinea-
Bissau.

In this context we would be glad to be informed by
the Secretariat, at the appropriate moment, about the nature
of the discussions with the Tajik authorities regarding the
establishment of this office, the modalities for its
establishment, the exact mandate it will be given and, in
particular, the question of coordination between the United
Nations and the OSCE offices in Tajikistan.

Finally, my country fully supports the statement that
Russia has proposed for you, Sir, to read following this
meeting of the Council.

Let me just add that the transition of the United
Nations presence in Tajikistan from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to the Department of Political
Affairs will be another example of a smooth transition,
much like what was very recently adopted for the Central
African Republic and for Haiti.

