Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to thank
the Kingdom of the Netherlands for convening
today's meeting.

The Security Council mandates peacekeeping
missions to help countries navigate the difficult
path toward peace. Yet peacekeepers today face
unprecedented challenges, especially in Africa.
Working in dangerous environments, they are often the
targets of armed groups, and the threats that they face
are increasingly complex. Our responses must therefore
evolve to match the realities on the ground. We must
ensure that peacekeepers are properly protected and
supplied with the necessary knowledge and training,
as well as technological equipment, so that they can
fulfil their mandates completely. Israel commends
the Secretary-General's initiative in requesting and
publishing the report of Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz on improving the safety
of United Nations peacekeepers, and we appreciate
the Secretariat's efforts to internalize the report's
recommendations. It is now the responsibility of the
Security Council and the States Members of the United
Nations to support immediate action to address the
report's serious conclusions.

Israel is actively engaged in lending knowledge,
expert advice and medical training to peacekeeping
operations as well as supplying them with technological
support. We have recently been working with the
Medical Services Division to establish life-saving
first-aid training for all peacekeepers and to support
its efforts to establish a mental-health strategy action
plan. We are also expanding our partnership with
the Department of Field Support in order to improve
camp security in field missions. We look forward to
continuing our collaboration with United Nations
departments on those important matters.

We also believe that the United Nations must
continue to enforce its zero-tolerance policy and
enhance its efforts to combat sexual exploitation, abuse
and harassment both in local communities and within
peacekeeping operations, sometimes known as "blue on
blue". Too often, peacekeepers face threats of violence
and assault from within as well as from external
sources, which violates their most basic human rights,
creates more victims, sabotages the ability of missions
to fulfil their mandates and damages the legitimacy of
the United Nations. Israel is committed to the protection
ofpeacekeepers. We fully support peacekeeping efforts
and will continue providing peacekeeping operations
with the tools for success.

If we want peacekeeping operations to achieve the
objectives that the Security Council sets for them, we
must provide them with proper mandates and ensure
that they are fully implemented. Israel has first-hand
experiencewiththistopicinrelationtotheUnitedNations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), a peacekeeping
force stationed just beyond Israel's northern border. In
resolution 1701 (2006), the Security Council authorized
UNIFIL to "take all necessary action to ensure
that its area of operations is not utilized for hostile
activities", with the goal of establishing "an area free
of any armed personnel, assets and weapons, other than
those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL".
In resolution 2373 (2017), adopted last summer, the
Council requested that the Secretary-General look at
ways to increase UNIFIL's visible presence, including
through patrols and inspections. It also requested ways
to provide prompt and detailed reports on restrictions
to UNIFIL's freedom of movement and on specific
areas to which UNIFIL does not have access, and on
the reasons behind those restrictions.

But the reality on the ground shows that UNIFIL's
mandate has not been fully implemented. We continue
to see an alarming situation that suggests that UNIFIL
may be unable to fulfil all the provisions of its mandate.
Hizbullah, the Iranian proxy and internationally
designated terrorist organization, has taken more than
two thirds of Shia towns and villages in UNIFIL's area
of operations in southern Lebanon, using Lebanese
civilians as human shields to protect its arsenal of more
than 100,000 missiles and rockets. As we have informed
the Security Council, armed Hizbullah fighters are
visiting the Blue Line with leaders of other Iran-
backed militia groups, in flagrant violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. They use those visits to
call publicly for violence and for Israel's destruction.
In accordance with its mandate, UNIFIL should be able
to fully monitor and explore these unlawful activities
and report on the true gravity of the situation in its area
of operations, including the areas that it cannot access.
This Iranian-supported terror and the strengthening
of Hizbullah in Lebanon represent just one example
of Iran's dangerous aggression in our region. It is
unfortunate, but we must all recognize that Iran's
destructive behaviour has only gotten worse in the years
since the signing of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action. Iran is empowered by that agreement. Billions
of dollars have flooded into the Iranian economy, only
to fund a dangerous missile programme and the work
of violent extremists in Lebanon, Yemen, Syria and
Gaza. As we speak, the United States is conducting
an important effort to fix the terrible flaws in what
we have always said is a bad agreement. We are now
at a critical juncture. This is the last chance to correct
past mistakes and recognize that we must all embark
on a new path to rein in Iran's reckless behaviour. I
have a simple message for the permanent members of
the Security Council today. They must not miss this
opportunity. In 45 days, the clock will run out and
the rules of the game will change. They have a choice
to make, which is either to choose to work with the
Americans and support their genuine efforts to make
the Middle East a safer place, or to choose Iran and
enable a dangerous regime. I urge them to make the
right choice before it is too late for all of us.

Israel's commitment to peacekeeping operations
is unwavering. We reiterate our support for the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), as
its forces continue returning to their positions in the
Area of Separation. We appreciate UNDOF's important
contributions to regional stability and look forward to
continuing our support for its mission, as well as for all
of the important protectors of peace.

