Mr. Nesho (Albania): Madam President, at the
outset, on behalf of my Government, allow me to
welcome the Foreign Minister of Denmark, Mr. Per
Stig Moller, who has been presiding over the Council
at this very important meeting on the future of our
region. Let me also express my delegation's
appreciation for the realistic, comprehensive and
substantive report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2005/335). We also
welcome at this important meeting the presence of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Soren Jessen-Petersen, and we thank him for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Kosovo. On behalf of my Government, I would like to
commend and thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his
leadership and foresight at the head of UNMIK and for
his active diplomacy in promoting a fruitful partnership
of Kosovo's institutions with the various regional and
international stakeholders. Once again, I would like to
assure him of Albania's full support.

We commend the Contact Group on Kosovo for
its active role, strongly believing that it will continue
and will have a noteworthy political and diplomatic
impact on that issue. We share the opinion that the
frequent contacts of this Group with the actors within
Kosovo, as well as its cooperation with the Security
Council, will significantly help the political process to
determine Kosovo's final status.

While praising the peaceful and voluntary
surrender of Mr. Ramush Haradinaj to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
we agree that the momentum of transition to the new
Government, led by Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi, is
another clear sign of the growing maturity and
effectiveness of the political class and institutions in
Kosovo. These three months, as noted in the Secretary-
General's report, have demonstrated the determination
of the new Government of Mr. Kosumi and the
leadership of President Rugova to maintain the
momentum on standards implementation.

The year 2005 is a crucial and significant one for

Kosovo and the Balkans. As we all agree, the time has
come for important and substantial progress in
determining Kosovo's political status. The status quo is
neither desirable nor useful. We strongly believe that
this process will help Kosovo's rapid progress,
economy and prosperity, will generate security and
stability and will promote the advancement of the
whole region, in line with the European countries.

The process of regular reviews of the progress on
standards now indicates significant momentum. We
fully share the Secretary-General's recommendation to
initiate a comprehensive review this summer, bearing
in mind, as he notes, the progress on the eight
standards and the tireless efforts made thus far by
Kosovo's Provisional Institutions. All this will
naturally lead to a process of determining Kosovo's
status.

We reaffirm our understanding that the
implementation of the standards is a complex and
ongoing process that will lead towards a democratic,
stable and multi-ethnic society in Kosovo, with
democratic institutions and effective guarantees for the
protection of minorities and of the cultural and
religious heritage. Implementation of standards is and
will remain the central focus of the efforts of all the
people of Kosovo to live in dignity and move forward
towards Euro-Atlantic integration. I think it is worth
recalling what Ambassador Kai Eide noted in his
comprehensive report (S/2004/932, annex I, enclosure)
of one year ago: we are moving to a "standards with
status" approach, which in our opinion remains
realistic and adequate.

We strongly believe that a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in Kosovo remains the ultimate
goal. For that purpose, the continued commitment of
Kosovo institutions to decentralization, minority
issues, good governance and the economy remains a
priority.

Decentralization is one of the key issues and is
beneficial to all citizens of Kosovo. In particular, it
will advance the rights of minorities, and it will also
strengthen local initiatives and help the economic,
social and cultural development of all communities.
We hold the view that decentralization should occur in
parallel with the shaping and the strengthening of the
central Government structures, that the autonomy of
local authorities should not escape or harm the vertical
line of power, that local structures must remain
accountable to Pristina and that parallel structures must
be integrated into Kosovo's structure or dismantled.
Above all, decentralization should avoid cantonization,
which would impede the normal functioning of a multi-
ethnic society in Kosovo.

The issue of minorities, which is a basic element
of a multi-ethnic society, demands the engagement of
all relevant actors in Kosovo: governmental institutions
and civil society, as well as the Serb and other
minorities. We commend the real progress and positive
steps already achieved, but we encourage further
attention and harder work in that area and further
efforts to revitalize the return process, expand the
inter-community dialogue and respect minority rights.

Meeting those objectives requires the continuous
commitment of the Kosovo leadership, as well as
goodwill and participatory efforts on the part of the
Serb and other ethnic communities. The Serb
minority's self-exclusion and its non-participation in
the Assembly and other institutions only impede
progress on standards. The Serb minority is part of
Kosovo society, and as such, it has both rights and
obligations. It should offer constructive engagement
and end its isolation.

Good governance is a priority objective for the
governing institutions of Kosovo. Establishment of the
rule of law, the creation of an independent judiciary
and a public administration and respect for private
property are indispensable in that regard.
Meeting those standards requires that more
competences and responsibilities be transferred to the
local authorities and that privatization be accelerated.
That process would have a positive impact on
economic development and on the climate for foreign
investment in Kosovo. Given its current political
status, Kosovo remains a long way from direct foreign
investment and lacks eligibility for benefiting from
International Monetary Fund and World Bank
programmes and assistance, which would have a direct
impact on the development of a stable and efficient
economy.

The Albanian Government thinks that the process
of discussing and defining the status of Kosovo has to
take into consideration some basic elements that will
undoubtedly lead to a long-term solution with a
positive impact on stability, security and the Euro-
Atlantic integration of the region. We share the broadly
held view that the basic principles that have already
been identified and recognized can guide the settlement
of this issue.

In that context, we reaffirm that respect for the
democratically expressed free will of all people of
Kosovo with respect to their future, together with
guarantees for the respect and the protection of
minority rights, including guarantees for the protection
of their inherited cultural and religious values, remains
crucial for a just and stable solution.

