Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
would like to focus - as you, Sir, have asked us to -
on the institutional aspects of our work over the past 12
months, to pay particular attention to what the outgoing
members of the Council have said this morning and to
make some additional comments. By way of preamble,
may I also say how much we appreciated the freshness
and vigour which the outgoing members of the Council
brought to the discussions of the Council. They have
made us think about how we are doing our work in a
way which we do not often do - and we are
continuing that this morning under your presidency,
Sir.

The agenda is becoming overloaded and I very
much share the feeling of the Irish delegation that there
needs to be a way of continually filtering what we do. I
think that we have had some useful innovations this
year. More of the management of the agenda is going
to coordinators and there have been fewer obligatory
meetings with the Council presidency at the beginning
of the month to go over the agenda, which can be done
before we reach the beginning of the month. I also
found the daily e-mails of the Colombian delegation,
sent by Andres Franco, to be extraordinarily helpful in
pushing us towards what needed to be done each day
and giving us notice of the changes in the mind of the
presidency about how we needed to deal with the
agenda. All of that was innovation in the right
direction.

I would also like to pay tribute to our experts.
There is an increasing tendency to deal with texts
outside informal consultations and for ambassadors not
to spend their time and competence on them; our
experts seem to do it better. The fact that that tendency
is increasing is also very welcome.

This morning several members - particularly the
outgoing members - have referred to unity in the
Council. I think that, when we can get it right, this is a
very real evolution of compelling impact. But we must
not forget that unity of result depends in the end on
what happens in capitals and the perceptions there. We
need to go on ensuring that our ministers understand
the need for collective action through the Council as
much as we appreciate it among ourselves, because we
cannot produce unity if we do not get instructions to do
so.

That element has to be remembered. I think that
resolution 1441 (2002) was a striking example of that,
not least because, if I may say so, the two countries at
either end of the spectrum of debate on that issue -
the United States and Syria - both came to conclude
that unity in the Council was what they were looking
for. If we learn the lessons of that and apply them -
not only on that subject - in the future, then I think
that we will increase the power, effectiveness and
legitimacy of the Council.

We are not just an isolated Council. We have to
deal with the Secretariat, people on the ground and
Governments, as well as other organs of the
intergovernmental system. I think we have made
progress on the relationship between the Council and
the Economic and Social Council this year. I
particularly appreciate the fact that the Guinea-Bissau
mission was a combined mission, reflecting also, if I
may say so, the excellent work done by Ambassador
Koonjul with the Ad Hoc Working Group on Africa -
another innovation, which he steered very successfully
this year and which needs to be taken forward.

How we organize that sort of thing has an effect
on our follow-up. Ambassador Mahbubani said this
morning that the cultures of action, innovation and
reflection were very important to the Council, and that
the Council was not good on all of them. I actually
think that we have been quite good at innovation and
reflection, as well as action. What we have not been
good at is follow-up and implementation. That is where
the Council is really being tested as we become more
professional in our mandates and in our discussions. I
think we need to talk a little more about that and,
indeed, act on it. I may come back to that in one or two
respects.

In your intervention, Mr. President, you referred
to the Council's work in combating terrorism, because
we lacked time for a more considered discussion of that
is sure when you had the breakout meeting the other
morning. I want to share and, indeed, reinforce, your
view. The Counter-Terrorism Committee is doing quite
a lot of bureaucratic work on counter-terrorism, which
is important. I am not trying to downplay that; why
should I try to do so? But the Council is in danger of
taking its eye off the ball that really matters, which is
stopping terrorists.

I am not sure that the Council is grappling with
the phenomenon of terrorism in all its aspects as
substantively as it should. I think that we should have a
discussion of this in January, if the French presidency
will allow it, because, if and when the next really big
incident happens and the Council has not proved yet to
be particularly active in stopping terrorism on the
ground, people will start throwing stones at us.

Therefore, Mr. President, I fully agree with your
focus on that particular issue. It has to be a concern of
the Council beyond the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

Allow me to get myself into trouble over the
question of the permanent five, which the Ambassador
of Guinea in particular focused on. He did continue a
bit of a myth about the amount that the permanent five
do before we come into the Council, which we have
done only on Iraq this year, and necessarily on Iraq, as
I think most members of the Council have realized. But
I do not think that the split, if you like, between the
permanent five and the elected 10 affects, or is related
to, transparency.

I think that the Council has become more
transparent, and that is not a permanent five issue. With
respect to legitimacy - if one wants to underline the
politics of this, and that is why the United Kingdom
supports reform and enlargement - we must not forget
that an element of the political legitimacy of the
Council is also professionalism. That is something
which it is obligatory for the permanent five to
introduce and which we discussed in the break-out
meeting the other morning.

Non-permanent members of the Council talk
about this, but I am not sure that they do very much
about it. That is why I think that we should pick up the
suggestion made by Norway - on which Ambassador
Kolby and I agree - that there should be more of a
tendency to take lead nations for a particular subject,
and the non-permanents should be in the lead on that.

In my observation of the Council's work over the
past four years, and in our own experience in the
United Kingdom, it is extremely difficult for
delegations on the Council to cover every subject
evenly, fully and professionally. There is too much
going on, and therefore there ought to be a division of
functions, so that the professionalism of spending more
time on a particular subject comes through.

Therefore, rather than just talking about it and re-
mouthing it every time we have a wrap-up session, we
ought to do something about it. I wonder whether the
non-permanents at the beginning of next year might
like to get together among themselves and see whether
they would like to take that forward, because I think
that it would help.

Ireland made a suggestion that we should have
more meetings away from Headquarters, of the kind
that was held the other day. I remember one or two
comments at the end of that meeting about the
usefulness of what we had just been doing and the role
of informal consultations. We behave in informal
consultations rather as we behave in here. In fact, I
rarely see any difference between the style of our
presentations between the two meetings, and the real
purpose of informal consultations has drained away.
We think that we are doing something, but actually we
are not doing as much as we often do in open meetings.

Therefore, Mr. President, I think that is a theme
that came out of your meeting, which you have
commented on in your excellent paper - written in
brilliant English, if I may say so - which we should
take forward. There are themes here that you have
written down for us which should not just go on the
shelf. I would like to continue these discussions,
perhaps, with a lunch early in the new year, so that the
old members exiting can come and join us and share
their experiences again. But I think that we need to talk
a bit about how we use informals and whether we need
to get really informal by getting away from
Headquarters now and again.

Finally, Ambassador Mahbubani of Singapore,
says, paradoxically, that we have not done much by
way of innovation, when he, perhaps, has been the
most innovative of all 15 of us over the past few years.
But let us not look for institutional innovation; that is
too difficult in this Organization. Let us look for
practical innovation, which he has been so good at, and
then we might actually be getting somewhere - get
away from the institutional habits and get into practical
innovation of what needs to be done, because there is a
situation on the ground that needs it. There, I think, our
growing habit of outside discussion would actually be
exceedingly useful.

I have used up my 10 minutes, but I think that
there is a lot there to follow up, and let us see if we can
do it in the new year.

