Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): North Korea's advancing
nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes represent the
most urgent nuclear-proliferation challenge of our time,
and I therefore thank the United States presidency and
you personally, Sir, for convening today's ministerial
meeting on a very topical issue. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his useful update.

Ukraine continues to condemn in the strongest
terms Pyongyang's persistent illegal activities in its
efforts to develop nuclear-missile capabilities, in gross
violation of its international obligations. They have
already seriously undermined the non-proliferation
regime as a whole. Despite immense political and
diplomatic efforts, the nuclear threat to the region is
growing. Regrettably, we have seen no signs that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea intends to
change its behaviour. What we have seen is the alarming
persistence, not to say ever-growing obsessiveness, of
the North Korean leadership. As a result, the whole
world faces the gloomy prospect ofa large-scale military
confrontation, with unpredictable consequences.

We all agree that the existing challenges related to
the nuclear and missile ambitions of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea should be addressed
collectively, decisively and without any further delay.

Apparently, the existing sanctions regime is not
effective enough to prevent the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea from acquiring technologies,
materials, equipment and financial resources for
the further development of its nuclear and missile
programmes. Sadly, we are witnessing a steady
evolution of North Korean tricks to evade sanctions.
It has been proven many times, most recently by the
pictures of a military parade in Pyongyang, with
a whole range of new weaponry that had never been
seen before. We all know that the North Korean regime
continues to build up its military arsenal at the expense
of its own people. The impact of diverting resources
has already produced a downward spiral in the steady
deterioration of the quality of life for ordinary citizens.
But does the regime care? Absolutely not.

Ukraine's stance in this regard has been consistent.
The Council should find ways to increase international
pressure on the North Korean regime to respond to
its reckless, unabated behaviour. We believe that
only robust steps by the Council can put an end to the
systematic and brutal violations of international law and
eradicate the growing nuclear threat in South-East Asia.
We must not allow Pyongyang to continue discrediting
the role of the Security Council in the context of global
non-proliferation efforts. What could be the ways to
effectively curb the North Korean nuclear threat? You
clearly outlined them, Sir, in your own statement.

First, undoubtedly, unconditional and faithful
compliance with the Security Council's resolutions is
a key prerequisite to lowering the level of the threat in
the region and to preventing new provocations. Yet, the
Council may have to take additional, robust measures
with a view to compelling the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to abandon its prohibited activities.
That includies the development of nuclear weapons,
ballistic missiles and other types of weapons of mass
destruction. We need to use every tool and avenue
at the disposal of Council members to contribute to
de-escalating the current highly volatile situation.

Secondly, we fully recognize the necessity
of further fostering neighbouring States' defence
capabilities against this threat. In this regard, I wish
to reiterate that Ukraine stands firmly by the side of
Japan, the Republic of Korea and other countries that
are facing the growing nuclear threat.

Thirdly, it is high time to consider what we can do
to prevent any nuclear threat in the future in any part
of the globe. Are we able to assess the whole range of
real challenges to the non-proliferation regime in order
to avoid disaster in the future? The forthcoming review
cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons will be a suitable platform to that end. In this
regard, I need to underscore the following.

Disrespect for international law and attempts to
undermine or change the established world order are
becoming more systematic nowadays. North Korean
actions are a testament to this trend, but not the only
one. The erosion of the existing system of international
security, continuous breaches and unaddressed
violations of international law pose a significant
threat to all humankind. It is therefore the ultimate
responsibility of the Security Council to spare no effort
to restore respect for those norms, ensure the fulfillment
of international commitments and obligations, and
prevent further violations.

As a country that voluntarily renounced its
own nuclear arsenal and has strictly abided by its
obligations related to the non-proliferation of nuclear
materials, technologies and their means of delivery, we
are convinced that a world without nuclear weapons
should remain a real policy goal for all concerned
parties and not a theoretical concept that is sneered
at by some. If nuclear Powers are serious about
nuclear non-proliferation and eventual disarmament,
they could strengthen the global non-proliferation
regime immensely by making nuclear disarmament a
success story.

Based on Ukraine's experience of confronting
aggression from a nuclear State, this aspect is of
particular importance to my country. The brutal
violation of international obligations, including under
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, by a permanent
member of the Council that put its signature to the
assurances of sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, contravenes the whole United Nations-
based security system created after the Second World
War. The international community has a collective
responsibility to restore respect for international law
and to find lasting solutions to the most urgent threats
to global peace and security.

The North Korea issue is a test case for all of us
today. Our success in resolving it may open ways to
address other pressing problems on the world stage.

