Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Senegal on presiding over the
Security Council this month, its tremendous efforts and
the transparent manner in which it conducts the work of
the Council. I commend the Russian Federation for its
work during the presidency of the Council last month.
I thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his briefing, the
efforts, dedication and excellent work of his team in
Baghdad and New York.

On behalf of the people and Government of Iraq,
I would like to congratulate the American people on
Mr. Trump's election as President-elect of the United
States of America. We pledge to work with him and his
team. We also thank His Excellency President Barack
Obama, Vice-President Biden and President Obama's
representative and entire team for their support to Iraq
and assistance in the war on terrorism. We also thank
them for their leadership of the international coalition
that has supported the Iraqi armed forces so that we could
liberate our territories from the clutches of the terrorist
gangs of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).
We also commend the logistical and financial support,
the training of our armed forces and the humanitarian
assistance provided by the United States, in addition to
fundraising activities that raised more than $2 billion
so that we could rebuild the infrastructure in those
cities. The United States will remain a strong ally and
friend of the Iraqi people and Government. We will
work hard with the new Administration to enhance
that relationship.

The Iraqi Government provides all of the necessary
means to ensure that the efforts of its security forces
meet with success as they combat terrorism and work
to retake all of the territories under the control of
ISIL terrorist gangs. The Prime Minister of Iraq and
Commander-in-Chief, Mr. Al Abadi, has directly
supervised those operations from day one. He oversees
all joint field operations and security sectors with a
view to defeating the ISIL terrorist gangs. In the past
few weeks, Iraqi forces, with the assistance of the
international coalition, have liberated the towns of Al
Qayyarah and Sharqat, in addition to other villages in
the Ninawa and Salah al-Din governorates, which were
under the control of ISIL terrorists.

My Government commends the achievements made
in Mosul by the Iraqi army, the Peshmerga, the People's
Mobilization Forces and the tribal forces, through the
joint operation command and with the assistance of the
international coalition. They have been victorious in
liberating most villages and towns on the periphery of
Mosul and have made incursions into the Left Bank.
They have liberated a number of neighbourhoods in
the centre of the city, and work assiduously to demine
areas in preparation for the return of internally
displaced persons.

More than 900,000 Iraqis were able to return to
their homes in areas that were liberated from ISIL.
That was made possible with financial support from
the international coalition. The areas were secured
before the return of internally displace persons. That
is in addition to providing jobs and services so that
normalcy could be restored. In Tikrit, 95 per cent of the
population has returned. More than 200,000 citizens
have returned to their homes in Ramadi. More than
90,000 citizens have returned to Fallujah.

The Iraqi House of Representatives voted against
the incursion of Kurdish forces into Iraq's territory
and rejects the presence of any forces on Iraqi territory
without the approval of the central Government. It
considers the Turkish forces in Camp Bashiqa to
be aggressive forces of occupation and has given
instructions to have them thrown out of Iraqi territory
if they do not heed Iraq's calls. We also rejected the
Turkish Parliament's extension of the presence of
those forces. Furthermore, we condemn the racist
statements of the Turkish Prime Minister, which gave
rise to sedition among the Iraqi people. He maliciously
attempted to undermine Iraq, which is winning in its
fight against the ISIL terrorist gangs, who receive
support in the form of logistics, human resources,
funding and health care from Ankara, which is trading
in our artefacts and oil with with ISIL terrorist groups.

We have called on the Council to take immediate
steps to throw the Turkish forces out of our territory.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Al-Jaafari, in his
letter dated 14 October 2016, informed the President of
the Security Council that we reserve the right to act in
self-defence and to apply the rules of engagement with
the aggressive Turkish forces in locations that are close
to our points of engagement with ISIL.

Iraq rejects the provocative statements made
by Turkish leaders against Iraq and their flagrant
intervention and occupation of Iraqi territory. Iraq
reaffirms the historic links between the peoples
of Turkey and Iraq, but we reject these statements,
which have become more explicit and clearly indicate
the intentions of Ankara officials who claim that the
Iraqi cities of Kirkuk and Mosul were once Turkish
cities. The Security Council must firmly counter these
expansionist expressions of greed against a State that is
a founding Member of the United Nations and a country
with full sovereignty.

We urge the countries of the world to implement
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2253 (2015), in particular with regard to stopping the
flow of foreign terrorist fighters from more than 120
States Members of the United Nations. Efforts must be
made to staunch the funding and recruitment of foreign
terrorist fighters and the logistical support provided
to them, including weapons, food and non-food stuff,
medical equipment, communication, transportation
and weapons, in particular the material used in the
manufacturing of improvised explosive devices and
landmines from neighbouring countries. The Security
Council sanctions committee should undertake its role
to limit the capacities of ISIL terrorist gangs, dry up
their sources of funding and monitor the countries that
provide funding, support and arms to the ISIL terrorist
gangs, which engage in cross-border trade, in particular
in Iraqi oil and artefacts.

Iraq is working with its friends and partners to
identify possible options for collecting and archiving
evidence on ISIL crimes and is strengthening its
national capacity in this regard. We value the efforts
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, which
have identified the main areas of capacity-building in
Iraq in the field of combatting terrorism through their
visi, in September 2015 and successive meetings, in
particular the meeting held in Baghdad on 25 October,
with a view to helping the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the relevant Iraqi authorities
and to assisting and coordinating the efforts of all
stakeholders in the area of technical support to Iraq in
countering terrorism.

The people and the Government of Iraq thank all
countries of the international coalition, in particular
the United States of America, the countries of the
European Union and others that are not part of the
international coalition. They have combatted terrorism
and provided military and logistical support to the
Iraqi security forces in the framework of respect for
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Iraq and
in full cooperation with its security forces. We value
their contribution to restoring stability and rebuilding
areas that have been liberated from ISIL so that we
could alleviate the humanitarian suffering of internally
displaced persons through demining activities and the
removal of ordinances, in addition to the provision of
basic support services.

We call on Member States to fund their programmes
in Iraq. We continue to promote our relations with
neighbouring and Arab States, in particular the State of
Kuwait, Jordan, Iran and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
in addition to our continued communication with the
Syrian Government.

The Government of Iraq is committed to strive
tirelessly for progress on the issue of the missing
citizens and archives of Kuwait. The national and joint
committees are meeting with witnesses in order to gain
a greater understanding of the plight of the missing
citizens of Kuwait and other States. The Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence broadcast
on local and satellite television and use other means
of media to atttract more witnesses. Field visits are
carried out in order to obtain more reliable information
and achieve tangible results in locating the burial sites
of the missing persons and Kuwaiti prisoners. We have
held many joint technical meetings, excavations have
been undertaken and witnesses interviewed. From 14 to
18 July, we excavated 120 locations in Karbala, but found
no human remains. The plan of the Ministry of Defence
of Iraq is to carry out excavations in Khamisiyah,
Radwaniyah, Ayn al-Tamr and Sulaymaniyah, as well
as in another location in Salman Pak.

With a view to promoting brotherly relations
with Kuwait, we have held, in New York from 24 to
28 October, a joint technical workshop on the new maps
of the internationally acknowledged boundaries
between Iraq and Kuwait. The workshop was held
under the supervision of the United Nations. The two
delegations have reached an agreement to start an
18-month project for the creation of new maps.

Iraq appreciates the genuine efforts of the United
States of America and the Russian Federation to reach
a comprehensive solution in Syria for the Syrian
people who have suffered for six years from terrorism,
destruction, killings and displacement. There must
be communication to reach an intra-Syrian solution
that is satisfactory to all parties. There must be an
end to the terrorist gangs - and the international and
regional support they receive - and the recruitment
of terrorists. We call on Syria's neighbours to respect
their boundaries. They must close the borders to the
terrorists and should not provide them with logistical
support as such actions would be in violation of Security
Council resolutions.

Iraq notes with satisfaction the relocation of the
inhabitants of Camp Liberty to other States. In that
regard, we value the efforts of Ms. Jane Holl Lute ofthe
United States of America and the Republic of Albania
for facilitating that process and carrying it through to
its completion.

In conclusion, we thank the Special Representative
Mr. Jan Kubis and his team for their efforts and for
the advice they provide to the Iraqi Government. We
are also grateful for the activities of United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq for an Iraq that is stable,
unified and free from terrorism.

