Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, we thank Mr. Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Ms.
McAskie, Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, and
Mr. Fall, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for their briefings, all three of which were very
important for the next stage in our effort to find
solutions to the problems of West Africa.

The international community, including the
United Nations, has made tremendous, successful
endeavours to bring peace and stability to West Africa.
We are most grateful to the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) for its efforts. The
March visit by the Inter-Agency Mission to West
Africa marked yet another United Nations effort to find
solutions to the problems of the subregion. The report
of that Mission (S/2001/434) sets out many excellent
and practicable recommendations that merit serious
study and adoption by the Council. This should be
followed up with concrete action.

Now the Council should focus on the security
situation in the border area of Sierra Leone, Guinea and
Liberia and should promptly carry out a study on ways
and means to support the deployment of ECOWAS
forces along the borders of the three countries and
effectively to verify Liberia's compliance with relevant
Security Council resolutions so that those resolutions
can be genuinely implemented.

The report's recommendation to establish a
United Nations office for West Africa is a very good
one. Such an office should coordinate the work of the
relevant United Nations agencies, of the United
Nations itself and of other agencies, along with
coordinating cooperation between the United Nations
and ECOWAS, to ensure that all action is fully
coordinated. The head of that office, in order to deal
with day-to-day responsibilities, should more
importantly focus on comprehensively resolving long-
term problems in this area.

We also support strengthening the presence of the
humanitarian relief agencies in this area, because the
humanitarian problems are integrally linked with the
security situation in the area. Therefore, while
resolving security problems, we should also strengthen
our efforts to solve humanitarian problems.

