Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Foreign Minister Popolizio Bardales as
he presides over today's meeting and thanks Foreign
Minister Trujillo Garcia for his participation. I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing.

Wejust heard the briefing on the Security Council's
visit to Colombia (see S/PV.8580). China welcomes
the positive results of the visit and also wishes to
thank the Government of Colombia for its cooperation
and hospitality.

The Colombian peace process is essential for
achieving comprehensive peace and stability in
Colombia. It is also of great value for regional peace
and security and development. In the recent period, the
Colombian Government has continued to advance the
peace process and make progress, particularly in such
aspects as strengthening national institution-building,
promoting economic and rural development,
developing crop substitutions and facilitating the
reintegration of former combatants. China commends
these achievements.

At the same time, Colombia is still facing
challenges in fully implementing the peace agreement.
In some regions, the security situation remains
fragile. All parties should continue making efforts to
enhance mutual trust, provide assistance for the social
and economic reintegration of former combatants,
take practical measures to guarantee the security of
former combatants and their communities, promote
development in former-conflict areas and strengthen
support for remote areas.

Recent differences in views among the relevant
parties in Colombia on such issues as the statutory law
of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace have been resolved
through legal channels, with the joint efforts of all
parties. China welcomes this achievement and hopes
that the parties in Colombia will advance the peace
process as a top priority, persevere in the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement, strengthen
inclusive political dialogue and accelerate economic
and social reconstruction. We hope that the Colombian
Government will continue to hold peace talks with the
parties concerned and create favourable conditions for
the realization of comprehensive peace, stability and
development in Colombia as soon as possible.

Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Ruiz Massieu and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia have made important contributions
to promoting the Colombian peace process and
enhancing the country's security, stability and economic
and social development. China commends them for their
efforts. We hope that the Mission will continue on the
basis of respect for the the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Colombia, to strengthen
communication with the Colombian parties, increase
trust and resolve suspicions, and advance the national
peace process with a view towards making further
achievements.

China stands ready to work with other members of
the Security Council to help advance the Colombian
peace process and achieve comprehensive peace,
stability and development in Colombia as soon
as possible.

