Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the briefing of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, and we thank
him for his work. We also welcome the briefing by the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Congo,
Ambassador Raymond Serge Bale, whose country is
chairing the Regional Monitoring Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Despite the size ofthe conflict, Bolivia is optimistic
about the efforts of regional and international partners
to promote sustained and concerted support for
the implementation of the agreements reached. On
24 February 2013, the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region was adopted. The agreement is a
regional milestone that endorses national, regional
and international actions, whose main objective is
to eradicate violence through cooperation among its
signatory countries with a View to building lasting
peace and stability by addressing the root causes
of conflict, deepening collaboration and building
confidence among neighbouring countries. In that
regard, we call on the signatory countries of the Addis
Ababa agreement to continue to promote the search for
peace and to consolidate the full implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Bolivia supports the political initiatives and
recommendations set out in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/209) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework,
which, among other objectives, seeks to have a
positive impact on disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration plans, as well as on the repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of the various insurgent
groups, both Congolese and foreign, operating in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in other
countries in the region.

Resolution 2389 (2017), on the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, reaffirmed the intention
of all its members to support the regional initiative by
emphasizing the need for full respect for the principles
of non-interference, good neighbourliness and regional
cooperation. Furthermore, the resolution emphasizes
that the fight against the illegal exploitation of natural
resources is paramount, as that is "one of the major
factors fuelling and exacerbating conflicts in the Great
Lakes region".

As one of the world's richest in natural resources,
this region is unfortunately currently experiencing a
quasi-imposed reality. The large multinationals and
international consortiums operating in the area have
become a factor that contributes through harmful
neocolonial mechanisms to the weakening of the ability
of States to use and enjoy their wealth. The promotion
of the purchase of diamonds, copper, cobalt and coltan,
among other resources that are illegally exploited by
armed groups, underwrites their war-making activities,
providing them with the means that appear to perpetuate
conflicts. Indeed, the activity of armed groups in the
region, such as the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda, the Allied Democratic Forces, the Lord's
Resistance Army, anti-balaka or ex-Seleka factions, the
Mayi-Mayi groups and various other groups that are
joining the inter-ethnic and intercommunity clashes
in different areas of the region, constantly threaten the
consolidation of security, peace and stability.

Bolivia once again expresses its concern about the
environment of violence and the deteriorating security
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan. We also
express our concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the region, which is deepening the
complexity of the conflict, with millions of internally
displaced persons and refugees, WHO constitute the
most vulnerable populations. Addressing the climate of
insecurity in the region, the current political impasse
and the continuing uncertainty surrounding election
timetables are key issues that need to be addressed.

Finally, aware that the challenges to achieving
stable and permanent peace in some of the countries
of the world remain complex, Bolivia considers it
essential to strengthen the mechanisms that contribute
to increasing confidence through strategic alliances,
strengthened dialogue and close collaboration with
regional and subregional partners. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region is a great example
that should be replicated in support of each and every
initiative that favours, first, conflict prevention, and,
more important, peacebuilding.

