Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): Egypt recognizes the
initiative taken by New Zealand in organizing this
open debate as the first open debate addressing the
specific challenges faced by a group of 37 countries and
territories with a combined population of 15 million.

Egypt believes that small island developing States
(SIDS) remain a special case for sustainable development
in view of their unique and particular vulnerabilities
and their peace and security challenges. Therefore, the
United Nations system and the international community
must undertake their responsibilities in supporting
SIDS to overcome their vulnerabilities and transform
them from challenges into opportunities. In that regard,
allow me to highlight the following remarks.

There is an urgent need to support the efforts of
small island developing States to combat trafficking
in persons, cybercrime, drug trafficking, transnational
organized crime and international piracy by promoting
the accession, ratification and implementation
of applicable conventions, by enacting and using
legislation that prohibits trafficking, by promoting
strong institutions and capacity-building, by providing
sufficient financial resources and by achieving
coordination and synergies among national, regional
and international efforts.

The challenges related to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources are global in nature, but their
impact on SIDS is especially devastating. Efforts to
sustainably manage natural resources and increase
the resilience of livelihoods to threats and crises rely
heavily on the management capacity of institutions and
on coordination and governance mechanisms. There
is a need to build capacities and develop an agenda
of institutional strengthening and capacity-building
at regional, national and local levels. That must be
achieved through partnerships among SIDS in and
across regions and between SIDS and the international
community.

Natural disasters, desertification, land degradation
and drought are major threats for small island
developing States and impede their progress towards
sustainable development. There is a critical need to
build resilience, strengthen monitoring and prevention,
reduce vulnerability, raise awareness and increase
preparedness and resilience policies to respond to and
recover from disasters and other challenges. The role
of the international community is of vital importance.

The outcome document of the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States,
namely, the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(Samoa Pathway) outlines a series of threats affecting
peace and security, as well as the challenges faced by
SIDS. It further identifies an action plan to respond to
them effectively. Our mission now is to guarantee the
implementation of the Samoa Pathway and to transform
our political commitment into concrete policies and
actions.
Egypt is committed to supporting all of the efforts
of SIDS to overcome their major existential challenges.
It reiterates its commitment to respect the mandate of
General Assembly resolution 63/281, which recognizes
the respective responsibilities of the principal organs of
the United Nations.

