Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Let me first join other
delegations in warmly welcoming Ambassador Sir
Emyr Jones Parry, even during this temporary spell of
non-permanence. We have been friends and colleagues
for a long time, and we have been working together in
the context of the European Union. I am also looking
forward to working very closely with him in context of
the Security Council.

My delegation would like to thank the Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1267 (1999), Ambassador Munoz,
for his very comprehensive and convincing first report,
which we fully support.

As terrorism continues to claim the lives of
countless innocent people, the United Nations
sanctions regime targeting members or associates of Al
Qaeda and the Taliban remains a major tool for
combating this global scourge. As Ambassador Munoz
has pointed out, the primary responsibility for making
these sanctions work lies with Member States. It is
therefore appropriate that, for the first time, the debate
on this key issue is open to all Member States. In the
view of my delegation, this should become a regular
practice.

My country will continue to help to strengthen
the credibility and efficiency of the targeted sanctions,
as it has done in the past. Germany has contributed to
improving both the consolidated list of targeted
individuals and entities and pertinent watchlists and the
border-crossing information system. We have
submitted reports and additional information to the
Committee as required, and we are cooperating closely
with law enforcement, judicial and security authorities
worldwide.

Our dialogue with United Nations experts,
including the head of the Monitoring Group,
Mr. Chandler, has been very close. We welcome
Ambassador Mufioz's announced intention to visit
several countries, and we gladly renew our invitation to
him to include Germany in his itinerary.

A major source of credibility for the sanctions
regime is the fact that it targets specific individuals or
entities on the basis of a consolidated list. We think,
however, that clear criteria should be developed that
would specify under which objective conditions a
given individual or entity should be added to that list.
Such criteria would be helpful to facilitate the
Committee's work. Perhaps we should discuss various
national practices and, ideally, come to a widely
accepted manner in which cases for listings are
presented and considered by the Committee members.

Another open issue relates to de-listing. In our
view, we should consider introducing some core
elements of due process to be applied by the Security
Council, mutatis mutandis. For example, there could be
room for the possibility that a targeted individual might
bring his case to the Committee for consideration.

We are convinced that these open issues can and
should be resolved with the aim of avoiding or undoing
the listing of innocent individuals. This would not
weaken, but rather strengthen the sanctions regime by
enhancing its credibility. The fact that resolution 1452
(2002) of December 2002 establishes objective criteria
for granting certain exceptions to the sanctions regime
demonstrates that appropriate refinement of the
measures is possible.

Germany fully subscribes to the forthcoming
statement by the presidency of the European Union and
its assessment of today's topic.

To conclude, I would like to thank Ambassador
Munoz and his able team in the Mission of Chile, as
well as the Monitoring Group and the Secretariat, for
their outstanding efforts in steadily improving this key
United Nations instrument in the fight against
terrorism.

