Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): Afghanistan extends its appreciation to the Security Council for the adoption today of resolution 2543 (2020), extending the mandate of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for another 12 months. The unanimous adoption of the resolution sends a very clear, strong and unequivocal message of the Council's support for Afghanistan at one of the most critical times in our contemporary history. Just a few days ago, the intra-Afghan negotiations finally began in Doha. We convey our gratitude to our friends and allies in facilitating the talks, especially Qatar for hosting the first round. The negotiating teams of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban sat down to discuss Afghanistan's long-lasting desire for peace. We are optimistic that these talks will help bring an end to a very long period of conflict and result in a dignified and sustainable peace that protects the rights of all Afghan citizens, including women and minorities, as reflected in our Constitution. We thank the members of the Security Council for highlighting in the mandate the importance of the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned element in our national processes, especially the peace process. I would like to express our gratitude for the Council's emphasis on the rights of women, youth and minorities, the importance of protecting the economic, social, political and development gains made in the last 19 years, and an immediate reduction in violence that leads to a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire. The Council's recognition of our Government's dedicated efforts aimed at addressing the coronavirus disease pandemic, and the initiatives taken by the Afghan President to respond to the immediate humanitarian needs for those affected are of great importance at a time when resources are extremely limited. The Council's acknowledgement of the brave decision taken by the Government of Afghanistan and its strong and commendable efforts towards implementing confidence-building measures for peace and the start of the intra-Afghan negotiations is noted with appreciation. Consistent with what I have said in the Security Council before, the release of 5,000 Taliban prisoners was not a simple and easy decision for the Government and the people of Afghanistan to make, but we have accepted this difficult compromise in order to achieve an end to violence and conflict. The important role of regional partners, neighbours and our international allies and friends, especially the United Nations, is crucial in our peace talks and in Afghanistan's sustainable economic development. Regional cooperation and connectivity are important for Afghanistan's prosperity and for fulfilling our vision of being the central hub of Central and South Asia. Our fight against narcotics requires a comprehensive and consolidated approach, with the Afghan Government's leadership and ownership, and we know that any post- peace development strategy would be incomplete if this shared challenge were not addressed. Resolution 1401 (2002) initiated a_ strong relationship between Afghanistan and the United Nations, which has helped to bring us to this culmination in our journey as a young democracy. This collaboration has contributed to the consolidation of our democracy, the strengthening of the rule of law and the creation of stronger institutions that will help us to continue our efforts aimed at achieving self-reliance and sustainability. At this time, allow me to also take a moment to pay tribute to all the United Nations staff members who have sacrificed their lives for our common dream of building a peaceful and prosperous nation from the ground up. Our nation values their sacrifice, and we will continue to build on their legacy. Consistently when taking the floor at the Security Council, I have spoken about the new Afghanistan - a country that emerged from darkness two decades ago and which is today being led by Afghans from different segments of our society, including women and youth, and which comprises a diversity of ethnic groups that make up our rich and unique national identity. Through its pursuit of peace, this new Afghanistan will demand that our ideals be upheld and that our country become a thriving nation, a leader and example in our region. The new Afghanistan is no longer a dream, but a reality built through the strength and resilience of Afghans. We pledge to protect this reality during the negotiations with the Taliban. Afghans want peace - a peace that maintains the hard-won rights embodied in our Constitution, a peace that provides freedoms and opportunities to all Afghans, a peace that preserves our inclusive and representative republic, our free and energetic media, and our strong regard for the protection and promotion of human rights. Finally, I would like to express my very sincere gratitude and appreciation for the invaluable hard work of the delegations of Germany and Indonesia as the co-penholders who led the Council towards the unanimous adoption of resolution 2543 (2020) today. We are grateful for them and for the collaborative spirit of all members of the Security Council, who unanimously supported the resolution. We look forward to continuing to work together towards the fulfilment of our common aspiration for peace and stability in Afghanistan. The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m. 17
