Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Shearer for
his valuable and comprehensive briefing. I would
also like to very briefly touch upon three main
points - political developments, the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
the humanitarian situation.

In relation to political developments, we welcome
the meetings between President Salva Kiir and
Mr. Riek Machar last week in Juba. We also welcome
the declaration on working towards the completion
of as many of the pre-transition steps as possible by
12 November, in accordance with the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan.

We also welcome the declaration on the
reconfiguration of the Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Commission and the continuation
of the ceasefire. In the meantime, we hope that the
containment and unification of forces will avert the
risks that usually accompany such processes. We also
look forward to seizing the moment and optimizing the
remainder ofthis sensitive and important phase. We call
on all the non-signatory parties to rapidlyjoin the peace
process. Meanwhile, we welcome the positive signals
sent by some with regard to holding consultations in
this regard.

The progressive achievements being made need
follow-up by national and regional parties, with
the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the African Union and the United
Nations, taking into consideration the positive role
played by South Sudan in supporting the transitional
process. Transitional justice in the post-conflict phase
is of paramount importance to ensuring reconciliation,
accountability and the sustainability of peace.

In relation to the humanitarian situation, we
welcome the relative increase in the number of
returning refugees and displaced persons and hope that
the international community will step up its support in
order to alleviate the humanitarian burden borne by the
people. That can be done by promoting humanitarian
activities in South Sudan, especially in the areas of
health care, education and housing, thereby creating
an environment conducive for voluntary, safe and
dignified return.

Meanwhile, we emphasize resolution 2417 (2018),
on hunger and conflict, which reiterates that hunger
plays a key role in the resurgence of conflict. We
welcome the progressive decrease in South Sudan of
the number of people in protection of civilians sites of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
and reiterate that the protection of civilians remains
the primary responsibility of the Government of
South Sudan.

We reaffirm our condemnation of the recruitment of
children and conflict-related sexual violence, regardless
of who the perpetrators may be or their rationale. We
welcome the intercommunal reconciliation process,
which needs to be supported and emulated at all levels.

In relation to UNMISS, we appreciate its important
role and commend its good offices, as well as its health,
humanitarian and legal services, which contribute
to the consolidation of peace by prioritizing political
solutions. We also call for ensuring the freedom of
movement of UNMISS and of humanitarian aid,
pursuant to the status-of-forces agreement and the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, South Sudan is at one of its most
critical phases in its history - one that will have very
serious repercussions for present and future generations
if not addressed effectively and seriously. We hope that
the vicious circle of war and destruction will come to
an end, leading to security, stability and prosperity in
the friendly South Sudan.

