Mr. Zerihoun: I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to introduce the special report of the
Secretary-General on the assessment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS). I would also like to use this
opportunity to provide a brief update on the status of
the country's preparation for legislative elections.

More than six months after the appointment of a
consensus Prime Minister and the formation of an
inclusive Government, both of which were key elements
of the Conakry Agreement, the political situation in
Guinea-Bissau remains fraught with uncertainty.

Due to technical challenges, the legislative
elections were not held as scheduled on 18 November,
in contravention of the legal and constitutional time
frames. It was in fact only two days ago, on 19 December,
that the Government declared the completion of the
voter registration. Prior to that, on 5 December, the
Office of the Prosecutor General had suspended voter
registration, pending an investigation into alleged
irregularities. The Prosecutor General instructed
security forces to prevent access to the building of
the electoral body in charge of voter registration.
Thanks to the timely intervention of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), which,
on 12 December, deployed a delegation to Bissau led by
the Nigerian Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Office
of the Prosecutor General reversed course and allowed
the resumption of the voter-registration process on
13 December.

In a communique, the ECOWAS delegation also
called for the legislative elections to be held in January
2019. However, the Prime Minister proposed that the
elections be held on 17 February, with 24 February and
10 March also floated as possible dates for the elections.
Yesterday, President Vaz issued a decree setting
10 March 2019 as the date for the elections. These
developments followed the infighting by the political
parties over technical aspects of voter registration,
during which accusations were traded of attempts to rig
and deliberately delay the process. Such tensions have
contributed to an unhealthy pre-electoral atmosphere in
the country.

The Party for Social Renewal (PRS), the Rally
of the Guinean People/Democratic Party of Guinea,
MADEM-GlS - all part of a collective of 18 political
parties - have demanded the resignation of the
Minister of Territorial Administration for allegedly
mismanaging the voter-registration exercise and
Violating existing laws. In response, the African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo
Verde (PAIGC) accused PRS of Violating the Conakry
Agreement and noted that PRS continued to discredit
the voter-registration process despite lack of evidence.
PAIGC also accused President Vaz, PRS and their
allies of deliberately provoking delays in the electoral
process in an effort to cause a Government collapse and
postpone the parliamentary elections.

On 5 December, Prime Minister Aristides Gomes
responded to an invitation by the National Assembly
to provide clarifications on the voter registration. In
his response, the Prime Minister said that the voter
registration was transparent and that legislative
elections would be held in a fair and free manner. In the
meantime, an ECOWAS technical team comprising two
election experts is presently in Bissau to audit the voter-
registration process. The team is expected to report to
the Government and to the ECOWAS Commission on
its findings.
Approximately 800,000 citizens - around 95 per
cent of the total estimated eligible population - were
reportedto havebeenregisteredto vote as 0f12 December,
the day the ECOWAS ministerial delegation arrived in
Bissau. The basket fund managed by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) has continued to
provide technical and financial support to the National
Electoral Commission and the electoral body in charge
of registration. Outside of the basket fund, Nigeria has
provided 205 biometric voter-registration kits to the
Government for the voter-registration process. Portugal
will make an in-kind contribution of approximately
€1 million, which should include the printing and
transportation of ballot papers. Timor-Leste pledged
a contribution of over $470,000 towards repairing and
purchasing electoral equipment and supporting the
voter-registration and electoral processes. Some 400
biometric voter-registration kits, procured by UNDP,
arrived in Bissau on 26 November. The kits will be
used for the annual voter-registration updates required
by law.

It seems appropriate at this stage that the
international community consider sending a strong
message to the Bissau-Guinean authorities and
political actors to demonstrate the requisite political
will for the organization of credible elections and
refrain from further delaying the process. The findings
of the assessment of UNIOGBIS undertaken by the
Secretary-General underscore the challenging political
context in which UNIOGBIS operates, as reflected in
the aforementioned developments. UNIOGBIS merits
recognition for the crucial role it has played in support
of the ECOWAS-led mediation process to resolve the
political impasse in Guinea-Bissau. Despite this year's
breakthrough, and with the likelihood of avoiding
widespread violence, Guinea-Bissau risks lurching
from one political crisis to another, unless decisive
steps are taken by the Government to meet the new
election date decreed by the President.

WhileUNIOGBISremainsunanimouslyappreciated
by the Government, civil society and international
partners on the ground for its preventive role through
the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and for strengthening the capacities
of civil society organizations, the Mission has now been
in Guinea-Bissau for close to two decades. Experience
has shown that in the absence of a nationally-owned
and nationally-led reform process, UNIOGBIS alone
will not be able to contribute to sustainable peace and
development in Guinea-Bissau. It is for these reasons
that the recommendation of the Secretary-General, as
reflectedinhis specialreport(S/2018/1086),underscores
the need for the United Nations to strictly focus on
good offices, the coordination of international partners,
the promotion of human rights, the incorporation of a
gender perspective in peacebuilding, and combating
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime,
in close cooperation with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. These tasks would occur over
three phases: the first phase, the electoral period, runs
through mid-2019; the second phase, the immediate
post-electoral period, runs from mid-2019 to the end of
2019; and the third phase, the transition and exit period
of the Mission, would conclude no later than the end
of 2020.

To accomplish the foregoing objectives and
subsequent to the reconfiguration the Mission has
undergone this year to comply with resolution 2404
(2018), the Secretary-General has endorsed a further
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence during
the second phase, namely, mid-2019, through the
establishment of a streamlined good-offices mission
in Bissau, led by a Special Representative and focused
primarily on facilitation of the political process. This
good-offices mission would then continue to draw
down until the end of 2020, while, concurrently, the
United Nations Office for West Africa would increase
its engagement in Guinea-Bissau, in the light of the
mandate to support ECOWAS. The capacities of the
United Nations country team would also need to be
strengthened to take on further responsibilities going
into the transition and Mission drawdown and closure.
In this regard, we would expect the Guinea-Bissau
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission to play
a leading role during the transition period, as it did
under similar circumstances with the closure of other
peacekeeping missions in the subregion.

The latest results of our combined efforts to assist
Guinea-Bissau stakeholders in overcoming the political
and institutional impasse and launch the country on
the path of sustainable development have prompted
our guarded optimism. However, the roadblocks
encountered during preparations for the legislative
elections and the inability of the Government to hold
the elections on 18 November have also given us pause.
The period leading to the legislative and presidential
elections will be critical and require the continued
attention and engagement of the international
community. There is still hope for the country to move
forward and its political leadership to Show good faith
and meet its national obligations by holding legislative
elections on 10 March 2019.
Before I conclude, I would like to recognize the
work of Mr. J 0510 Honwana, the independent expert who
led the assessment mission to Guinea-Bissau on behalf
of the Secretary-General. The continued engagement
of the Peacebuilding Commission in mobilizing the
attention and support of the international community
for Guinea-Bissau has also been crucial, as has the role
played by Special Representative Viegas Filho and the
men and women serving in UNIOGBIS in promoting
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

Our appreciation extends also to our
partners - ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries - for their cooperation and efforts, which
have helped pave the way to a better future for Guinea-
Bissau.

