The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr.
Vieira de Mello for the clarifications and answers he
has provided.

Before adjourning, I would like to discharge a
duty of conscience and also to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to Mr. Bernard Miyet, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.
First of all, the duty of conscience: this is the last
public meeting for the Security Council in the month of
September, under the presidency of Mali. Before taking
up the presidency on behalf of Mali, I did not think that
the task of presiding over the Council would be
cumbersome in the first half of the month in view of
the general debate that was being held at the time in the
General Assembly. However, recent developments in
various situations throughout the world compelled us to
break with tradition. The Security Council was thus
required to be active during the general debate, and a
number of meetings of experts were required. I am very
grateful to all members for their understanding and
cooperation.

The second half of the month has been very
difficult. Members' support and cooperation continued,
and I am very grateful. Additionally, our task was made
much easier by the Secretariat, which gave us
instructive presentations and good advice. I would
particularly like to thank Mr. Stephanides and his team
for their help and their reliability at all times.

Finally, and most importantly, I would like to
thank the interpreters and the translators, who worked
very skilfully for long hours alongside the members of
the Council.

Now I would like to pay tribute to Mr. Bernard
Miyet on behalf of the members of the Council. His
function as head of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is now coming to an end, and his skills are
required elsewhere. On behalf of the Council, I thank
him for the great contribution he made to the work of
the Secretariat and for the dedication with which he
served to further the objectives of the United Nations. I
wish him every success in his future endeavours.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.20 pm.
