Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's membership of the Security Council and its presidency for the current month. It is no small feat, by any account. I am sure Viet Nam will excel in shouldering that important responsibility. At this point, I would like to make the following statement on behalf of Canada, Germany, Sweden and Ukraine. We thank all who expressed their condolences in connection with the crash of the Ukraine International Airlines passenger aircraft near Tehran International Airport. We are grateful for the words of support to the families and loved ones of the victims of the tragic catastrophe. One hundred and seventy-six innocent lives were lost - citizens of Iran, Canada, Ukraine, Sweden, Afghanistan, Germany and the United Kingdom. The circumstances surrounding the catastrophe are still unclear. It is now up to the experts to investigate it and to find answers to the question of what caused the crash. To do so, our experts must receive unconditional support for their investigation into the incident. That brings me to the end of my statement on that matter. Before proceeding, I would like to put on record that my delegation aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union. We appreciate, Mr. President, your timely initiative to launch the year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations witha discussion onthe importance of upholding its founding document - the Charter of the United Nations. Let us recall that, back in 1945, at the San Francisco Conference, the very name of our Organization was the subject of intellectual debate, in particular with regard to the proposal by the prominent United States President Franklin Delano Roosevelt to name it the United Nations. It is interesting that those countries that opposed that name were afraid that there might be a conflict among the nations in the future and that the name - the United Nations - would not correspond to reality. I wish to repeat the response of the Ukrainian representative to those concerns in San Francisco. "The delegation of Ukraine believes that one should not have such a pessimistic outlook on the future of our Organization. It should be constructed in a way that would avoid the possibility of a division or conflict among nations". He also insisted that every nation that would become a member of the Organization would have to fully share the principles that united the nations during the war and fight for them. Today, I fully subscribe to the words spoken by the representative of Ukraine in 1945. Yet, today, 75 years later, as a representative of the country that fought for the name of the United Nations and appealed for optimism and as a representative of the country that is the victim of an ongoing armed aggression on the part of a permanent member of the Security Council, can I say that we made the right choice and fulfilled the aspirations of the founding fathers and mothers, as one delegate put it, of the United Nations? Indeed, there is no unity among nations. There are ongoing wars among the Members of the United Nations and old and new democracies work hard to ensure unity at the national level - based on democracy, human rights, rule of law and social cohesion. That key message is consistently promoted by my own President, Volodymyr Zelenskyy. Since 1945, there have been very many Security Council meetings, other events dedicated to the United Nations Charter and anniversaries of all kinds. Let us recall the Security Council summit held in January 1992. If you read its 146 pages of verbatim records, members will see how good the speechwriters of all the Heads of State and Government who took part in it were. Members will see how euphonic and saturated with ideas the speeches were - although, rather amusingly, they occasionally departed from reality. As we approach another milestone, we view Viet Nam's initiate to convene today's meeting as a useful opportunity to take stock of how the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter are being honoured or not. Today's meeting also takes place against the background of escalating regional conflicts and the ongoing war between United Nations Members in Europe. One thought I would like to share with those present is that among the dozens of statements on the United Nations Charter that I have read, there are several, to which I myself would subscribe. Those statements, with all the right words, glorify the supremacy of international law and the triumph of the principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter - except for one thing - they were made by those who, upon obtaining permanent membership of the Security Council and joining the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe, unleashed, in this century, more than one war against their immediate neighbours. Therefore, let us not judge them by the ornate style of their statements but by their concrete deeds and compliance with the United Nations Charter. Despite the fact that the drafters of the Charter envisioned, in Article 27, the intent to remove the prospect of a Council member casting a vote when a conflict of interest was clearly present, that integral part of the Charter is often overlooked for the sake of political expediency. We regret that, under such circumstances, the Council was unable to take action on Ukraine's request in 2015 regarding the deployment of a robust United Nations-mandated multinational peacekeeping force in occupied Donbas. After a couple of years of inaction, the Russian Federation expressed doubt that such a request had even been made. Let me remind those present that two years later, when the Russian Federation put forward its own proposal, we provided our partners in the Security Council with Ukraine's vision of the major elements of the mandate of a possible peacekeeping operation. Now, five years later, President Zelenskyy of Ukraine points to the importance of the deployment of peacekeepers along the Ukrainian-Russian border. Certainly, the quality of work of the Security Council largely depends on the quality of its membership. At this point, I wish to commend the work of those non-permanent members who have left the Council upon completion of their two-year term. Our good friend and neighbour, Poland, which contributed significantly to the Council's activities, will be particularly missed by us. We trust that the new non-permanent members will be fully dedicated to the fulfilment of their important mission. I come to this anniversary not to speak of futility or failure nor of doubt and despair. I come to raise a voice of confidence in both the future of the United Nations and the fate of the human race. Those are not my words. They belong to the Head of State who spoke them at the meeting dedicated to the twentieth anniversary of the United Nations Charter in 1965, during a major regional conflict. Let me express the hope that by the time of the formal anniversary events in October, we will all, as truly united nations, by our actions - not our words - and by stopping ongoing military aggression and de-escalating regional conflicts, have the moral right to joyfully celebrate rather than sombrely mark yet another anniversary of the Organization, which was created by the people and for the people. The famous opening words of the United Nations Charter begin "We the peoples of the United Nations ...". We must do our utmost not to fail our peoples.
