Mr. Salam (Lebanon): 1 thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council today in my capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1521 (2003) concerning Liberia. In that connection, I
intend to provide a brief overview of the work of the
Committee during the current year.

Over the course of 2011, the Committee held
three formal consultations. At its first meeting, on
15 June, the Committee considered the findings and
recommendations contained in the midterm report of
the Panel of Experts. In that report the Panel of Experts
recommended, among other things, that the Committee
update the travel-ban and assets-freeze lists and
explore, with the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), the preparation of
INTERPOL-United Nations special notices for the
individuals whose names are contained in the travel-
ban list. Pursuant to the Panel's recommendations, the
Committee reached an agreement on a comprehensive
update of the travel-ban and assets-freeze lists on
4August.

At its second meeting, on 19 August, the
Committee also agreed on procedures on cooperation
with INTERPOL in the creation of INTERPOL-United
Nations special notices. The agreement was marked -
the first occasion since 2005 - by the issuance of the
first special notices for individuals on the consolidated
list of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) to the effect that now the sanctions
Committees will utilize the special notices mechanism.

At its third meeting, on 30 November, the
Committee considered the findings and
recommendations contained in the Panel of Experts'
final report. Among its findings, the Panel of Experts
reviewed the activities of Liberian combatants during
the 2011 Ivorian conflict, to better assess the future
disposition of those groups, currently residing in
Liberia. The Panel observed that Liberian mercenary
command structures in the Ivorian conflict were fluid
and relied on an alliance of generals who often
activated their own recruits, mainly drawn from
unemployed Liberian ex-combatants. The Panel also
obtained testimony concerning the substantive overlap
between the military operations of Liberian
mercenaries and Ivorian militias, whose forces were
residing in Liberia and intermingling with Ivorian
refugees. While those groups likely did not pose any
immediate threat to Liberian or Ivorian national
security, they could nevertheless attempt to destabilize
areas along the Liberian-Ivorian border.

This morning, with the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2025 (2011) on Liberia, the Security Council
noted with serious concern the lack of progress with
regard to the implementation of the assets freeze and
demanded that the Government of Liberia make all
necessary efforts to fulfil its obligations. But, in the
same resolution, the Council also renewed the arms
embargo on all non-governmental entities and
individuals operating in the territory of Liberia, as well
as the travel ban for a period of 12 months. It also
extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts on
Liberia for the same period and requested the Panel to
report on the implementation and present an evaluation
of the measures on arms as amended by resolution
1903 (2009). The Council also decided to review the
measures of the sanctions regime by the end of 2012,
with a view to possibly modifying or lifting part of the
sanctions in the light of progress achieved in
stabilization throughout Liberia.

The Committee has been committed to
successfully discharging its mandate in close
cooperation with the Panel of Experts, with a view to
playing its part in making sustainable the
peacebuilding process in Liberia, which still faces
considerable challenges.

