Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for her briefing today.
The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2015/157) and appreciates the valuable
contribution that the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) has made to stability
and progress in Haiti, as seen during the Council's visit
in January. I will focus my statement today on three key
points - the 2015 elections, the security situation and
the future of MINUSTAH.

In January, the Council had the opportunity to
see at first hand the contribution of MINUSTAH. It
was also a chance to see the positive steps that Haiti
is taking to ensure its own development and security.
A further step is the recent confirmation that elections
will be held this year. The failure to hold elections in
2014, together with the dissolution of Haiti's Parliament
in January, led to uncertainty and insecurity among
Haiti's people. We therefore welcome the formation of
an Electoral Council, the publication of the electoral
decree and the announcement of an electoral calendar.
We commend the efforts of President Martelly and the
political parties in finding the consensus needed to
agree to that. As the Secretary-General acknowledges,
there will be more challenges to the electoral process
ahead, but that is a positive step. We call on all actors
to play an active role in preparations to ensure the
integrity and credibility of the elections.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General reports
that the security situation remains generally stable,
including in the parts of the country where MINUSTAH
is no longer present. The development and reach
of the justice sector, including through corrections
institutions, will support stability and will ensure
that the rule of law is justly applied in Haiti. As the
Secretary-General reports, that has been undermined
by the recent prison escapes and the resulting
criminality. However, we commend the response of
the Haitian National Police, which led to the recapture
of the escapees, including through collaboration with
law enforcement agencies in the Dominican Republic.
The report also highlights improvements in the rule
of law, which are to be applauded, although there is
clearly more to be done to end impunity and ensure
accountability and transparency.

The role of MINUSTAH is to help Haiti re-assume
responsibility for its security. While MINUSTAH
undoubtedly still has a stabilization role to play in Haiti,
we are encouraged to read in the Secretary-General's
report of the increasing capacity and professionalism
of the Haitian National Police. That is illustrated
by the way in which they have dealt with the recent
political demonstrations, mostly without the need for
overt operational support from the military element of
MINUSTAH. We recognize that Haiti faces challenges
in 2015, including the elections, a weak economy
and tensions across its border with the Dominican
Republic. But we believe that a leaner, more flexible
MINUSTAH, working in support of a growing and
more professional Haitian national police force, will
be able to maintain stability and counter any threats
to security. Our support for the drawdown of some of
the military elements of MINUSTAH is evidence of
our confidence in the Haitian National Police and in
a leaner MINUSTAH force to ensure stability while
elections take place.

We are encouraged by the work already done by
MINUSTAH alongside the United Nations country
team to reconfigure and consolidate their resources.
We particularly welcome the decision to develop, with
the Government of Haiti, a road map to guide the
transitional functions from the Mission to other actors.
We look forward to receiving an update on that process
in the Secretary-General's next report. Together with
political progress, we see development rather than
peacekeeping actors as the key to securing Haiti's
future, and we hope that Member States will support
the United Nations country team and the Government
of Haiti in their efforts to find the right people and
resources for the crucial work.

Haiti faces a difficult period, not the least as a
result of economic pressures and tensions with its
neighbour. Despite some progress, Haiti still faces
challenges. However, we are confident that, with the
right level of support, Haiti will continue to progress
in taking increasing responsibility for its own security
and development. Maintaining the reform of the justice
sector, the police and the corrections facilities and
ensuring that the elections take place will be vital to
building stability and safeguarding Haiti's future.

