Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to congratulate you most warmly,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of April. We assure
you of our full support and cooperation during your
tenure. I would also like to extend our appreciation to
your predecessor for his able leadership in directing the
work of the Council during the past month. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence at this debate.

My delegation also wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of Japan for
organizing this open debate of the Security Council on
the topic of post-conflict peacebuilding and developing
a comprehensive peacebuilding strategy to prevent the
recurrence of conflict. The Government of Sierra
Leone appreciates this opportunity to participate in
deliberations focused on shaping a comprehensive
global strategy on this important issue.

Before I proceed, allow me to convey the
profound regrets of my colleague, Foreign Minister
Zainab Hawa Bangura, who is unavoidably unable to
participate in today's session as originally planned,
owing to compelling countervailing events of a serious
nature.

As a country that has been fully engaged in the
process of post-conflict reconstruction over the past
few years, Sierra Leone has gained keen insights into
the challenges involved in formulating a
comprehensive and sustainable peacebuilding strategy.
We recognize, in particular, the urgent need for the

international community to assess how best the current
architecture, including the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), can be strengthened to ensure a successful
transition from peacebuilding to sustainable security
and development in countries emerging from conflict.

My delegation shares the ideas in many of the
perceptive reflections outlined in the concept note
prepared by Japan. Accordingly, I will endeavour to
focus my intervention on the key questions highlighted
therein and share with you my delegation's Views
concerning the lessons to be learned from Sierra
Leone's own modest experience with post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Over the past decade, Sierra Leone has served as
a veritable field laboratory for the design and
implementation of long-term peacebuilding strategies,
as considerable international efforts have been
expanded on addressing a vast array of challenges,
initiatives and policy options during the country's
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.

Today, Sierra Leone is on the threshold of the
fifth anniversary of the Peacebuilding Commission's
engagement in the country, having received catalytic
funding through the Peacebuilding Fund to undertake
critical peacebuilding efforts over this period.

Key among the challenges the United Nations and
the international community have confronted during
their engagement in Sierra Leone is the question of
how best to devise comprehensive strategies and
mechanisms to mobilize adequate support and
resources designed to minimize the likelihood of a
relapse.

Given the fragility of countries emerging from
conflict, the challenges of building lasting peace can
only be met with a comprehensive and integrated
approach that goes beyond merely establishing
political stability and security. In order for durable
peace to be achieved, there must be a seamless linkage
between those core goals and measures intended to lay
a foundation for long-term development and
democracy, particularly with respect to governance
issues, social stability, human rights and the rule of
law.

Unlike current peace operations, earlier efforts in
conflict resolution were narrowly focused on crisis
management, which allowed for gaps to emerge
between the political and security spheres, on the one
hand, and reconstruction and development, on the
other. That approach increased the likelihood that
conflict countries would degenerate into renewed
violence, in that it failed to adequately address the root
causes of Violent conflict, particularly the interplay
between both underdevelopment and weak governance,
on the one hand, and intra-state warfare, on the other.

In this regard, contemporary peace operations
must focus on tackling the complexities of conflict
situations by identifying and supporting structures that
consolidate peace, not only during the peacebuilding
phase, but also during the traditional peacekeeping
period.

Following the Revolutionary United Front rebel
barricade of some United Nations troops in the eastern
part of Sierra Leone during the early stages of
development, the role of the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone was broadened to include emergency
relief, disarmament and demobilization, the training of
the military and police forces, human rights training,
the repatriation of internally displaced persons and
refugees, and the monitoring of elections. Building
lasting peace also requires addressing the root causes
of violent conflicts by strengthening Government
institutions and enhancing political participation.

On the specific question of what measures can be
implemented to achieve political stability, security and
social stability in the framework of a comprehensive
and integrated approach, I will endeavour to speak
about some of the initiatives undertaken in the Sierra
Leone and their impact on the overall peacebuilding
process to date.

In the aftermath of the cessation of hostilities and
the signing of the Lome Peace Agreement, which
paved the way for the successful conclusion of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, the Government, in collaboration with the
United Nations and other bilateral and multilateral
partners, embarked upon a comprehensive sector
reform process involving the security and justice
sectors.

The Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces, for
example, were increased from 1,700 to 8,500, and
underwent critical training and logistical support led by
the International Military Advisory Team (IMAT),
which was led by the United Kingdom. Sierra Leone
has achieved a significant milestone - the deployment
of military and civilian police peacekeepers in ongoing
United Nations peace operations.

Similar interventions were undertaken with
respect to the national police force, including critical
training and logistical support and the rehabilitation
and construction of police facilities throughout the
country. In addition, the numerical strength of the force
was increased from 5,000 to 9,000, with the aim of
broadening and intensifying the Government's reach
across the entire country for the maintenance of law
and order and the enhancement of the respect for the
rule of law.

Critical reforms were introduced through the
Justice Sector Development Programme, resulting in
the enhancement and development of the capacity of
the judiciary to dispose of the existing backlog of
cases.

All of the foregoing initiatives culminated in a
comprehensive institutional reform process
encompassing defence, police, intelligence, the
judiciary and prisons, aimed at strengthening civilian
oversight and democratic accountability of the security
apparatus.

Undeniably, the security sector has come a long
way in its development and Sierra Leone continues to
progressively move towards the establishment of a
coordinated security and intelligence architecture
designed to allow a participatory approach to assume
full ownership and responsibility for the security
sector. The underlying principle has been: without
security there can be no sustainable development.

The relational dimension of peacebuilding is
critical to the attainment of lasting peace and social
cohesion. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
and the Special Court for Sierra Leone were
established as instruments to achieve the twin goals of
promoting reconciliation and forgiveness and
combating impunity.

Adopting a strategy that includes comprehensive
measures to protect and promote human rights,
strengthen governance and rebuild democratic
institutions will inevitably address many of the root
causes of conflict. Accordingly, since the formal
declaration of the end of the war in Sierra Leone in
2002, a broad array of initiatives within the security-
political-humanitarian-development framework have
been undertaken to enhance democracy and rebuild

weak or dysfunctional State institutions. All of these
efforts have been geared towards laying the foundation
for medium- and long-term national recovery, and have
enhanced the State's capacity for effective delivery of
public services to the citizenry and resulted in positive
outcomes for human development.

To date, my Government has worked with the
United Nations, in collaboration with our bilateral and
multilateral partners, to restore State and local
government institutions across the country, completing
two presidential and parliamentary elections, as well as
local government elections. In 2007, national elections
saw the opposition dislodge the ruling party from
power. I can say, with great pride, that, although not
perfect, most of the strides being made in the ongoing
democratization process in Sierra Leone are
unparalleled in post-conflict situations in many parts of
the world.

The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2005 as an advisory body and as a
forum for mobilizing resources and support for the
consolidation of peace in countries emerging from
conflict, and its subsequent addition of Sierra Leone to
its agenda, occasioned a turning point in our
peacebuilding efforts. The considerable gains achieved
from the engagement with Sierra Leone have clearly
enhanced the importance of the Commission's role as a
medium for securing resources and galvanizing support
for peacebuilding initiatives that are comprehensive,
coherent and coordinated and which reflect country-
specific realities.

Since the engagement of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Sierra Leone has made significant
progress in the areas of governance issues, inter-party
dialogue, the protection of human rights, and
addressing the security threats posed by endemic
corruption, drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime.

Security across the country has greatly improved
thanks to the vigilance of joint police and military
patrols. Several legislative enactments and a
constitutional review process have been undertaken to
address these and other factors that could potentially
threaten the ongoing peacebuilding efforts and the
long-term quest for national development, as
envisioned within the framework of the Government's
national strategy, known as the Agenda for Change.

While we continue to be indebted to the United
Nations architecture currently engaged in Sierra Leone
and to other development partners for the advances
mentioned above, challenges still abound in addressing
a number of development, human rights and
governance issues. Perhaps most vexing of these
concerns are the exceedingly high infant and maternal
mortality rates, which are reportedly among the highest
in the world, as well as burgeoning youth
unemployment in my country. The fact is that, despite
all of these efforts, coupled with the engagement of the
international community, Sierra Leone remains close to
the bottom of the human development index on many
key indicators. This is a worrying concern for us.

This brings me to the nexus between security and
development and the imperative of addressing the
enormous economic and social challenges that beset
post-conflict peacebuilding. It is in appreciation of this
synergy that my Government has spared no effort in
embarking upon a robust sector-wide reform regime,
with a View not only to taking advantage of the
multiplier effect, but, more important, to enabling us to
invest in the development of infrastructure and public
finance management. Similarly, we have resolutely
pursued efforts to invest in the development of human
capital for the furtherance of our social and economic
recovery programme, a vital precondition for
consolidating peace.

As I conclude my intervention, I wish to reiterate
that as much as peacebuilding is a national imperative,
there must be a holistic approach to conceiving and
managing peacebuilding and preventive efforts, with
local ownership, including through regional and
subregional actors, playing a pivotal role.

However, it is important to note that, at this
juncture, despite the overwhelming interest
peacebuilding has generated in the past decade,
mobilization of resources for peacebuilding and
preventive efforts still remain grossly inadequate when
compared to the corresponding commitments to
peacekeeping. Of particular importance in this regard
is the recognition of the catalytic role that can be
played by a meaningful and sequential allocation of
financial resources in the early stages of the transition
period.

The issue of accessibility to funding for
peacebuilding initiatives should be of particular
concern as the major assisting nations and financial
institutions all continue to recover from the shocks of
the current global financial crisis and economic
slowdown, which has occasioned declining support and
remittances from donors across the spectrum. Given
this stark reality, the international community must
urgently consider new approaches and methodologies
for allocating and sustaining financing for
peacebuilding and national post-conflict reconstruction.

