Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and to
wish you every success. I also wish to pay tribute to
Ambassador Gambari for a job well done.

Three months after the fall of Srebrenica the fate of
thousands of men and boys of draft age is still unknown,
because the Bosnian Serbs have denied representatives of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) and
other international humanitarian agencies access to the
town. If the Serbs have nothing to hide, we wonder why
they are unwilling to grant access to persons displaced
from Srebrenica. Their behaviour would seem to confirm
our worst fears - that shocking atrocities may have been
perpetrated against the helpless and defenceless people of
Srebrenica when their town was overrun by the Bosnian
Serb party. Reports that captives were shot in cold blood
do not go away. If these reports could be categorically
confirmed, the action of the Bosnian Serb party would
constitute the most blatant and flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and the accepted norms of
international morality.

The Secretariat has recently informed the Security
Council of similar Serb atrocities in the regions of Banja
Luka and Sanski Most. Draft-age men are reported to
have been rounded up, and some of them summarily
executed. There are also corroborating reports which
confirm that 120 civilians were killed by the Serbs before
the fall of Sanski Most. In addition, there is evidence that
some of those detained had been maltreated and/or used
in degrading forced labour.

Botswana wishes to express its strong disquiet at
these incidents of human rights violations, and insists that
the Serbs should abide by the Security Council resolutions
and cooperate fully with the ICRC and other international
humanitarian organizations in this very important matter.

It is against this background that Botswana will vote
in favour of the draft resolution before us. However, we
do so under no illusion that its adoption will have any
significant effect on the behaviour of those being
addressed. Equally, while it is almost impossible to draw
a line between the political and human rights aspects of
the war in Bosnia, it is important that the Security
Council guard against the possibility of infringing on the
responsibility of the competent bodies of the United

 

Nations, especially the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991. This could
be damaging to whatever prestige and credibility the
Council can still claim on the question of the former
Yugoslavia.

It is important that we avoid the temptation to
politicize human rights. We all know that the human rights
situation in the former Yugoslavia has been the most
disastrous, to say the least, and we also know that the Serbs
have been the worst violators. But none of the parties in
that senseless war has a clean record or is an angel.
Botswana believes that all human rights violations in the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina should be investigated
and those found responsible should be brought to justice.
Similarly, all human rights violations committed in the
territory of Croatia should be investigated, and appropriate
charges should be preferred against the suspects irrespective
of their origin.

