Mr. Perricos: I welcome this opportunity to brief
the Council on our activities. The twenty-ninth
quarterly report to the Council, covering the period
1 March to 31 May, is in document S/2007/3l4. This is
the last quarterly report of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), in view of the imminent decision by the
Council to terminate the mandate of UNMOVIC and
that of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) under the relevant Security Council resolutions
relating to Iraq.

In the present security environment of Iraq, the
possibility should not be discounted that non-State
actors may seek to acquire toxic agents or chemical
precursors in small quantities. One recent example is
the reported use by insurgents in Iraq of toxic
industrial chemicals previously under United Nations
monitoring, such as chlorine, combined with
explosives for dispersal. The possibility of non-State
actors getting their hands on other, more toxic, agents
is real. In view of those events in Iraq and the interest
generated by them, we have, in the annex to our
twenty-ninth quarterly report, further elaborated our
study on the issue of small quantities in both the
chemical and biological areas.

UNMOVIC's activities over the past several
years have been detailed in its quarterly reports to the
Council and the various technical annexes thereto. We
have already provided the Council with a summary of
our compendium of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) programmes, which was issued as document
8/2006/420 in June 2006. The Council had been
informed in the past of our intention to place the full
compendium document on the UNMOVIC website,
www.unmovic.org, after sensitive information had been
eliminated. That, I am pleased to say, took place on
27 June.

The material has been redacted on the basis of
two principles known to the Council. The first is
information related to technology, research and
production that may assist in the development of
07-40467

weapons of mass destruction and means of delivery.
The second principle concerns the confidentiality of
certain information, which includes names of foreign
companies, institutions and banks, names of countries
and names of individuals. The same principles will
apply in the classification of UNMOVIC's archives.
The publication of the compendium provides a detailed
and comprehensive United Nations account of the
former Iraqi regime's extensive WMD programmes.
For the first time it provides lessons learnt over many
years of United Nations inspections and monitoring,
which could be useful in any future multilateral
verification undertaking.

With your encouragement, Mr. President, we have
actively pursued our training programme for inspectors
on our roster. A multidisciplinary training course
related to petrochemical technologies took place from
9 to 22 June in Doha, Qatar. It is noteworthy that this is
the first training course to be conducted by UNMOVIC
in the Middle East region. The course had long been
planned and I am grateful to the Government of Qatar
for the support it provided.

The training course in Qatar was the last training
course provided by UNMOVIC for its roster of 380
experts. The other 38 courses, from UNMOVIC's
inception, were possible due to the generosity and
support of the Governments of Argentina, Austria,
Brazil, Canada, China, Finland, France, Germany,
Romania, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and
the United States. I take this opportunity to again thank
those Governments which have been consistently
supporting our training activities.

Members will recall that on many occasions over
the past years I have been asking that the Council find
the opportunity to revisit UNMOVIC's mandate,
including the activities and the process that could
eventually lead to the closing of the disarmament file
for Iraq and any other follow-up actions required. I
have also drawn the attention of the Council in the past
to the fact that, unless the Council decides otherwise, it
would be assumed by UNMOVIC that the relevant
disarmament obligations on Iraq in section C of
resolution 687 (1991) and the disarmament
undertakings in the letter of 8 May 2003 from the
Permanent Representatives of the United Kingdom and
the United States to the President of the Council, and
noted by the Council in its resolution 1483 (2003),
constitute the standards for determining the
disarmament of Iraq.
07-40467

During the period from 27 November 2002 to
17 March 2003 - when United Nations inspectors
were withdrawn - UNMOVIC conducted 731
inspections covering 411 sites, 88 of which had not
been inspected before. The inspection findings were
summarized in paragraphs 8, 9 and 19 of the thirteenth
quarterly report to the Council of 30 May 2003. In
paragraph 8, it was noted that

"In the period during which it performed
inspection and monitoring in Iraq, UNMOVIC
did not find evidence of the continuation or
resumption of programmes of weapons of mass
destruction or significant quantities of proscribed
items from before the adoption of resolution 687
(1991)";

and in paragraph 9 it was reported that

"Inspections uncovered a small number of
undeclared empty chemical warheads which
appear to have been produced prior to 1990.
Those and a few other proscribed items were
destroyed" (ibid)

Such destruction activities also included two thirds of
the Al Samoud 2 missiles, which exceeded the 150-
kilometre range limit set by the Council. Paragraph 19
of the same quarterly report clarifies that, during the
inspections,

"a thorough assessment was made of both
dual-use capabilities and the amount of time that
would be needed to reconfigure specific
installations to perform proscribed activities"
(ibid)

But neither the inspections nor the declarations
and documents submitted by Iraq to UNMOVIC have
resulted in eliminating the existing unresolved
disarmament issues. A list of key remaining
disarmament tasks selected from unresolved
disarmament issues was presented to the Council on
19 March 2003.

In the light of changes in Iraq in the aftermath of
the war in 2003, we have revisited the unresolved
disarmament issues. We understood that resolution
1284 (1999), under which UNMOVIC was created,
required us to update our assessment of what are the
remaining disarmament issues regarding items,
materials and capabilities with respect to Iraq. I
outlined to the College of Commissioners at its last
3
meeting in May our present assessment of these
outstanding issues.

The list of unresolved disarmament issues had
been established on the basis of various sources, such
as the report of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM) (S/1999/94) and the Amorim
report (S/1999/356) on the matter, as well as UNSCOM
inspection reports and findings since 1991. During that
early period of inspections, the United Nations
inspectors uncovered key elements of the proscribed
programmes, including that of undeclared biological
warfare agents production and weaponization that had
been concealed by Iraq until 1995. The inspectors also
uncovered advanced capabilities in chemical weapons
development, including the nerve agent VX, as well as
indigenous developments on long-range missiles.
Furthermore, the inspectors supervised the destruction
of large quantities of proscribed items, material,
munitions, missiles and equipment.

In addition to those findings, various declarations
and documents of Iraq - including those from the
Haidar or so-called Chicken Farm - were consulted.
The latter revealed that Iraq had deliberately concealed
at that time significant parts of its proscribed
programmes, in particular in the chemical area, thus
triggering considerable doubt about the sincerity of its
intention to disarm. That led to UNSCOM's and then
UNMOVIC's increased and sustained attention to any
disarmament issue that remained unresolved.

When assessing if a disarmament issue is still
relevant, it has been necessary to consider whether any
information made available since the draft UNMOVIC
work plan was submitted to the Security Council in
March 2003 could contribute to its solution. Such
information includes any finding of an unaccounted-for
item or evidence of its destruction, such as in
testimony or documents, as well as assessments from
the analysis of the latest pre-war Iraqi declarations and
explanations, results of satellite imagery analysis and
open-source information, such as the 2004
comprehensive report of the United States-led Iraq
Survey Group (ISG) and its 2005 addendum.

It should be noted that UNMOVIC did not have
access to any of the supporting documentation,
interview testimony or details of site inspections
carried out by the ISG. The main finding in the ISG's
comprehensive report - the absence of any stockpiles
of WMD or evidence of a revival of WMD-related
programmes proscribed under the Security Council's
resolutions - corresponds to UNMOVIC's
conclusions reported to the Council in June 2003 with
our thirteenth quarterly report, in light of our own
verification experience in Iraq.

The outstanding disarmament issues that we
believe are of certain concern are of a technical nature
and I shall therefore not detail them here. They cover
all the weapons disciplines - chemical, biological,
missiles and other means of delivery. While assessing
the current relevance of a disarmament issue,
UNMOVIC also considered whether it still represents a
threat. For example, what would be the current
potential viability of a chemical or biological agent or
the usability of a missile? A number of those issues -
for instance, the 25 known Al Samoud 2 missiles that
had not been destroyed by the middle of March 2003
and the 326 SA2 missile engines that are unaccounted
for - have been reported by me to the Council during
my presentation of various UNMOVIC quarterly
reports.

When reviewing the unresolved issues to
determine whether they were still relevant, UNMOVIC
has also identified capabilities that may still remain in
Iraq. Capabilities include scientists and technicians
involved in proscribed programmes, where they gained
experience and know-how. They also include a large
number of dual-use equipment - more than 7,900
items that we knew were in certain sites in Iraq as of
March 2003, but of whose present whereabouts we
have no knowledge, except for the few found outside
Iraq.

The ISG report states that Iraq's chemical
industry had the capability to restore chemical weapons
production as a result of improvements in the chemical
infrastructure achieved during the latter half of the
1990s. It further states that large and important projects
for the indigenous production of chemicals were
initiated to improve Iraq's self-sufficiency in their
availability. At the same time, it recognizes that Iraq's
industry was still struggling with serious shortages in
many areas. UNMOVIC had arrived at similar
conclusions regarding the production capability of
Iraq's chemical industry after it had inspected all key
facilities potentially capable of involvement in a
chemical weapons programme, and determined that a
number of them could be adapted for such a purpose
after reconfiguration of the equipment.

Know-how, at least the part of it necessary to
develop proscribed activities, lies in the memory of
each of those who already participated in those
activities. But it may also be available in documents or
records describing fabrication processes, sometimes
referred to as "cookbooks", including blueprints and
test results. UNMOVIC cannot provide assurances that
all such documents and blueprints are in its possession
or have been destroyed and that none remain in the
hands of Iraqi individuals. The use of this know-how
and of relevant capabilities was expected to be
monitored by the United Nations under the monitoring
mechanism created by the Council as long as the
Council reaffirmed Iraq's disarmament obligations
under its relevant resolutions, not through self-
monitoring by Iraq's national institutions.

It should also be noted that a number of
UNMOVIC's present concerns about unresolved issues
actually follow from the ISG's findings. For example,
the report of the Iraq Survey Group provided
information related to the disposal by Iraqi personnel
of bulk quantities of liquid anthrax in an area in
Baghdad in 1991, but it was not clarified whether those
quantities of agent were deactivated before being
dumped into the ground. That could represent a
reservoir from which this strain of anthrax could be
isolated and cultured in the future. Another example
relates to the status, as of 2004, of the Muthanna
facility, which was the main chemical-weapons
production site in Iraq. It was stated that all structures
and bunkers at the site that had been sealed under the
observation of the United Nations inspectors in 1994
had been breached and some equipment and materials
removed. The ISG reported that chemical munitions
were still being stored in the bunkers and that the
bunkers tested positive for the presence of chemical-
weapon agents. UNMOVIC therefore no longer knows
the current status of the items and materials that were
contained in the bunkers when a handover protocol was
signed in 1994 between UNSCOM. and Iraq, which
required steps by the Government of Iraq to ensure the
integrity of the buildings containing potentially lethal
toxic agents.

It is widely accepted that there can be no
complete certainty that disarmament has been fully
achieved in a country. On a number of occasions, I
personally and Mr. Blix before me referred to the
unavoidable residue of uncertainty that will remain in
that regard. A number of the still-open issues in the

chemical, biological and missile areas could have been
clarified with some additional activities such as
sampling, interviews, the checking of documents in the
possession of the ISG or even information from the
coalition authorities. Some issues would not have been
resolved even with such measures. However, the
Council foresaw in 1991 that disarmament would need
to be followed by an undetermined period of ongoing
United Nations monitoring, which would minimize any
continuing uncertainty regarding the closing of the
disarmament file.

Under the present circumstances, the remaining
outstanding issues cannot be resolved and therefore
contribute to the residue of uncertainty. If Iraq had
already acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) and were under the inspection regime of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), the uncertainty with regard to its chemical
weapons programme would be reduced. That is
important, given that any industrial developments in
Iraq would result in substantial increases in the size
and extent of the chemical industry in the future. As I
reported to the Council, it is nearly a year since we
provided extensive information intended to assist Iraq
in submitting to the OPCW an initial inventory of its
chemical-warfare programmes, as required by the
CWC. It is, of course, up to the Council, exercising its
judgement, to determine whether it will accept the
residue of uncertainty when taking a decision to close
the Iraq WMD disarmament file.

This is my last briefing to the Security Council as
Acting Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC. It
coincides with my last working day in the
Organization. Sixteen years ago, in April 1991, I had
the opportunity as an IAEA official to be present in the
Council Chamber when the Council adopted resolution
687 (1991), which is considered the mother of all
resolutions related to weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq. It created the mandate for the United Nations
Special Commission established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 687 (1991) (UNSCOM), the
predecessor of UNMOVIC, and for the IAEA relating
to Iraq. The draft resolution on which the Council will
take action today, terminating that mandate, closes a
cycle of many years of verification, during which the
United Nations showed that it can successfully carry
out the activities demanded by the international
community despite difficulties and, frequently, a lack
of cooperation from the inspected party. That draft
resolution also brings to mind paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991), in that fulfilment of the Iraqi
obligations under the resolutions represents steps
towards the goal of establishing in the Middle East a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction and all
missiles for their delivery and the objective of a global
ban on chemical weapons. I sincerely hope that that
goal will not be overlooked, but that it will be realized
in the not-too-distant future. It also raises another
question, regarding, the future of the obligations that
were imposed on Iraq by various Council resolutions
and that are still valid. Of particular interest for the
future - not only for Iraq, but also for exporting
States- is resolution 1051 (1996) and the
export/import mechanism that it established to monitor
the trade in dual-use items, equipment and material.

I have had the opportunity to thank UNMOVIC's
College of Commissioners for the support and advice
that they provided to me. I would also like to thank the
members of the Council secretariat for their full
cooperation since the creation of UNMOVIC. My
thanks go also to the Chairmen of UNSCOM,
Ambassadors Ekeus and Butler. In particular, I wish to
thank Mr. Hans Blix for the professional and
independent manner in which he guided UNMOVIC
during a very critical operational period. I also take
this opportunity to thank successive members of the
Council for the guidance and support that they offered
me and UNMOVIC, and especially for the patience
that they have shown in listening to my statements
every three months since September 2003.

I wish to conclude by expressing my thanks and
gratitude to the inspectors and the support staff of
UNMOVIC and its predecessor, UNSCOM, and the
staff of the IAEA involved in Iraq, for their dedicated
work, diligence, courage and devotion to their mission
of serving the United Nations and the Security Council
and for using their knowledge, experience and
expertise in unravelling a very complicated picture
related to Iraq's weapons of mass destruction
programmes. Through their professionalism, they made
Iraq a success story in international verification, and I
hope that that expertise will not be dispersed and lost
to the United Nations in the future.

