Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary General of INTERPOL,
Mr. Stock, and to the Chairs of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee for their instructive
briefings today. The activities of these subsidiary
bodies contribute substantially to strengthening the
central coordinating role of the United Nations and the
Council in international counter-terrorism activities.

The Council is not considering the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters for the first time today. The number of
such fighters is growing, despite measures undertaken
internationally, regionally and nationally. This
worrisome trend has been corroborated by the reports
presented today on the part of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team. According
to reports, Iraq and Syria remains the epicentre of
terrorism, where extremists from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat al-Nusra operate.
A detailed analysis of these extremist groups has
concluded that they now pose a threat to those States.
Furthermore, the situation in other regions is also of
serious concern. ISIL is attempting to gain a foothold
in Libya and on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
According to the Monitoring Team, of the more than
25,000 foreign terrorist fighters, 6,500 are located in
Afghanistan.

Unless we scale up international cooperation in
counter-terrorism efforts guided by the United Nations
and the Security Council, it will prove impossible to
address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Furthermore, we must take pre-emptive action, avoiding
politicization and double standards, to stop those
recruited into international terrorism from travelling
into areas of armed conflict.

We need a systemic approach that include information
exchange, border control and joint measures to establish
a database of evidence regarding the participation of
jihadists in terrorist actions. The use ofthe INTERPOL
database and the World Bank data on counter-
terrorism and other information-exchange formats
could be useful in addressing potential terrorists. It
is important to bolster bilateral cooperation channels
through special agencies and law enforcement bodies
and customs, border and immigration entities. It would
also be advisable to strengthen cooperation among
State financial bodies, mindful of the fact that, without
financing, terrorists would have trouble achieving their
purpose.

It will be of the utmost importance in the long
term to curtail the process of radicalization, which is
the root cause promoting foreign terrorist fighters. The
end game must be to establish an environment based
on a categorical rejection of terrorism and extremism,
howsoever cloaked in ideological, religious or
nationalistic slogans. Greater effectiveness is necessary
at all levels to counter radical ideologies and to create a
reliable barrier to the infiltration of such ideologies into
public consciousness. In that context, it is especially
important to counter the use of modern information
and communications technology - including the
Internet - that is aimed at extremist goals. Agreed
recommendations on such measures are contained
in resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178
(2014) and presidential statement S/PRST/2014/23 of
19 November 2014 and today's presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/ll.

A sine qua non for effective decisions on the part
of the Council is their unconditional implementation
on the ground. We call upon States to maintain
flexibility in adopting national legislation to counter
new threats emanating from terrorist fighters. The
Russian Federation has already undertaken legislative
measures that provide for the prosecution of those
responsible for perpetrating international terrorist
acts. A federal law assigns criminal accountability for
the training of terrorists and participation in terrorist
activities, societies and organizations, including those
in foreign States. Addressing new challenges, the penal
code establishes accountability for so-called terrorist
tourism. As we speak, a procedure for the application
of such norms is being designed.

Russia actively participates in combatting foreign
terrorist fighters regionally and internationally with the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Council of Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent
States, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization. Guided
by our national experience, we actively participated
in the drafting of the Optional Protocol to the Council
of Europe Convention on Preventing Terrorism, which
should foster regional implementation on Security
Council resolution 2178 (2014). Guided by the need to
establish additional conditions to halt the activities of
foreign terrorist fighters, the Russian Federation has
added the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the
Al-Nusra Front to its list of terrorist organizations.

We hope that, as a result of today's meeting, the
added focus on practical measures for countering foreign
terrorist fighters will help all States - particularly
those in the most affected regions - to better counter
this threat.

