Mr. Awaad (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council has just adopted a very sensitive resolution
concerning the withdrawal of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) from that country, a
fraternal African country that has witnessed one of the most
terrible human tragedies in contemporary history. Like the
wide-ranging discussion about the role the international
community should play in preventing the terrible massacres
and genocide we saw in Rwanda the year before last, today
we have had an equally wide-ranging discussion on whether
or not now is the right time for UNAMIR to withdraw.

However, as members of the Security Council we
must respond to the request of the Rwandan Government
and withdraw the Mission. It is for the Rwandan
Government to make that decision, and we must respect it.

Although the Security Council has decided to end the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda, our attention should not be diverted from one fact:
if, for whatever reason, the international community failed
to prevent the massacres, the presence of the United
Nations in Rwanda after the crisis was very useful. This has
been proved by United Nations assistance in protecting
those repatriated to Rwanda; in re-establishing the
infrastructure to provide health and education services; in
training the police force; and in demining.

The Egyptian delegation takes this opportunity to pay
tribute to the role of the United Nations and its specialized
agencies in extending relief and humanitarian assistance
to the people of Rwanda in their trials and tribulations.

The Egyptian delegation expresses its full
appreciation for the report of the Secretary-General of
29 February 1996 on the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda. The report contains a precise and
objective analysis of events in Rwanda over the past two
months at the political, humanitarian and military levels.
The report also contains a vision of the future role of the
United Nations in Rwanda - a role which, in our
opinion, is no less important than the positive role played
from the beginning of the UNAMIR mission in October
1993 until the present. Indeed, it is a source of
satisfaction for us that the report of the Secretary-General
states that relative calm and stability prevail in most areas
of Rwanda, with the exception of areas close to the
borders, and that promising progress is being made in the
areas of agriculture, health services and education.
We agree with the Secretary-General's assessment of
the issues which are still faced by the Government of
Rwanda, and which need to be dealt with. First, the
Government of Rwanda must assume its responsibilities
in facilitating the repatriation of more than 1.7 million
refugees, re-establishing them in their country and
guaranteeing their safety and property. That will be a very
difficult and complex task. However, it is the key to
stability in Rwanda. Secondly, Rwanda needs to make
real and rapid progress towards achieving national
reconciliation among all its people, and establishing the
principles of tolerance and peaceful coexistence. Thirdly,
Rwanda must take effective measures to ensure law
enforcement and strengthen the judicial system.

Despite the concrete efforts made by the
Government of Rwanda and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, solving the
first problem will be difficult, given the number of
refugees and the obstacles to their return. Paragraph 45 of
the report of the Secretary-General refers to the negative
role played by elements of the former Rwandan army and
organized militias in intimidating refugees and preventing
their return. However, we must also understand the
refugees' fear and their reluctance to return because of the
lack of security within Rwanda. That is a national
problem, and we believe that the Government of Rwanda
bears the greatest responsibility for finding a solution.

The concern of the Egyptian delegation throughout
the negotiations over the resolution we have just adopted
was to underline the particular responsibility of the
Government of Rwanda with regard to the return of

 

refugees, especially during the post-UNAMIR period. The
fact that the resolution does not specifically and clearly
refer to guarantees for the return of the refugees does not
mean that the Security Council will not take the necessary
steps to safeguard their rights if the Council deems it
necessary in the future. That is why it is essential that a
climate conducive to the voluntary return of the refugees be
established through confidence-building and other measures,
such as the provision of constructive information, and
innovative ideas, such as organizing visits across the border
and the monitoring necessary to guarantee property and safe
return.

As for the role of the United Nations after the
departure of UNAMIR, we fully support the establishment
of an office in Kigali to provide assistance, as referred to
in paragraph 43 (a) of the Secretary-General's report. It is
encouraging that the Government of Rwanda has abandoned
its former reservations in this respect and is ready to
facilitate the role of the political office and to provide
necessary assistance. We hope that we shall receive regular
reports on developments.

Egypt has always affirmed that Rwanda cannot
achieve stability without the regional and geographical
dimensions being borne in mind. The problems faced by
Rwanda today, foremost among them the refugee problem,
have an impact that goes beyond the Great Lakes region.
Solving those problems requires regional cooperation, with
international support. We believe that the refugee problem
in particular has a regional dimension, and that
neighbouring countries should further extend their
cooperation and coordination in this respect. We hope that
the contacts which have taken place over the past two
months between Rwanda and its neighbours will be a first
step towards closer cooperation in the near future.

Egypt reaffirms its belief that any attempted solutions
which disregard that fact can only be placebos, and not real
answers. All those efforts, which were partly successful, to
ensure the return of refugees were made by the United
Nations within the context of collective cooperation
between Rwanda, Tanzania, Burundi and Zaire.

As we are firmly convinced of these facts, the
delegation of Egypt wishes to stress the need to ensure
complete implementation of the decisions of the Bujumbura
Conference, the Cairo Summit and the Addis Ababa follow-
up conference held on 29 February last. We wish also to
stress the importance of extending all possible assistance in
all efforts to convene an international conference on peace,
stability and development in the Great Lakes region,
following the necessary preparatory work.

I wish in conclusion to note that the experience of
the United Nations in Rwanda has taught us a critical
lesson about the importance of preventive diplomacy and
the need to remain committed to preventive measures in
averting crises. Unfortunately, this Organization never had
the equipment, the staff or the political will necessary to
intervene successfully to prevent the human tragedy we
witnessed in Rwanda. That situation must never be
repeated.

The Egyptian delegation voted in favour of the
resolution the Security Council has just adopted, despite
the concerns we have expressed about ensuring and
facilitating the return of refugees. We did so in solidarity
with the Government of Rwanda and to support that
Government in all its endeavours to establish stability. We
hope that future developments will be positive and will
dispel our concerns and fears, and that the people of
Rwanda will overcome this crisis and embark on the road
to development in all economic and social areas.

