Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): My
delegation is particularly pleased that the Security
Council has decided to return to Africa after so many
years and that it decided to meet in this hospitable city
of Nairobi, thereby showing the great importance it
attaches to our continent and the respect and esteem it
has for Kenya, which plays such an important part in
settling so many conflicts in Africa, and also for all
African leaders, who for many years now have been
working with determination and dedication to promote
African solutions to African problems.

We sincerely hope that this meeting in Africa on
the problems of Africa will be beneficial for Africa and
for the Security Council, which, after two days of very
intensive talks and interaction, will go back to New
York with a better idea of African realities and will
therefore be able to tackle them with greater prudence
and humility.

The fact that the Security Council has
unanimously adopted a balanced and constructive text
is a positive development that I believe we should all
welcome. It is perhaps a sign that African wisdom has
inspired the Security Council.

Algeria joined in the consensus because, in the
resolution which we have just adopted, the Security
Council showed great wisdom by advocating a process
of positive dialogue and involvement with the parties
concerned, along with continuing firmness and
vigilance in our approach. It has undertaken to use its
authority and its credibility to ensure the advent of
peace in the Sudan. We joined in the consensus also
because in the resolution, the Security Council
recognizes the primary role that the African Union has
played in the process of the restoration of peace in the
Sudan and expresses its full support for it. This is
particularly true in view of the fact that in this
resolution, the Security Council is sending a very
strong message to all parties by saying that, by the end
of the year, the parties have publicly committed
themselves to a comprehensive peace agreement that
will lead on to the reconstruction of the country.

Last but not least, this resolution shows a very
clear and simple truth. Peace between the north and the
south of Sudan will lead to a much better prospect for
tackling the other problems that Sudan faces, like
Darfur, where the ongoing conflict is of enormous
concern to the whole of the international community,
and quite rightly so, and, most of all, to Africa itself.
Africa, through the African Union, has embarked, not
without success, on a triple mission: the respect of the
ceasefire, assurances to the civilian population and the
need to bring the parties to a peaceful settlement of the
problem as soon as possible.

We hope that this resolution will mean a break
with the past and it will have the impact hoped for by
the international community, which is to see the return
of peace and stability throughout Sudan and to bring
peace and harmony to all Sudanese.

