Mr. Toro Jimenez (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we wish to express
once again our categorical condemnation of all acts of
terrorism, whatever their form or manifestation,
whether committed by States or by non-State actors.
We also want to make clear our position that the
legitimate resistance of peoples against foreign
invasion or occupation does not constitute an act of
terrorism. That is recognized in the Charter of the
United Nations.

In our resolve to fight terrorism, we have ratified
many international conventions. At the domestic level,
we have developed broad legislation to combat
terrorism and have created a national authority in that
area. Our Government is diligent, responsible and
consistent in its approach to this matter.

We have also submitted, in a timely manner,
reports to the Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
and to the Inter-American Committee Against
Terrorism.

With the same conviction and consistency with
which we are fighting that scourge, we condemn and
reject the use of terrorism as a political tool to kill at
close range and to intimidate weak, helpless, innocent
victims in any part of the world, including through
actions that are justified as collateral effects of a
foreign invasion.

Equally condemnable are the lies, distortions,
misinformation and manipulation promoted and
disseminated on a daily basis by the national and
international communications media that, working in
the service of the dominant imperial Powers, conceal
and alter information and prevent the general public
from knowing the truth about those who are working
collectively, in exercise of their right to self-
determination, to build their future and to make
possible a different world.

We recall once again that resolution 1624 (2005)
states, in its fifteenth preambular paragraph, that

"all States must cooperate fully in the fight
against terrorism, in accordance with
international law, in order to deny safe haven
and bring to justice, on the basis of the principle
of extradite or prosecute, any person who
supports, facilitates, participates or attempts to
participate in the financing, planning, preparation
or commission of terrorist acts or provides safe
havens".

Today, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
would like to set out two cases before the Council.

The first is the case of the Venezuelan terrorist
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles, who is currently in the
territory of the United States of America, apparently as
a refugee. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
already requested his extradition by the Government of
the United States of America, on the basis of existing
international agreements. Despite that request, to date
there has been no response from the authorities of that
Government. There has been only a long,
compromising silence. Neither has Posada Carriles
been tried in the United States.

In this regard, we recall documents S/2005/394 of
16 June and S/2005/624 of 3 October 2005, which set
out our position in that respect. In our opinion, not
only those who carry out terrorist acts, but also those
who protect such individuals, are terrorists. We cannot
ignore the inconsistent attitude of the Government of
the United States of America, which has often repeated
those same words, yet offers protection to the terrorist
Luis Clemente Posada Carriles. The double standard of
the United States Government with regard to terrorism
is clear. It applies its national anti-terrorist laws only
when it is convenient, and the same is true of its
international obligations.

The second case we would like to bring before
the Council is also incomprehensible to anyone of good
judgement. It relates to the Reverend Pat Robertson,
who has high-level connections within the Republican
Party and who, on United States television, publicly
called for the assassination of our President, Hugo
Rafael Chavez Frias. We can assure the Council that
that constitutes a crime under United States law.
Furthermore, that crime is an act of terrorism,
according to existing international law, including the
most recent Security Council doctrine as expressed in
resolution 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005. Against
that backdrop, we do not understand how that terrorist
can continue, with impunity, to make absurd, insane
and disrespectful comments directed at the President of
a democratic republic who has been confirmed in
office on a number of occasions by the Venezuelan
people in accordance with his constitutional mandate.
We reaffirm that it is inadmissible from the
standpoint of international law to harbour those two
terrorists. That would be to ignore resolution 1373
(2001), of 13 September 2001, subparagraphs (c) of
paragraph 2 and (g) of paragraph 3 of which prevent
States from providing refuge to those who carry out
terrorist acts and ensure that political motivation is not
recognized as grounds for refusing requests for the
extradition of terrorists.

With regard to the second case, the Government
of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has already
taken steps, in accordance with the extradition treaties
in force between the United States of America and the
Republic, with a view to extraditing Mr. Pat Robertson
for the crimes committed, under the terms of the
Venezuelan penal code and international law, against
the President of the Republic. We hope that, once those
steps have been completed and a formal extradition
request has been made, the competent authorities of the
Government of the United States of America will give
due and diligent attention to the matter, in accordance
with the treaty in force and with international practice.

