Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by offering thanks and congratulations
to you, Mr. President, and to all of your team for a
very successful month. I would like to join others in
praising your effective presidency and leadership
and inclusive management of the Council's business
throughout August.

Quite often, August has a reputation of being a
quiet month, but it has not been quiet at all. This month,
there has been absolutely no let up in the activity of the
Security Council. And, of course, the most important
issue that we have all faced has been North Korea. So,
I want to begin with that and how we respond to the
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions.
Also, like others, I am very glad that we were able to
send a strong united message, first of all on 5 August
(S/PV.8019), with the new package of sanctions, and
secondly, yesterday evening, with presidential statement
S/PRST/201/l6, condemning the latest atrocities from
North Korea. The threat that North Korea poses, not
just to its region, but now to the whole world, means that
we must remain united and make sure that we respond
with clarity and unequivocal condemnation every time
there are such violations.

I also want to use this meeting very briefly to focus
on three other points that we have tackled this month.

The first is to pay tribute to the men and women
around the world who carry out the decisions of the
Security Council, often in the most dangerous locations.
This month, the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo reported to us on its most recent
findings (S/PV.8026). Sadly, it was not a routine briefing
because it was in the course of seeking evidence for
that report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) that Zaida Catalan and
Michael Sharp were so tragically killed. We were also
briefed on the results of the United Nations Board of
Inquiry report on their murder, and we look forward
to seeing its recommendations implemented in full.
The Security Council and the wider United Nations
have a responsibility to those that work on our behalf.
It is essential that we see a swift, full and transparent
investigation into who was responsible for their murders
and that the perpetrators be held to account. We call
on the Secretary-General to establish a mechanism for
further investigation without delay.

My second point is about the links that we have seen
this month between conflict and humanitarian crises.
The United Kingdom welcomes the adoption this
month ofpresidential statement S/PRST/2017/14, on the
devastating famines in South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia
and north-eastern Nigeria. It is vital that the parties
to each of these conflicts respect their obligations to
protect civilians and ensure the security of humanitarian
operations and personnel. The Security Council must
keep up the momentum over the next few months. We
look forward to a discussion of these crises during the
high-level week and to a briefing from the Secretary-
General in October on the deliberate actions that are
increasing humanitarian need and the barriers to an
effective response.

We were also briefed this month on the growing
humanitarian crisis caused by the conflict in the Central
African Republic and the dangers that humanitarian
workers are facing when trying to deliver aid. The
meeting in high-level week on the forthcoming mandate
renewal will provide opportunities to reconsider our
approach to the Central African Republic.

Finally, the Council has continued its discussion
of peacekeeping. I would like to thank Egypt for
scheduling yesterday's open debate on the contribution
that peacekeeping can make to sustaining peace (see S/PV.8033). The decisions to close the Missions in
Haiti, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire have reminded us
of the importance of ensuring that peacebuilding is
considered throughout the life cycle of a mission, which
means ensuring that there is a whole-of-United Nations
approach from the beginning and that a mission's
strategic objectives are clearly set out at its inception.

I am pleased that this morning we were able to
put this into practice and confirm our support for a
set of clear strategic objectives in Somalia, when we
unanimously renewed the mandate of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) (see S/PV.8035).
In response to the joint Africa Union-United Nations
review, this marks an important shift in emphasis for
the Mission, with AMISOM. focusing on the transition
of tasks to the Somali security forces and a gradual and
phased reduction in AMISOM. troop numbers.
I once again offer my thanks, Mr. President, for
the work over the month, and I wish the very best to
Ethiopia for next month, and I thank Japan for all its
hard work on working methods.

