Mr. Al-Shara' (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Three months ago, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1441 (2002). Syria joined the
consensus after receiving assurances and clarifications
that voting in favour of the draft resolution meant
proceeding seriously towards a peaceful resolution of
the issue of the disarmament of Iraq of weapons of
mass destruction and that it would not be used as a
pretext for waging war against Iraq.

A moment ago, Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
presented their reports and noted the progress made in
the period that has elapsed since they made their last
reports to the Council. This means that in only two
weeks substantial progress has been made in the work
of the inspectors. The progress reached its peak today
when Iraq approved a law prohibiting weapons of mass
destruction. That progress proves that the inspections
are leading to significant results through dialogue,
cooperation and mutual trust between the inspectors
and Iraq. Therefore, the Council must continue to
support the inspectors and allow them sufficient time to
undertake their task as set out in resolution 1441
(2002).

Our region stands at a grave crossroads, teetering
between war and peace. Our region has suffered
tremendously from the scourge of many wars, and it
continues to this very day to suffer a racist policy
directed against the defenceless Palestinian people, a
policy based on occupation and settlement and bent on
destroying man and nature alike.

Since 1973, we have been counselled to adopt
policies to pursue a peaceful settlement to the Arab-
Israeli conflict, to normalize relations with Israel and
to cooperate with it in various areas. This is despite the
fact that Israel, first, continues to occupy Syrian,
Palestinian and Lebanese territories, to build
settlements in them and to threaten its neighbours.
Secondly, Israel continues to possess all types of
weapons of mass destruction; it is in exclusive
possession of nuclear weapons and rejects all
international supervision and inspections, unlike the
States of the Middle East that have accepted such
international supervision and inspections. Thirdly,
Israel continues to defy all relevant United Nations
resolutions - more than 500 of them, 31 of which
were adopted by the Security Council. Israel refuses to
recognize an independent Palestinian State, as endorsed
by the international community, including the United
States of America. Even when the United States of
America voted in favour of those resolutions, they
remained a dead letter - or as we say in Arabic: ink
on paper. The ink has faded of late and the paper has
turned yellow. And miraculously, Mr. Sharon has
become a "man of peace".

Against that backdrop, allow me to ask, where
does today's Iraq stand? Has Iraq not recognized the
State of Kuwait and its international borders, which
were demarcated by the Security Council? Were not
no-flight zones imposed on Iraq in the northern and
southern parts of the country without any legal basis
that could justify such a ban? Has Iraq not
unconditionally and unreservedly opened its doors to
the inspectors? Has it not cooperated with them
positively, while Israel rejects any form of inspection
of its nuclear facilities? Against that paradoxical
backdrop, are we not justified in wondering whether
such policies indicate double standards? Or perhaps we
should realize that the real danger lies in the fact that
those policies are deliberately designed to put Iraq and
Palestine, in particular, and the Arabs and Muslims, in
general, in a difficult position and to jeopardize their
present and their future? Will not such policies have an
impact on the vital interests of the world at large?

We are in favour of a peaceful solution to the
question of Iraq. Common sense dictates that there is
no alternative to such a solution. As Iraq's neighbour,
and having considerable experience with current events
in our area, we understand better than anyone else that
this would be the first war in the Middle East region to
be unanimously rejected by Arabs. And the great
majority of the people of the world say no to this war.

This war will have grave consequences for the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq and its people. It
will spill over to the entire region. The war will lead to
total anarchy and will benefit only those whose aim is
to spread fear and destruction everywhere. Those who
are beating the drums of war make no secret of their
goal, which is not to disarm Iraq of its weapons of
mass destruction. Rather, they have a hidden agenda
that they seek to implement throughout the entire
region. The prelude to that agenda is the war against
Iraq. Had they really sought the elimination of Iraq's
weapons of mass destruction they would have done so
by supporting the work of the inspectors and by
granting them enough time to accomplish their task.

We support a peaceful settlement of the question

of Iraq because we believe that the option of war would
erode the international coalition against terrorism. The
first signs of that erosion have already appeared, in the
Afghan theatre. We will spare the Council any details,
with which we assume members are all too familiar.
Simply thinking that war is an option open to the
Security Council is in itself proof both of the Council's
failure to carry out its task and of the failure of the
entire international order. In these circumstances, we
believe that there is no alternative to respecting the
Charter of the United Nations and using its institutions
to safeguard world peace, security and prosperity,
instead of poising the world on the edge of a volcano
for many long months.

The efforts of prominent members of the Security
Council to stress the need to pursue a peaceful solution
in implementing Security Council resolution 1441
(2002) give us hope that the world order is still in good
shape. In that context, we recognize the French,
German, Russian and Chinese efforts, as well as those
of the majority of other members of the Security
Council, that are fully devoted to the promotion of the
United Nations, its Charter and its central role. We
should all appreciate those efforts.

We have considered the French proposal to
strengthen the work of the inspectors. The inspections
have brought considerable achievements that could not
be attained by military force. Therefore, we support the
French ideas because they provide an alternative to
war. They constitute a basis for strengthening the
inspections regime in order to enable it to complete as
soon as possible the task entrusted to it. The fulfilment
of this task will immediately lead to the lifting, through
appropriate measures, of the sanctions imposed on Iraq
under Security Council resolution 687 (1990). It would
also lead to activation of paragraph 14 of that
resolution, which would designate the Middle East as a
zone free from all weapons of mass destruction:
nuclear, biological-bacteriological and chemical,
without excepting any State, including Israel, which
alone has acquired all of those lethal weapons.

In conclusion, this is truly a historic moment. War
in the twenty-first century is not a game. It has become
a tragedy condemned by history. Let us work for peace,
because we can achieve peace if we pursue it in good
faith, with strong determination and with the political
will. These requirements are readily available to those
who are faithful to the United Nations Charter, a
charter which, when all is said and done, remains the
sole authority capable of maintaining world peace and
security.

