Mr. Pascoe: Since the Secretary-General briefed
the Council on 24 March, efforts aimed at bringing
about the conditions for a resumption of Israeli-
Palestinian talks have continued, including through a
10-31334
meeting between President Obama and Prime Minister
Netanyahu in late March. The situation on the ground
remains fragile and a crisis of confidence between the
parties has so far prevented the resumption of talks.
The United Nations will continue to engage with its
Quartet partners to ensure that the circumstances which
made it possible to agree to launch the proximity talks
be respected.

The Secretary-General attended the League of
Arab States summit on 26 and 27 March, at which he
briefed Arab leaders on the meeting of the Quartet in
Moscow and his visit to Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory. He met with Secretary General
Amre Moussa, with whom he discussed the full range
of issues of mutual interest to the United Nations and
the Arab League. In his address to the summit, the
Secretary-General encouraged Arab leaders to continue
to support Palestinian participation in talks on the goal
of the creation of an independent Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with Israel and
its other neighbours. He emphasized that this goal can
be brought about only through a return of the parties to
the negotiating table and testing their commitment in
that framework.

The summit condemned Israeli actions on the
ground, in particular in East Jerusalem, and
conditioned continued Arab support for Palestinian
participation in proximity talks on the outcome of the
United States efforts to create conditions conducive to
the success of negotiations. In their concluding
statement, Arab leaders reconfirmed their endorsement
of the Arab Peace Initiative and pledged $500 million
to support the Palestinian population in East Jerusalem.

The Secretary-General also held discussions with
Palestinian President Abbas in the margins of the
League of Arab States summit. He reiterated to the
President his own and the Quartet's support for
negotiations on all core issues.

Turning to the situation on the ground, the Israeli
Government's partial restraint on settlement
construction in the West Bank remains in effect and, as
previously noted, has led to a reduction in construction
activity despite some violations. Although these
developments are welcome, this policy falls short of
Israel's Road Map obligation to a full settlement freeze
and excludes settlement activity in East J emsalem. The
Secretary-General has reiterated that all settlement
activity is illegal and must stop. He urged that the
10-31334
restraint be expanded into a comprehensive freeze of
all settlement activity.

As a result of the transfer of Israeli settlers into
the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh Jarrah,
there were further incidents of violence between
Palestinian residents and the settlers. We note that there
have been no house demolitions carried out in East
Jerusalem since January this year. We hope that this
positive development will continue.

In the West Bank, there were almost daily clashes
between settlers and Palestinians during the reporting
period, as well as incidents of stone-throwing at Israeli
vehicles. These incidents caused four Palestinian
injuries; two further Palestinians were injured and a
Palestinian youth was killed in three incidents of
Palestinians being hit by vehicles driven by settlers.
Citing security concerns, Israeli security forces carried
out 58 incursions into West Bank towns and villages,
and 112 Palestinians were arrested. Forty-one
Palestinians and seven Israelis were injured during the
reporting period. On 7 April, Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli prisons and detention centres held the first in a
planned series of coordinated one-day hunger strikes in
protest at the conditions of detention.

In Jerusalem, Palestinian Christian access to
Easter celebrations was limited due to an extraordinary
closure of checkpoints between the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, which lasted from 25 March to 6 April. On
28 March, a protest by Christians in Bethlehem against
Israeli access restrictions resulted in the detention of
11 Palestinians, including Fatah Central Committee
member Abbas Zaki. There were also instances of
restricted access to Haram al-Sharif/Temple Mount for
Muslim prayer. Demonstrations against the route of the
barrier continued, in particular where it is constructed
inside the West Bank, in contravention of the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice. An
increasing number of senior Palestinian officials have
joined the call for peaceful popular protest against
Israeli occupation.

We note with concern that a street in the
Ramallah district has been named after a Palestinian
militant responsible for the murder of a number of
Israeli civilians. We would like to remind all concerned
that, under the Road Map, the Palestinian Authority has
the obligation to end incitement.

The Palestinian Authority continues to exert
efforts to meet its obligations to maintain law and order
and combat terrorism in areas under Palestinian control
in the West Bank. There has been continued security
cooperation with Israel during this reporting period.

In a worrisome development, an Israeli military
order that gives the military commander the power to
evict a broad category of individuals whom the Israeli
authorities deem not to be residents of the West Bank
went into effect yesterday, 13 April. This could have
the effect of enabling Israeli authorities to deport these
individuals and has provoked strong Palestinian and
Arab reaction. Special Coordinator Robert Serry raised
the issue with Israeli authorities, and his Office will
continue to monitor this development closely.

Palestinian municipal elections planned for
17 July will be an important democratic element of the
State-building agenda. The Central Elections
Commission has now completed the registration of
over 200,000 new voters in the West Bank. The
nomination of candidates is scheduled to take place
from 1 to 10 June, and campaigning will be between
3 and 15 July. Hamas has not allowed voter registration
to take place in Gaza and has called for a boycott of the
poll. We reiterate our call on Hamas to allow Gazans to
exercise their right to participate in elections. We call
on parties to ensure that the elections are free, fair and
transparent.

Turning to the important Palestinian State-
building agenda and United Nations and international
community support for those efforts, the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) met in
Madrid at senior official level on 13 April. The meeting
was chaired by Norwegian Foreign Minister Store and
was hosted by Spanish Foreign Minister Moratinos
Cuyaube. The AHLC was also joined by Quartet
Representative Blair, and the United Nations was
represented by Special Coordinator Serry. The AHLC
discussed measures necessary to support the
Palestinian Authority's budget and institution-building
as part of the State-building agenda aimed at attaining
Prime Minister Fayyad's goal of readiness for
statehood in 2011.

The AHLC reconfirmed its support to the
Palestinian Authority State-building agenda. During the
meeting, Prime Minister Fayyad said that the
Palestinian Authority was approaching "the home
stretch" in the implementation of its programme and
expressed confidence that the remaining tasks of the

programme can be implemented over the period June
2010 to June 2011.

The Palestinian Authority requires an estimated
$100 million a month in external financing for
recurrent budgetary expenditures, but since January,
only an estimated $174 million has been transferred.
Projected shortfalls in the Palestinian Authority's
budget could undermine its reform and State-building
agenda. Member States are encouraged to commit
funds they pledged, wherever possible through direct
support to the Palestinian Authority. We take positive
note that the Palestinian Authority has requested
budget support of $1.2 billion in 2010, down from
$1.35 billion in 2009 and from $1.8 billion in 2008,
thus reflecting what Prime Minister Fayyad termed an
effort to secure a reduced reliance on the international
community.

The 2010 draft budget projects expenditures at
$3.9 billion, of which half will be allocated to Gaza.
Reflecting positive Palestinian Authority reforms, the
Palestinian Central Bureau for Statistics reported that
real gross domestic product increased by an estimated
6.8 per cent in 2009 as compared to 2008. However, it
is of concern that this figure is driven by the growth in
the West Bank, whilst the Gazan economy continues to
stagnate. The United Nations has aligned its
programming in support of the State-building agenda
and intends to focus its efforts in critical areas,
including Area C, East Jerusalem and Gaza.

Let me turn to progress that is now being made
on entry of materials for a number of approved United
Nations projects since the Secretary-General's visit to
Gaza on 21 March. As a result of Israeli approval of
the entry of aggregate and cement, work has now
began on the sewage pumping station project at Tel
el-Sultan, and work on the other approved projects,
including the 15 l-unit Khan Younis housing project, is
expected to commence shortly. The commercial import
of wood and aluminium has been approved and will be
allowed entry this week. There have also been other
positive measures carried out by Israel, such as the
continued exports of cut flowers during the reporting
period and an increase in the amount and type of goods
entering the Strip, including clothing, shoes and further
imports of glass. However, the entry of materials still
falls far short of what is required to address the
immense reconstruction and development needs of
Gaza.

The approved United Nations housing, water and
sanitation projects are a modest start of what needs to
be done in Gaza. More than half of the population is
under the age of 18, and it is their future that should
concern us most. More schools need to be built in Gaza
to ensure that Palestinian children receive an education
that broadens their horizons and prepares them for a
better future. The quality of health care is also
declining, due in part to the lack in building materials,
equipment and supplies necessary for health facilities.
In all these critical areas the United Nations will
continue to exert its utmost efforts to expedite the entry
of needed materials and to expand the scope of
activities in Gaza to address these needs. In order to
enable these goals and United Nations projects in both
Gaza and the West Bank, the United Nations and the
Palestinian Authority have agreed that a trust fund will
be established at an appropriate time. I would
encourage all donors to consider supporting the work
of the United Nations through that mechanism.

Beyond the entry of materials into Gaza, other
key elements of Security Council resolution 1860
(2009) remain unfulfilled and continue to contribute to
the instability in the Strip. In particular, the
resolution's calls for the commitment of the parties to a
durable and sustainable ceasefire and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are yet to be implemented. Without
renewed and determined efforts to implement
resolution 1860 (2009) in all of its aspects, the
situation in Gaza cannot be fully addressed. A more
comprehensive and strategic approach to Gaza is
urgently required.

It is of serious concern that the security situation
in Gaza is again volatile. On 26 March, a clash near
Khan Younis led to the deaths of two Israeli soldiers
and three Palestinian militants. The military wing of
Hamas, the Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade and a group
called Palestine Taliban, all claimed responsibility for
the action. In another incident on 13 April, two
Palestinian militants belonging to Islamic Jihad were
killed by Israeli security forces, reportedly while trying
to place improvised explosive devices near the Gaza-
Israel border.

During this period, a total of 35 rockets and
mortars were fired from Gaza, and 16 reached southern
Israel, with no damage or injuries reported. One
Palestinian civilian was killed and 15 others were
injured in the course of 14 incursions and six air strikes
by Israeli security forces. There are reports that Hamas
is trying to prevent further outbreaks of violence, and
the major factions in Gaza have agreed with Hamas
that they will maintain calm. However rockets continue
to be fired from the Strip. We condemn the rocket fire
and call for calm to be respected and for international
humanitarian law to be upheld.

Egypt is continuing its efforts to combat
smuggling, and on 31 March uncovered a significant
cache of missiles and shells in northern Sinai, which
were reported to be destined for the Gaza Strip.
Smuggling of all goods, including arms, continues
through tunnels into Gaza and one Palestinian died and
six were injured in tunnel collapses during this
reporting period. It is vital that all legitimate crossings
for imports and exports be opened, as envisaged in the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, in
accordance with resolution 1860 (2009). There has
been no progress in efforts to secure the release of
Corporal Shalit in exchange for Palestinian prisoners.

The Arab League summit stressed the importance
of Palestinian unity; however, there has been no further
progress in finalizing an agreement based on the
Egyptian proposal. We reiterate the Quartet's call for
the promotion of Palestinian unity based on the
commitments of the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) and the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank
under the legitimate Palestinian Authority.

On 29 March, Hamas took over the bank assets of
a benevolent society in Gaza. Such measures
jeopardize the whole banking sector and aggravate the
humanitarian situation. There are also reports of
increasing human rights abuses. We are concerned at
public statements by Hamas authority figures
indicating the intention to carry out executions of
prisoners.

At the League of Arab States summit, the
Secretary-General held a bilateral meeting with Syrian
President Al-Assad to discuss a range of regional
issues. The United Nations continues to support all
efforts to revive the Israeli-Syrian track and a broader
resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, as envisaged in
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative. In the occupied Syrian Golan, settlement
activity continued, including the approval of 100 new
housing units in the settlement of Nimrod. However,
the situation there remained calm.
In Lebanon, on 9 March, President Sleiman
reconvened the Committee of National Dialogue for
the first time since the parliamentary elections of last
June. In its new configuration, the national dialogue
now has a total of 20 participants. Participants agreed
to hold the next meeting of the Committee of National
Dialogue on 15 April.

On 30 March the Minister of Interior, Ziad
Baroud, announced that municipal elections will take
place on schedule on four consecutive Sundays in the
month of May. In the meantime, Parliament is still
pursuing its consideration of the draft law for
municipal elections that was submitted to it by the
Government.

On the security front, a few unrelated incidents
took place in various parts of the country during the
reporting period. The most significant was an exchange
of fire amongst Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC) military
personnel, which took place on 8 April at the Kussaya
PFLP-GC military base near the border with Syria,
resulting in one person killed and at least two injured.
Four individuals were later turned in to the Lebanese
Armed Forces.

Continued support by the international
community for the reconstruction of the Nahr al-Barid
refugee camp remains a priority. Additional funding is
urgently required if progress achieved so far in the
reconstruction of the camp is to be sustained.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remained generally quiet in the period under review.
Violations of Lebanese airspace have continued on an
almost daily basis, mainly using unmanned aerial
vehicles but also occasionally involving fighter planes.

The Secretary-General's report to the Security
Council on the implementation of its resolution 1559
(2004) will be issued in the coming week.

The Secretary-General has made clear the United
Nations commitment to the goal of a comprehensive
peace in the Middle East. As he outlined last month to
the Council, for that to be achieved, there is no
alternative to the urgent resumption of negotiations on
all core issues for a two-State solution. This must be
enabled by positive developments on the ground. Peace
is in the hands of the parties themselves, but the
international community must continue to play a
crucial role.

The situation is critical. We cannot afford to lose
this opportunity to reach an agreement that will end the
occupation that began in 1967 and that will result in
the emergence of an independent, democratic and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security with Israel and its other neighbours in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, previous
agreements, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

