Mr. Ehoumy (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation also wishes to thank the presidency for having
convened this briefing and Mr. Annabi for the very useful
information he has provided us.

On 30 August 1999, in the popular consultation held
throughout the territory, the East Timorese people spoke out
in favour of a transition to independence. Last November
the People's Consultative Assembly of Indonesia ratified
the result of that referendum. Today, as a result of this
positive evolution, and also as a result of our actions,
including Security Council resolution 1272 (1999) of 25
October 1999, East Timor has a Transitional Administration
entrusted with a complex and well-defined mandate to
move the country towards self-government. Supported by
the International Force, East Timor (INTERFET), we are
confident that the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) will be able to
fulfil its task successfully. However, it should be noted that
the financial and material support of the international
community, including that of the international financial
institutions, remains necessary if the UNTAET mandate is
to be successful. In this regard, we welcome the pledges
recently made in Tokyo.

Now, when East Timor is ready to stand
independently, there are many challenges to overcome,
particularly those related to reconstruction and development.
However, working together, the Timorese people will be
able to achieve their objectives. In this connection, we
encourage all refugees and displaced persons to return to
their towns and villages so that they can participate in the
building of new institutions and in the reconstruction of
their future country.

Regarding the militias that continue to intimidate and
disseminate misinformation, we ask them to accept the new
circumstances. We wish to remind them that continuous
flagrant violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will not go unpunished. Furthermore, we
are confident that the cooperation of all will be helpful to
shed light on the cases of grave violations of human rights
that took place immediately after the popular consultation.
We wish to pay a tribute to the members of the
International Force, East T imor, the personnel of the
humanitarian organizations and the personnel of the United
Nations, in particular Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for their courage
and perseverance in working in such a difficult
environment and context.

In conclusion, we trust that the administration of
East Timor will plan to establish friendly and normal
relations with all its neighbours, in particular with
Indonesia.

