Mr. Shah (India): Mr. President, I should like to
begin by congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of April.
Your acknowledged diplomatic skills and experience are
particularly reassuring as we consider today a matter of
fundamental importance to all nation-States.

While maintenance of peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council in the United
Nations, preservation of national security is the primary
responsibility of all governments of States Members of the
United Nations. For those of us who are committed to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, a debate on the
question of security assurances against nuclear weapon
attack is a welcome development, even though my
delegation is sceptical about the motivation which has
prompted this debate today.

Today's debate takes us back to June 1968, when the
Security Council adopted resolution 255. The nuclear-
weapon Powers were then canvassing for signatures to the
proposed Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Today, in a repeat of history, they are
canvassing for votes for indefinite extension of the NPT. It
is particularly disheartening that in this post-cold-war age,
which provides the ideal opportunity for achieving complete
and genuine nuclear disarmament, all that the most
powerful countries in the world can think of are half
measures aimed at preserving the balance of terror on the
one hand and power by nuclear weaponry on the other.

May I recall that, when resolution 255 was passed by
the Security Council in 1968, India was a member and
abstained in the voting on the resolution. At the l433rd
meeting of the Security Council, India's permanent
representative had said,

"I should like to emphasize that any security
assurances that might be offered by nuclear-weapon
States could not and should not be regarded as a quid
pro quo for the signature of a non-proliferation
treaty." (S/PV.J433, para. 107)

He added,

"The basis for any action by the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace
and security is the Charter of the United Nations.
Any linking of security assurances to the signature
of a non-proliferation treaty would be contrary to its
provisions, because the Charter does not discriminate
between those who might adhere to a particular
treaty and those who might not do so." (ibid., para. 108)

He further clarified that, while the permanent members of
the Security Council have a special obligation and
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, they are:

" precluded from adopting a discriminatory
approach in situations involving the security of
States, including that arising from the threat or the
use of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon
States." (ibid.)

In the debate 27 years ago, many countries supported
the logic of this approach. Ambassador Berard of France
stated, in this room:

"My Government reiterates that the real problem is
that of the elimination of atomic weapons; the
nations of the world will not receive the guarantees
of security to which they are entitled until the
nuclear powers agree to embark upon the road
towards nuclear disarmament and until they reach
that goal." (S/PVJ430, para. 51)

Ambassador Kuznetsov of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics stated:

"The fact is, the nuclear weapons will still not
disappear with the conclusion of the Treaty on Non-
Proliferation; the possibility of an outbreak of
nuclear war in the world will remain even against
non-nuclear-weapon States." (ibid., para. 10)

I recall these categorical views of the important
nuclear-weapon States so that this body can
dispassionately judge the utility of the kind of security
assurances that have now been offered.

 

Twenty-seven years later, I must reiterate that what
my distinguished predecessor stated then is equally true
today. In my delegation's view, it is the clear responsibility
of the nuclear-weapon States that are also permanent
members of the Council to go to the assistance of any State
that is threatened with or is the victim of nuclear attack,
and not merely those that might be signatories to the NPT.

At the forty-ninth session of the General Assembly,
the international community decided to seek an advisory
opinion from the International Court of Justice on whether
the threat or use of nuclear weapons is permissible under
international law in any circumstances. This was an
initiative taken primarily by the non-aligned countries,
which do not possess nuclear weapons. India supports this
initiative, and maintains that use of nuclear weapons would
cause such indiscriminate suffering and destruction that it
is contrary to the rules of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
It is said that those who ignore the lessons of history
are condemned to re-live them. Twenty-five years after the
NPT came into force, there are today many more nuclear
weapons placed in more countries than in 1970. Unless the
international community acts, and acts quickly, to commit
itself to the elimination of nuclear weapons, 25 years hence
there will be more nuclear weapons, in more countries, than
there are today, despite the extended NPT. What we should
be debating today is not an interim measure to preserve the
balance of terror as a sop to the security concerns of a
category of non-nuclear-weapon countries, but a universal
treaty commitment for time-bound destruction and
elimination of nuclear weapons; that is, if the nuclear-
weapon Powers are serious about indefinite security for all.

Despite General Assembly resolution 49/73, adopted
overwhelmingly, the Conference on Disarmament's Ad Hoc
Committee on Effective International Arrangements to
Assure Non-Nuclear-Weapon States against the Use or
Threat of Use of Nuclear Weapons has not been re-
established during the current session of the Conference on
Disarmament. While that must clearly be our priority, it is
unfortunate that we are today discussing a draft resolution,
to be passed by the Council, which is discriminatory, is
riddled with ifs and buts and falls short of the requirement
for a binding international legal commitment.

It bears repetition to say that the only security against
the threat or use of nuclear weapons is a binding
international legal convention on the elimination of nuclear
weapons. Half measures, such as the draft resolution
presented by the permanent five, which attempt to offer
security assurances to a certain category of countries are
no substitute for permanent security and, in fact, may give
a wrong message. One would hope that by offering a
draft resolution of this kind, the nuclear-weapon States
are not telling the non-members of the NPT that they, the
nuclear-weapon States, are free to use nuclear weapons
against them, because this would have implications which
are too frightening to contemplate.

Let me reiterate that India is firmly committed to the
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. India will not
subscribe to the NPT so long as it is a discriminatory
Treaty whose objective is not to prevent proliferation of
nuclear weapons so much as to prevent proliferation of
nuclear-weapon countries. India will continue to pursue,
both in the United Nations and outside, its unrelenting
efforts to work towards non-proliferation and the
elimination of nuclear weapons, even if yet another
discriminatory and non-universal resolution emerges from
the Security Council at the end of this debate.
