Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, allow
me to thank our briefer, Mr. John Ging, for his
comprehensive analysis.

First, let me very briefly underline once again our
strong support for the relaunching of a United Nations-
facilitated political process for Syria. We strongly
support a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned inclusive
political process under the auspices of the United
Nations in Geneva.

Switching now to our main topic, namely, the
humanitarian dimension of the Syrian conflict, we
have to acknowledge that the military logic continues
to drive developments in Syria. We still face unceasing
and widespread violence and violations of international
law, including gross and systematic human rights
violations and abuses. The most striking examples of
that are still visible in the south-western part of Syria.
We are extremely worried by reports stating that by the
end of this month, almost 200,000 people may be newly
displaced in affected areas.

Taking into consideration the recent events, we
strongly condemn the intensification of military
operations and call for an immediate end to the violence
in south-western Syria. Military operations resulting
in deaths among the civilian population, as well as the
destruction of and damage to civilian infrastructure,
such as schools and hospitals, are unacceptable and must
stop. Safe and sustainable humanitarian access must be
secured. Unfortunately, since the Syrian Government
retook control of many areas of the country, there is
still no unhindered access for humanitarian actors to
the areas in need.

We are concerned about not only south-western Syria
but also the north-western part. Military operations led
by Government forces, with the support of its allies,
have already displaced thousands of civilians. The total
number of people in need of humanitarian assistance in
Aleppo and Idlib governorates has increased by more
than half a million this year.

As we heard in the briefing, Idlib governorate
is still struggling with the new, significant influx
of internally displaced persons. It is an extremely
worrying pattern, which leaves Idlib with the highest
total number of displaced persons in Syria. More than
half a million people have been displaced to and within
Idlib governorate in the past six months, mostly from
eastern Ghouta, Horns, Yarmouk and other parts of Idlib
governorate. Possible consequences of further military
escalation in that area are of great concern to us.

The humanitarian imperative should be our
priority. We would like to reiterate our strong call to
all parties with some influence on the ground to take
all the necessary actions to achieve a full cessation of
hostilities in the whole territory of Syria, in particular
in Idlib, in order to prevent scenarios already witnessed
in eastern Ghouta and Aleppo. In that context, it should
be emphasized that the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure by all sides to the conflict should
be respected.

Let me also stress the need for the protection for
refugees. We would support only the safe, voluntary
and dignified return of the Syrian people under a
United Nations-led framework once conditions allow it.
Respect for the imperative of non-refoulement should
be our guiding principle in that matter.

There is no need to repeat the importance of the
protection of groups in situations of vulnerability,
especially children, women and members of religious
minorities, who are far too often disproportionally
affected by the conflict in Syria.

In conclusion, allow me to stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Security Council on the
question of the full implementation of a humanitarian
resolution across Syria. Unfortunately, we see a new
military offensive persisting. That worries us, as we
may again witness increased violence. We call on all
parties that can affect events on the ground to take the
steps necessary to ensure the cessation ofhostilities, the
adequate protection of the Syrian people and, finally,
the provision of urgent humanitarian access.

