Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
you, Sir, for convening today's meeting at the request
of the United Kingdom. We also thank the United
Kingdom for sharing the findings of the investigation
conducted by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.

We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has closely
followed the developments surrounding the use of a
nerve agent in Salisbury on 4 March. According to the
report issued by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the results of laboratory
tests of the blood samples taken from Mr. Skripal, his
daughter and the police officer have confirmed that
they were exposed to high purity toxic chemical agents.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea condemns in the
strongest terms the fact that the toxic chemical was
used on human beings. I request that we find a way
to determine without a doubt the person or persons
responsible for using that substance so that the proper
legal action can be taken.

There should be no doubt or speculation surrounding
the identity and culpability of the perpetrators.
Conclusive evidence is required, such as the results
of tests conducted by the OPCW to determine and
confirm the chemical agent to which Mr. Skripal and
his daughter were exposed on 4 March. In that regard,
we congratulate the OPCW on its excellent work and
professionalism. As investigations continue to unravel
the plot and identify the perpetrators, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea requests that the Government
of the Russian Federation and the Government of the
United Kingdom show restraint and find an appropriate
and reasonable way to manage the situation through
direct contact. We hope that the diplomatic crisis can
be resolved.

Equatorial Guinea's wishes Mr. Skripal, his
daughter and the British police officer affected by the
attack a full and speedy recovery.

Let me conclude by reaffirming Equatorial
Guinea's complete rejection of the manufacture,
stockpiling, use and distribution of chemical weapons,
wherever and by whomever. Once again, we stress the
importance of establishing a transparent, independent
and professional monitoring mechanism to determine
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons.

