Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): It is clear that the region of the Middle East
and North Africa is undergoing a period of serious
upheaval as a result of the conjunction of inter-ethnic and
inter-religious clashes with the unprecedented eruptions
of terrorism and extremism that have enveloped Iraq,
Yemen, Libya, Syria and have disturbed a number of
other countries, including some in Africa. The potential
deterioration of the situation presents the likelihood of
increasingly serious threats to international stability
and security.

This is hardly the first time that such a state of
affairs is the direct consequence ofthe heinous practice
of geopolitical engineering, interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States, and attempts to replace
objectionable regimes, including by violent means. It
is fair to say that the situation in Syria is particularly

worrying. Since the very beginning ofthe crisis, Russia
has consistently advocated an exclusively peaceful
solution arrived at while respecting the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of that ancient nation. We
continue to believe firmly that there is no alternative
to a political process based on a mutually respectful,
inclusive intra-Syrian dialogue without preconditions,
while ensuring an end to hostilities, the expansion
of humanitarian access and a more effective fight
against terrorism.

That complex position has been clearly affirmed in
the decisions of the International Syria Support Group
and the Security Council's resolutions, particularly
resolution 2254 (2015). In order to fulfil the provisions
of that resolution, Russia and the United States, as
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group,
arrived at a specific arrangement, which took more
than six months to produce and was completed on
9 September, after the Presidents of Russia and the
United States, meeting three days earlier in China, had
reached final agreement on the last remaining issues to
be resolved.

I apologize for referring to documents that almost
no one in the Chamber has seen. As ever, Russia is
prepared to make them public and distribute them
within the United Nations. It is important to note that
the Russian-American agreement emphasizes that one
of its key priorities is distinguishing the opposition
forces from those of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and Jabhat Al-Nusra, in order to put the
ceasefire into effect, resolve humanitarian issues and,
most importantly, end terrorists' attempts to evade
punishment by using the pretext of their cooperation
with the so-called moderates participating in the
ceasefire regime.

The arrangements came into force on 12 September,
and I should say once again that the fact that they are
not yet publicly available prevents us from comparing
them with what has been done and by whom, but I can
give one example. The arrangements required ensuring
safe passage for humanitarian access along the Castello
Road and that therefore both the Government and the
opposition, which were controlling various sectors of
that road, should withdraw their forces to an equal
distance from the road. That distance was specifically
fixed in the agreements. The Government forces began

to withdraw, as required in the Russian-United States
agreement, only to see that the opposition was not
only not reciprocating but in fact began shelling the
Government forces. That happened more than once,
and the opposition has still not withdrawn from the
Castello Road, as the 9 September agreements required.
In general, through its Ministry of Defence, Russia
has been continually monitoring the activity on the
Castello Road and around Aleppo, and the Ministry's
website shows very clearly who is complying with the
agreements and who is not.

Last week, through the operational monitoring
centre we established in Geneva with our United States
partners, we informed our American colleagues about
300 cases of violations of the ceasefire regime by Ahrar
Al-Sham and a number of other opposition groups,
including some whose names were provided to us as
supposedly participating in the ceasefire. There were
violations in Aleppo and the provinces of Hama, Homs,
Latakia and Dar'a, as well as in the suburbs ofDamascus.
I would like to stress that the information we passed on
is reliable. It comes not from Internet or media reports
but was obtained on the ground by Russian military
monitoring groups and it corresponds to specific facts.
The violations include shelling using light weapons,
mortars, multiple rocket launchers and homemade
shells. The strikes on 16 September by the opposition
coalition against Government forces' positions in Deir
ez-Zor were a clear violation of the ceasefire, and as
soon as they occurred, ISIL launched an attack on the
Government forces. Another unacceptable provocation
took place on 19 September, when a United Nations
humanitarian convoy was attacked near Aleppo in an
opposition-controlled area. It should be noted, by the
way, that on that same day, in the same area, known as
the Ramusa road, Jabhat Al-Nusra and its allies carried
out an aggressive attack on Government forces. As a
result, the jihadists were able to make progress in the
10-70 sector.

I do not have any proof, but I am certain that
such coincidences should be thoroughly analysed and
investigated, particularly the attack on the humanitarian
convoy. Many people said that it could have been a
rocket or artillery shelling a that was what we were
informed originally - and then they started talking
about helicopters and then airplanes. I think we should
restrain the emotional instinct that makes us instantly
reach for the microphone to comment and should rather
conduct a thorough, professional investigation. I should
mention that the distance between where the incident
occurred and the epicentre, to the west of Aleppo,
where Al-Nusra is, is no more than five or seven
kilometres. Russia has provided all the information it
has obtained about the attack on the convoy, including
real-time video. In general, in spite of our appeals,
which are to be found in Security Council decisions on
the importance of exerting influence over the various
armed opposition groups, the results have so far been
extraordinarily limited.
I mentioned the list provided to us by our American
partners of the 150 or so organizations named as
participants in the ceasefire regime, but for a long time
now, and officially since 12 September, more than 20
of them have declared that they will not comply with
the agreement. That list also includes Ahrar Al-Sham,
which, by the way, when drafting resolution 2254
(2015), we proposed including on the list of terrorist
organizations, together with another group, Jaysh
Al-Islam. At the time, however, our partners said that
would make it impossible for us to work effectively, and
as a gesture of goodwill we decided not to insist on
that, limiting the terrorist list to Jabhat Al-Nusra and
the so-called Islamic State. Well, after the ceasefire's
entry into force, on 12 September, the leadership of
Ahrar Al-Sham stated officially that it would not abide
by the agreements because they describe Al-Nusra
as a terrorist organization. Ahrar Al-Sham does not
consider it to be a terrorist organization, and in fact
works closely with it.

I believe, therefore, that the time has come to think
about revisiting the list of terrorist organizations,
especially since a specific incident occurred in the
past few days in the north of Hama province, where
Syrian forces were defending against attacks by the
Jund Al-Aqsa group in the El Khabare and Maan areas.
Regarding the fighting there, some have accused the
Syrian Government forces of violating the ceasefire,
but yesterday the United States stated that it had added
Jund Al-Aqsa to the list of terrorist organizations, so I
hope that no one will demand that we cease hostilities
against that group. I just wanted to mention that
example, on top of what I just pointed out about Ahrar
Al-Sham, since they will probably require that we
revisit the list. There has to be an end to covering up for
those who are opposed to peace and refuse to comply
with the agreements and with the Security Council's
resolutions, and they should be considered equivalent
to terrorists. In the past few days, in the Damascus
area, Jaysh Al-Islam has been trying to gain territory
in eastern Ghouta, while at the same time there have
been intensive attacks on Government forces by Jabhat
Al-Nusra and Failak Al-Rahman, which is also working
in coordination with Al-Nusra in the suburb of Jobar,
from where they often use mortars for shelling civilian
neighbourhoods in Damascus.

Another lesson that we should like to draw from
the latest events is that, in ensuring security during
humanitarian operations, the effective participation of
all parties to the conflict is necessary, not only that of
Syrian and Russian armed forces, to which everyone
usually addresses all appeals and requests. The armed
groups and their sponsors need to provide relevant
guarantees as well. Representatives of the United
Nations also need to escort the convoys after receiving
such guarantees.

The International Syria Support Group met
yesterday, and many colleagues were present. Everyone
spoke in favour of resuscitating the cessation of
hostilities. Initially the proposal was to ensure three
days of calm. We are convinced that that can be
achieved only by all the parties to the Syrian conflict
without exception, taking simultaneous, parallel
steps. Otherwise, nothing will happen. There will not
be any unilateral pauses. We have done that already.
There were unilateral pauses around Aleppo for 48
and 72 hours, and each time the result was that the
insurgents, including Jabhat Al-Nusra, were provided
with re-enforcements and military equipment and
ammunition during these periods of calm. We therefore
can no longer even discuss unilateral measures.

What is needed is that every single member of the
International Syria Support Group, especially those
mentioned by the President of the Council, the Prime
Minister of New Zealand, need to formulate serious
guarantees in order to ensure that those units on the
ground on whom they have influence will comply
with all the provisions of the cessation of hostilities
agreement. If we can agree on that type of comprehensive
approach, then I believe that the viability of a cessation
of hostilities will have a chance. Of course, it will not
be enough to reach an agreement, we will have to make
sure that the agreement is actually implemented.

Finally, I would like to say that we have always made
a top priority of the intra-Syrian political dialogue,
without any preconditions, as demanded by resolution
2254 (2015) and with the participation ofrepresentatives
of all ethnic and religious groups, in order to implement
the road map set out in the resolution, which should lead
to a solution to the Syrian crisis within 18 months - as
we had hoped at the time. Otherwise, we will not be
able to achieve a lasting solution and preserve Syria as
a single, territorially integral State, restore its economy
and ensure the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

We support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura, and we call
on him to continue working with the Syrian parties
to the conflict to ensure the continuity and inclusive
character of the negotiating process. Attempts by
certain participants to put forward preconditions or
ultimatums to sabotage resolution 2254 (2015) are
unacceptable. Unfortunately, such attempts have
continued, and the United Nations and the Special Envoy
should not yield to such blackmail. Negotiations should
resume urgently. Those who insist on preconditions
should be told that such decisions run counter to the
demands of the Security Council. We are ready to
contribute in every way to the efforts carried out by
Mr. De Mistura, including by further working with all
parties - the Syrian Government and all members of
the opposition - without excluding anyone.

