Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the African Union
(AU) Commission and its Chairperson, Mr. Jean Ping,
as well as on behalf of the members of my
delegation - including Ambassador Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission and head of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), and Major General Nathan
Mugisha, AMISOM. Force Commander - I would like
to most warmly commend you, Sir, for organizing this
meeting. Coming as it does on the heels of the mini-
summit convened here in New York on 23 September
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, this meeting bears
further testimony to the determination of the United
Nations to sustain the current momentum in the search
for a durable solution to the crisis in Somalia.

We commend the Secretary-General for the
attention and efforts he continues to devote to the
situation in Somalia, and for his rich and forward-
looking statement to the Council this morning. That
statement indeed translated his renewed and
unflinching commitment to bringing a durable end to
the two decades of suffering endured by the Somali
people. Indeed, such a strong determination, which is
required from the international community as a whole,
hardly needs to be emphasized. The protracted
suffering inflicted on the Somali people and the
increasing threat posed by the situation to regional
stability and to international peace and security cannot
be allowed to continue any longer.

Today's meeting of the Security Council is taking
place a week after the 245th meeting of the AU Peace
and Security Council, which convened at the
ministerial level in Addis Ababa on 15 October. The
meeting provided an opportunity to review in-depth the
situation in Somalia and to take far-reaching decisions,
whose timely implementation, we are convinced, will
help turn around the situation on the ground and assist
the Somali people in opening a new and more peaceful
chapter in the history of their war-torn country.

The current developments in Somalia are well
known. I would like, however, to provide a brief
overview of the background against which the Peace

and Security Council meeting took place and to
highlight political, security and humanitarian aspects.

First, over the past few months, the political
situation has been challenged by the inability of the
Transitional Federal Institutions to effectively
implement their obligations under the Transitional
Federal Charter and the Djibouti peace process. That
was mainly due to the intermittent and recurrent
wrangling within the leadership of the Transitional
Federal Institutions and the resultant lack of cohesion,
which led to the resignation of Prime Minister Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, on 21 September. The
African Union notes that President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed has now appointed a new Prime
Minister. We look forward to the early formation of a
representative Cabinet and the speedy completion of
the parliamentary confirmation process.

Secondly, the security situation in Mogadishu and
in the rest of Somalia - the south-central area -
remains unacceptable, as demonstrated by the
persistent violence in the country and other heinous
acts, such as the mortar attacks, assassinations and
suicide bombings that continue to be perpetrated
against the Somali people, the Transitional Federal
Institutions and AMISOM. by the insurgents and
terrorist groups of the Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam
with the active support of foreign elements. The
African Union is very concerned that the insecurity in
Somalia is spilling over into the region, as attested by
the despicable Kampala bombings of 11 July 2010.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation is of the
utmost concern. It is characterized by persistent attacks
against humanitarian workers and agencies by
Al-Shabaab and Hizbul Islam, by limited access, as
well as by inadequate funding.

In reviewing the situation in Somalia, the African
Union Peace and Security Council was guided by the
urgency of effective and coordinated action by the
Somalis and the international community. In particular,
the Peace and Security Council was convinced that the
situation required three layers of action.

The first layer concerns the Somalis themselves.
Indeed, the Somalis, and their leaders in particular,
have the primary responsibility for the restoration of
peace, security and stability in their country. That is
why the Peace and Security Council strongly urged the
leadership of the Transitional Federal Institutions and
all other stakeholders to show selfless leadership,
resolve and unity of purpose. Without such
dispositions, no amount of external assistance will
make it possible to effectively turn around the situation
in Somalia.

More specifically, bearing in mind that 20 August
2011 will mark the end of the transitional period, the
Peace and Security Council requested the Transitional
Federal Institutions of Somalia, first, to ensure the
confirmation of the new Prime Minister by the
Transitional Federal Parliament and the formation of a
new Government; secondly, to develop a road map
with regard to the management of the remaining
transition period, with clear political, security and
reconstruction priorities, in line with the Djibouti
process; thirdly, to expeditiously complete the
outstanding transitional tasks, including in particular
the constitutional process; fourthly, to continue to
reach out to all peace-embracing Somalis, in a spirit of
inclusiveness, bearing in mind that the Djibouti peace
process remains the sole basis for peace and
reconciliation in Somalia; and, fifthly, to urgently
endorse the draft national security and stabilization
plan and the security-sector assessment report.

The second layer relates to the African Union.
The Somalis will not succeed in their efforts without
the full support of the continent and that of the
international community as a whole. While the
situation in Somalia calls for the mobilization of
resources and assets that are beyond the means of the
African Union, our continental organization cannot
abdicate its responsibilities to Somalia and fail its
people. Building on the achievements made so far, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) will continue to do their utmost
to support the Somalis as they strive to bring to a
definite end the conflict and violence that have plagued
their country for two decades. In particular, the African
Union's action over the coming months will centre on
the following efforts.

First, we will focus on supporting the political
process, including the management of the remaining
transitional period and efforts to reach out to all peace-
embracing Somalis.

Secondly, we will concentrate on strengthening
AMISOM. in order to bring its military component to
20,000 troops and its police component to 1,680. That
increase in strength will be accompanied by the
enhancement of the Mission's equipment. In addition,
AMISOM'S civilian component will be enhanced
substantially.

Thirdly, we will focus on mobilizing the
international community so that it can fully play its
role. The appointment of former Ghanaian President
Jerry John Rawlings as African Union High
Representative for Somalia will no doubt inject new
momentum in that respect.

The third layer pertains to the international
community, and in particular the United Nations.
Clearly, while duly acknowledging the support
rendered so far, we at the African Union strongly
believe that more efforts are required for the
international community to rise to the challenge posed
by the current situation in Somalia. More specifically,
the Peace and Security Council ministerial meeting has
urged the United Nations Security Council to take the
following actions.

The Council has been urged, first, to endorse the
newly authorized strength of AMISOM.

Secondly, the Council has been urged to authorize
an enhanced support package for AMISOM, funded
through United Nations assessed contributions on the
basis of the newly authorized strength and catering for
reimbursements for contingent-owned equipment,
including minor and major equipment, and the payment
of troop allowances at United Nations rates, in order to
ensure adequate, predictable and sustainable support to
the Mission. In addition, such support should be
provided to the Mission, both within and outside
Somalia, as required.

Thirdly, in response to the request by the African
Union and IGAD, the Council has been urged to
impose a naval blockade and a no-flight zone over
Somalia to prevent the entry of foreign fighters into the
country and the operation of flights carrying shipments
of weapons and ammunition to armed groups inside
Somalia - the very groups responsible for attacks
against the Transitional Federal Government,
AMISOM. and the Somali population. In that respect,
the Security Council might like to consider requesting
the Governments and organizations involved in the
naval operations undertaken off the coast of Somalia to
provide, with the Council's authorization, more direct
and tangible operational support to AMISOM.

Fourthly, the Council has been urged to ensure
the effective implementation of sanctions against all
those impeding the peace and reconciliation process in
Somalia.

Fifthly, the Council has been urged to approach
the issue of piracy off the coast of Somalia in a holistic
manner, with a view to effectively addressing the
underlying causes and other equally serious threats that
affect the livelihoods and well-being of the Somali
people, in particular illegal fishing and the dumping of
toxic substances and waste off the coast of Somalia.

Lastly, the Council has been urged to reaffirm the
commitment to deploy, in due course, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia through the
re-hatting of AMISOM, and to establish a timeline for
such a deployment.

Somalia is today at a crossroads. While the
situation on the ground remains very difficult and the
transitional federal institutions of Somalia are
confronted with a myriad of challenges, not least those
relating to their internal cohesion and effectiveness, we
should not lose sight of the opportunities that exist to
make peace happen in Somalia. After two decades of
conflicts and chaos, the Somalis are yearning for
peace. In addition, there is today greater awareness
than ever before of the serious threat that the current
situation in Somalia poses to international peace and
security, as illustrated by the phenomenon of piracy
and, even more dramatically, the Kampala terrorist
bombings of July 2010.

The international community can decide to
pursue its current policy of limited engagement and
half-hearted measures in the false hope that the
situation can be contained, and continue to make the
existence of peace a precondition for the deployment of
a United Nations operation and a greater contribution
to the stabilization of the situation in Somalia.

But the international community can also decide
that it should step up its efforts, bearing in mind its
duties and responsibilities to Somalia and its people
and the need to give concrete meaning to the much-
heralded notion of the responsibility to protect, as well
as the urgent need to confront the threat that the
prevailing situation poses to international peace and
security. We at the African Union are convinced that
this is the right course of action and that the time for
action is now, in the expectation that 2010, the Year of
Peace and Security in Africa, will indeed bring the
blessings of a normal life to the people of Somalia.
We therefore call on the Security Council to stand
alongside the African Union in rising to the challenge
and responding decisively to the desperate call for
assistance from the Somali people.

