Mr. Lancry (Israel): I would like, first, to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, Ambassador Ouane of Mali, for his most
capable leadership.

Nothing would have made me happier than to be
able to stand before the Council today and announce a
breakthrough in the peace process. Regrettably,
circumstances compel me, instead, to deliver to the
Council an update on the recent events that have taken
place in Jerusalem and in the West Bank and Gaza.

At the outset, I wish to express my most profound
sadness at the tragic loss of human life that has
occurred in recent days. In particular, I would like to
express here, before the Security Council, a feeling
widely shared in Israel. We mourn, together with the
Palestinians, the shattering death of the young
Mohammed Jamal Al-Durra, as we mourn our own
losses. It is precisely this human suffering that the
Middle East peace process was meant to alleviate.

The events of the last few days represent the
latest and most severe developments in a wave of
violence that has been building in recent weeks.
Although some are inclined to assign exclusive
responsibility to Israel for these acts of provocation,
the reality is far less simplistic. The present Palestinian
escalation dates back to well before the Temple Mount
disturbances, when, on 13 September, stones and
Molotov cocktails were thrown at Israeli positions in
the vicinity of the Netzarim junction in Gaza. This was
followed by a number of increasingly violent incidents,
including the killing of an Israeli soldier by a roadside
bomb on 27 September and the murder of an Israeli
police officer by a Palestinian policeman who served
with him in a joint patrol of the West Bank on 29
September.

The events of this past Friday on the Temple
Mount escalated the violence even further. Muslim
worshippers, intent on provoking a violent
confrontation with both Israeli police and civilians on
the eve of the Jewish New Year, hurled a hail of stones
at Jewish worshippers gathered at the Western Wall
below. Israeli police attempted to turn back the
protesters through non-violent means, but the mob
persisted, trying to force its way out of the Temple
Mount area and through the Mughrabim gate to the
Western Wall plaza. At this point, the Israeli police,
who had been deployed outside the perimeter of the
Mount, were compelled to enter the area in order to
push back the surging mob. The stone-throwing mob
continued in its violence for a period of more than four
hours.

Regrettably, the wave of widespread Palestinian
violence did not stop there, despite Israeli attempts to
end the clashes through dialogue. Let there be no
doubt: we are not faced with peaceful demonstrators
but, rather, with a coordinated escalation of violent
confrontation throughout the West Bank and Gaza. In a
fatal phenomenon which is now a commonplace
occurrence, there have been numerous instances of live
fire emanating from within rioting crowds.

Let me stress that in all the cases mentioned
above, Israeli security personnel returned fire only
when absolutely necessary and only when faced with
an imminent threat to life and limb. Israeli forces
exercised all possible restraint in their efforts to restore
calm and security, and took action only as a last resort,
in order to protect the lives of civilians, police officers
and Israeli soldiers, as any Government would be
obligated to do.

I must also stress that the responsibility for this
distressing escalation lies squarely with the Palestinian
Authority, not only because of its failure to take action
to halt these events, but also because of its incitement
of the population through inflammatory rhetoric and
calls to violence. Furthermore, Palestinian Authority
security forces and paramilitary groups, such as Fatah's
Tanzim, have taken a leading role in the events,
including the use of live ammunition against Israelis.

Even more disturbing for Israel is the wholesale
violation of signed agreements regarding the use of
weapons by Palestinian policemen. Yesterday alone, a
soldier was ambushed and killed by a Palestinian
policeman near the town of Beit Sahour. One Israeli
civilian was shot and killed at close range when
dropping his car off at a Palestinian-owned garage in
the village of Maskheh. Palestinian attackers opened
fire on an Israeli school bus near Shiloh. Israeli
policemen were wounded in gunfire from armed
Palestinian security forces in Jericho, Nablus,
Ramallah, Netzarim and other locations. Throughout
the day, I have been receiving persistent reports from
our soldiers in the field about indiscriminate and
unprovoked gunfire, including the use of heavy
machine guns and high explosives emanating from
Palestinian police positions. The Palestinian police
have turned these weapons against the same Israeli
soldiers with whom they carry out joint security tasks
on a daily basis.

It is regrettable that at such a sensitive time in the
Middle East peace process, the Palestinians have once
again decided to resort to violence for political gain.

Experience has repeatedly shown that the
Palestinian Authority's willingness to incite popular
violence as a means to elicit concessions in the
negotiations serves only to divert the peace process
from its course and to hinder our ability to arrive at a
permanent settlement.

At this decisive crossroads of peace negotiations,
backed up by an unprecedented Israeli willingness to
pursue a path of historic compromise, one major
question demands our scrutiny: is Chairman Arafat
truly prepared to forgo unrealistic demands and dreams
and to embrace a reasonable peace? Or, will he for ever
remain entrenched in his positions, and for ever play
the role of the unquenchable leader of an endless
Palestinian revolution?

We call upon the Palestinian leadership to act
with responsibility, and to do its utmost to immediately
calm the situation and to help foster a climate
conducive to the advancement of peace negotiations.
Specifically, we call upon the Palestinian Authority to
put an end to the unrestrained use of gunfire by
Palestinian police, to collect the illegal weapons in the
hands of the Tanzim and to keep Palestinian protesters
at a distance from Israeli positions, as is their
obligation under the Oslo agreements.

I must reiterate that Israel remains committed to
achieving a peace settlement with our Palestinian
partners, even in the face of such violence. We call
upon Chairman Arafat to contribute to the restoration
of the spirit of trust and confidence between our two
peoples and to resume the peace talks in earnest.

We look forward to the meeting tomorrow in
Paris between Prime Minister Barak and Chairman
Arafat as an ideal opportunity to achieve this. For our
part, we will continue the search for peace with the
same unremitting determination that Mr. Barak has so
clearly demonstrated in the recent past, and we will
continue to make every effort to achieve a lasting peace
and historic reconciliation between our two peoples.

