Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me thank the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2014/656).
I would also like to express our deep gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his tireless efforts during the past
years and, particularly, for the constructive role that
he most recently played during the election process.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Nicholas Haysom
as the new Special Representative and look forward
to continuing our close cooperation with him in his
new capacity. I also appreciate Ambassador Tanin's
presence in the Council today.

My Government aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union earlier
in this debate.

It is now more than three months since the Afghan
people cast their votes in the presidential elections in
June. The Afghans - including, most encouragingly,
millions of women - have shown tremendous courage
in making use of their constitutional right to actively
participate in the elections, defying the Taliban threats
to disrupt the process. The most comprehensive audit
process, to which Germany contributed substantially,
has been undertaken. We are also very grateful for the
role that the United Nations has assumed in the process.
Mr. Ghani and Mr. Abdullah have agreed to establish
a unity Government. It is now time to deliver on their
commitments. As Foreign Minister Frank-Walter
Steinmeier recently underlined during his recent visit
to Afghanistan, both candidates must embrace their
responsibility for the future of Afghanistan. Only a
united Afghanistan will be able to overcome the many
challenges lying ahead.

I would like to mention four important points, also
with a View to the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting
Afghanistan in tackling those manifold challenges.

First, the impact of the current electoral conflict
is far-reaching. Afghanistan is showing symptoms of
a true State crisis. Even if the candidates agree on a
Government of unity, cooperation will be an immense
challenge after the difficult process ofthe past months.
It will take hard work to restore the confidence of
the Afghan people in the political elite and in public
institutions.
Secondly, necessary economic and political
reforms were put on hold while the election was being
audited. That further exacerbated the current economic
and fiscal crisis. The new Government urgently needs
to tackle the reform backlog.

Thirdly, a new Government is the precondition for
the full implementation of the civilian and military
commitments of the international community. As long
as there is no new Government, the envisaged NATO
post-International Security Assistance Force Resolute
Support mission cannot be put into force. In our opinion,
it is also crucial that the new mission be founded on a
sound legal basis. It should ideally be supported by a
Security Council resolution.

Fourthly, once there is a legitimate Government,
the international community should continue to
support Afghanistan's reconstruction and development.
With a shift of responsibilities in Afghanistan and the
immense challenges lying ahead, the commitment of
the United Nations will become even more important.
It is indispensable that UNAMA have a comprehensive
mandate and work on a financially sound basis to be
able to support Afghanistan in the aforementioned
areas. It is also important that UNAMA not only be
present in Kabul but also continue to work throughout
the country.

Let me finish by saying that Germany stands ready
to continue its support for Afghanistan. We very much
hope that the new Government will work towards uniting
the country in building a stable political environment
for a peaceful, secure and prosperous Afghanistan.

