Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you for convening today's meeting, Mr. President,
and for the briefings by Mr. Lowcock and Mr. Feltman
on the situation in Syria.

On Saturday, when we adopted resolution 2401
(2018) after long and complex negotiations, we
highlighted the commitment that Council members
have shown to achieving a humanitarian ceasefire in
Syria. As we said at the time, it will be crucial to closely
monitor its proper implementation and to maintain the
Council's unity with regard to its responsibility to
protect the civilian population, in line with international
law and international humanitarian law.

Four days in, we are still being forced to lament
and condemn the attacks on civilians and to reiterate
our calls for the immediate and comprehensive
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018). As the
Secretary-General has pointed out, Council resolutions
make sense only if they are effectively implemented.
The credibility of the Security Council as a whole,
and of those of its members with the greatest potential
influence on the ground in particular, is at stake. In the
light of this, we want to emphasize that the cessation of
hostilities that the Council has demanded clearly covers
the whole of Syrian territory, including eastern Ghouta
and Afrin, and should last for a minimum of 30 days. If
we are to ensure that, in our view we should mobilize
the International Syria Support Group's Ceasefire
Task Force. It is essential to ensure that all the parties
to the conflict comply with the ceasefire provided for
in resolution 2401 (2018), and that the Council is able
to closely monitor that compliance. In that regard, we
support the four recommendations outlined by Sweden
and Kuwait.

We must remind the Syrian authorities of their
responsibility to protect their people, and we firmly
condemn the military operations in eastern Ghouta
and other areas of the country that have continued even
after the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018). However,
we welcome the strenuous efforts of the Organization,
and of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in particular, to prepare 45 trucks carrying
supplies and ready to enter eastern Ghouta as soon as
the necessary permits are granted. The first report on
the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) will be
presented in less than two weeks, and we hope that it
will be able to inform us that the humanitarian crisis
caused by the Syrian conflict has been alleviated,
because we cannot wait any longer. It is the Security
Council's duty to continue working relentlessly to
achieve what we have all unanimously agreed on.

