I would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Incontemporary history, Iran was the main victim of the large-scale, systematic and frequent use of chemical weapons during the eight-year war imposed on us by Saddam Hussein, when some Western States not only assisted Saddam in developing chemical weapons but also refrained from taking any action when he made extensive use of those weapons against our citizens and later against Iraqi citizens. Those bitter experiences taught us that no one should possess such inhumane weapons and that the legal regime to prohibit their development and use must not allow any sort of politicization. We understand and feel more than any other country both the horrible nature of those inhumane weapons and the poisonous nature of politicizing the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). It is in that context that we condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anytime, anywhere and under any circumstances, and also call for the full, effective, balanced and non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention as well as for upholding the integrity, authority and legitimacy of the OPCW. Nevertheless, it is a source of grave concern that in the past several years, a group of OPCW member States have politicized the consideration of Syria's implementation of the Convention, systematically abusing the processes of the Security Council and the OPCW. They disregard the fact that in her final report to the Council, in 2014, the Special Coordinator of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission confirmed that Syria had fulfilled all of its commitments and that its entire chemical stockpile had been destroyed. That was also later confirmed by the OPCW. They are referring to a technically defective report of the Investigation and Identification Team, which was prepared without on-site investigation or due regard for the chain of custody, and they intentionally disregard the progress achieved by Syria in implementing its obligations. They also overlook Syria's commitment, which it reiterated very recently, to continuing to work with the Technical Secretariat in order to resolve all outstanding issues as soon as possible. Even the relevant decision of the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety-fourth session disregarded Syria's unprecedented cooperation with the OPCW, which it carried out despite the serious security threats posed by the deadliest of terrorist groups as well as the restrictions resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic. Unfortunately, the unproductive policies of some Western countries, pursued relentlessly during the course of the past several years, have resulted only in division within the Security Council and the OPCW, eroding their legitimacy and credibility. More important, those politically motivated approaches continue to endanger the consensus decision-making tradition of the OPCW, the latest example of which was the decision at the recently held twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties to the CWC regarding the OPCW's programme and budget for 2021, which was adopted by a vote. That unconstructive approach will continue to adversely affect the efforts to achieve the full and effective realization of the very purpose of the CWC, namely the elimination of chemical weapons, which has yet to be realized, owing to blatant failure on the part of the United States, as the sole major possessor State party to the Convention. A recent draft decision proposed by a group of countries in order to deprive a State from continuing to be a party to the Convention despite its having destroyed all of its chemical weapons, as verified by the OPCW, and despite its continuing cooperation with the Organization, will set a dangerous precedent and have far- reaching, serious consequences for the chemical-weapon disarmament regime. The continuation of such policies is not acceptable and must no longer be permitted. Every effort must therefore be made to restore the OPCW's authority and promote the full and non-discriminatory implementation of the CWC.
