Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein aligns
itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

The children and armed conflict agenda is sadly
particularly relevant today. The ongoing erosion of
the respect for international humanitarian law has
a particular impact on children, as evidenced in the
increasing number of attacks on children living in
conflict zones and other grave Violations of their
rights. We reiterate our strong support for the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict.
Protecting the independence and integrity of her
mandate, including her reporting on violations, is
crucial to its effectiveness and credibility.

The monitoring mechanism that was established
by resolution 1612 (2005) to document grave violations
is critical for the protection of children's rights during
armed conflict. Attacks on schools and hospitals are
one of the six grave violations identified under the
mechanism. Such attacks have become a disturbing
trend, as documented in the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/821). In the past six months
alone, over 500 schools were attacked. Those are just
the verified incidents, and point to a probably much
higher actual total number of incidents worldwide.
Furthermore, the Special Representative's latest report
(A/72/276) documents attacks on schools in nearly all
of the countries reported on, with an alarming trend of
air strikes being used as a method for attacks. Another
disturbing development is the increasing use of schools
for military purposes, in violation of the relevant rules
of international humanitarian law.

Liechtenstein strongly condemns all attacks against
schools and hospitals, as well as their use for military
purposes. We urge all parties to conflict to respect
the principle of distinction and other basic rules of
international humanitarian law. Where the principles of
international humanitarian law are violated, perpetrator
accountability must be ensured. We endorse the Safe
Schools Declaration and call upon other Member
States, especially Security Council members, to follow
suit. The right of children to an education must also
be preserved during armed conflict in order to lay the
foundations for sustainable peace and the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

A decade ago, the international community
adopted the Principles and Guidelines on Children
Associated with Armed Forces or Armed Groups
and the Paris Commitments to protect children from
unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed
groups so as to end the recruitment of child soldiers.
And yet, that type of recruitment continues to this
day and constitutes a devastating reality for far too
many children. A particularly concerning trend is
the exploitation of children by violent extremists and
non-State armed groups, such as Da'esh and Boko
Haram. It is well documented that, among other
purposes for such actions, armed forces or groups,
including groups involved in Violent extremism, recruit
both girls and boys for sexual purposes.

Moreover, men and boys often represent the
majority of detainees during armed conflict and are
highly vulnerable to sexual Violence. In post-conflict
situations, they need our full and sustained support to
be reintegrated into society. We also call on States to
prosecute those who have been associated with child
recruitment and Violence against children, so that we
can put an end to the impunity gap that persists in many
conflict and post-conflict societies.

