Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to thank Mr. Annabi for his very factual and
comprehensive briefing and to reiterate my country's
full support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri. We again call on all
parties to cooperate with him in his extremely complex
and difficult task.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria fully supports the statement to be made
shortly on behalf of the Union by the Ambassador of
Italy. As a country of the region, located in close
proximity to Kosovo, Bulgaria wishes to make a few
additional comments.

Bulgaria once again categorically condemns the
acts of violence referred to earlier by Mr. Annabi, in
which innocent people, including a police officer, were
killed. We convey our condolences to India. Bulgaria
believes that all such acts are acts of ethnic violence
and that attacks on the representatives of international
institutions in the province merely undermine the
efforts of local and international actors working for
Kosovo's future and to normalize life for all its
inhabitants. Bulgaria again recalls that such acts can in
no way improve the positions of parties to negotiations,
merely delay the normalization process and serve the
interests only of the very few who thrive on disorder
and organized crime. Violence is surely not in the
interests of the legitimate political representatives in
Kosovo, much less those of ordinary people.

That is why we believe that the full cooperation
of the Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government with police investigations and the
prosecution of the perpetrators of these acts of violence
will provide evidence of their readiness to shoulder the
burden of the genuine management of the province's
affairs. In this respect, we would recall that Bulgaria
remains very interested in the investigation of the
murder of Valentin Krumov, a Bulgarian international
civil servant killed in Pristina in 1999.

Bulgaria continues to follow with interest and
concern these acts of ethnic intolerance, which hamper
reconciliation among the ethnic communities and the
return of refugees to their homes. We believe that the
international presence in Kosovo, especially that of the
United Nations, must categorically demonstrate to all
local actors, regardless of their ethnic origin, that such
behaviour and the inspiration of violence are
unacceptable and will not be tolerated by the
international community.

