Mr. Reyes Rodriguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes the presidency of the People's Republic
of China in the Security Council this month and, in
particular, its leadership of our work. Cuba strongly
supports the collective efforts of the United Nations in
its fight against terrorism, and therefore accords great
importance to this debate.

Cuba rejects and condemns all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism in all of their forms and
manifestations committed by whomever, against
whomever, wherever they are committed and whatever
their motivations, including State terrorism. Any
Government involved in an act of State terrorism must
be held accountable at the international level.

It is impossible to eradicate terrorism, however, if
only some terrorist acts are condemned while others
are ignored, tolerated, justified or reinterpreted, an
approach that seeks to to promote narrow political
and economic interests. It is unacceptable that double
standards, political bias and impunity prevail in
addressing such a sensitive issue. Cuba is a country that,
in seeking to defend its independence and sovereignty,
has suffered for decades from the consequences of
terrible terrorist acts that were organized, financed and
planned from abroad, resulting in a toll of 3,478 dead
and 2,099 injured. Our people have suffered in their
own flesh because of that scourge, and we will always
fight against it.

One such concrete example of our fight against
terrorism is our Law No. 93 against terrorist acts. It has
been in force since 20 December 2001 and is part of our
penal code, with specific provisions for defining efforts
to respond to criminal conduct of a terrorist nature. We
are also party to 18 international conventions relating
to terrorism, pursuant to which legal and institutional
measures have been put in place to effectively confront
the phenomenon. Cuba has never allowed nor will it
ever allow the use of its national territory for carrying
out, planning or financing terrorist acts of any kind
against any State, without exception.

The international community must not accept the
fact that the fight against terrorism is being used as
a pretext to justify interference in the internal affairs
of other States, carry out acts of aggression, or allow
gross violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, such as torture, kidnapping, illegal
detentions, disappearances or extrajudicial executions,
thereby undermining the national sovereignty of a State.
Those actions are in contravention with the Charter
of the United Nations and the principles and norms
of international law. Wherever those legal and ethical
principles are violated, the legitimacy of our struggle
against international terrorism will be undermined.

Today, the question of terrorism is made up of a
number of important issues, tied in to the threat to
international peace and stability. Some of them were
included in the last review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which is, with its
four pillars, the guiding framework for the global fight
against terrorist acts.

Information and communications technologies
must be used in strict accordance with international
law. Access to such technologies should be blocked for
recruitment activities of terrorists and for the financing
and carrying out of terrorist acts. States also have the
obligation to refrain from resorting to those tools to
undermine the exercise of sovereignty of other States.
In that regard, we ought to condemn the practice of
certain States in funding, supporting and promoting,
through the Internet, radio or television, acts that
violate the self-determination of other peoples, as well
as messages of intolerance against cultures or political
and socioeconomic systems that do not agree with the
imposed prescriptions for their models of hegemonic
power.

Justice and reparations for victims must be at the
heart of our course of action. States are responsible for
meeting their international obligations and securing the
achievement of victims' rights, including the numerous
victims of State terrorism.

Cuba reiterates the duty of States to fulfil their
obligations to prosecute and extradite all terrorists
without exceptions, such as the notorious terrorist Luis
Posada Carriles, responsible for the first terrorist attack
against civil aviation in the Western Hemisphere. In
that crime, he instigated the mid-air explosion near
the coast of Barbados of a plane of the commercial
airline Cubana de Aviacio'n on 6 October 1976, with the
resulting loss of 73 passengers.

Cuba actively participates in the actions and efforts
of the United Nations aimed at combating international
terrorism. We firmly believe that the Organization is
the appropriate setting for confronting this scourge
with determination and energy and without double
standards. The fight against terrorism requires the
cooperation of everyone, with full adherence to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law. Cuba has demonstrated
its commitment to and full support for the call of the
United Nations to States, international organizations
and the international community to refuse, as a whole,
to finance or encourage terrorist activities, to support
them by other means or to provide training for them.

Cuba believes that we can do much more in the
matter of the fight against terrorism. The Council
and all Member States can count on our unwavering
commitment to combating this scourge in all its
forms and manifestations, wherever it occurs and
independently of whomever the perpetrators of terrorist
acts may be. Multilateral efforts to consolidate the full
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy assuredly have our support.

