The President: I thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his comments and clarifications with
regard to the debate that we have had.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and reaffirms its
commitment to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular, of the political independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
in conducting all peacekeeping and peace-
building activities and the need for States to
comply with their obligations under international
law.

"The Security Council recognizes that, as
experience confirms, United Nations
peacekeeping operations play a critical role in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
preventing and containing conflicts, promoting
compliance with international norms and Security
Council decisions, and building peace in post-
conflict situations.

"It further notes that United Nations
peacekeeping missions are charged with
increasingly difficult and complex mandates
assigned to them by the Security Council and
recognizes in this regard the need for a continued
review of United Nations peacekeeping.

"The Security Council notes that, in
addition to the existing 14 United Nations
peacekeeping operations, there has been a recent
surge in demand for new peacekeeping
operations. It is cognizant of the challenges this
represents for the United Nations system in terms
of generating necessary resources, personnel and
other capabilities to meet the increased demand.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to ensure that the United Nations is
provided with full political and financial support
to meet these challenges effectively, keeping in
View the specific requirements of each mission

and bearing in mind the human and financial
resource implications for the United Nations. The
Council also stresses that it is important to ensure
that, while meeting demand for new
peacekeeping operations, the resources available
for, and effective management of, the existing
operations are not adversely affected. At the same
time it underscores the need for efficient and
effective management of resources.

"The Security Council calls upon Member
States to contribute sufficient levels of trained
troops, police and civilian personnel, including
those with specialized capabilities and skills,
bearing in mind the need for an increased
percentage of female personnel at all decision-
making levels, as well as mobilization of logistic
and administrative support, to allow the multiple
operations to start optimally and fulfil their
respective mandates in an effective manner.
Enhancing the Secretariat's capacities and using
them in a rational and efficient manner will
constitute a crucial element of this response.

"The Security Council stresses also the need
for improved integrated mission planning, as well
as enhanced capacity for rapid deployment of
personnel and materiel to ensure efficient start-up
of peacekeeping operations. The timely and
adequate replenishment of strategic deployment
stocks is essential to meet current and future
demands.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
to work, as appropriate, with regional and
subregional organizations and multinational
arrangements in peacekeeping operations in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations to ensure complementary
capacities and approaches before and during the
deployment and after the withdrawal of United
Nations peacekeeping missions.

"The Security Council recognizes its
responsibility to provide clear, realistic and
achievable mandates for peacekeeping missions.
The Security Council values, in this regard, the
assessments and recommendations provided by
the Secretariat for informed decisions on the
scope and composition of new peacekeeping
operations, as well as their mandates, concept of
operations and force levels and structures.

"The Security Council believes that there is
need to strengthen the relationship between those
who plan, mandate and manage peacekeeping

operations, and those who implement

mandates for these operations. Troop-contributing
countries, through their experience and expertise,
can greatly contribute to the planning process and
can assist the Security Council in taking
appropriate, effective and timely decisions on
peacekeeping operations. The Council
recognizes, in this regard, that the meetings and
mechanisms established by its resolution 1353
(2001) serve to facilitate the consultation process.

"The Security Council recognizes that in
peacekeeping operations there are contributors,
other than troop-contributing countries, whose
views should also be taken into account as

appropriate.
"The Security Council stresses that, in
challenging environments, United Nations
peacekeepers may need to be provided with
sufficiently robust rules of engagement and the
necessary military resources to enable them to
fulfil their mandate and, if necessary, to defend
themselves. In all cases, the Security Council
considers the safety and security of all United
Nations personnel to be a priority. It stresses, in
this context, the importance of enhanced capacity
to gather and manage information in the field.

"The Security Council takes note of recent
efforts to increase coordination between missions
in adjacent countries and encourages Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General to
explore synergies to ensure effective management
of peacekeeping missions in the same regions or
subregions.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
regularly assess the size, mandate and structure of
peacekeeping operations with a view to making
the necessary adjustments, including downsizing,
where appropriate, according to progress
achieved. It also encourages the continued
commitment of the international community to
consolidate and sustain the peace on the ground
during and beyond the life of the mission.

"The Security Council further recognizes
the importance of a gender perspective, including
gender training for peacekeepers, in peacekeeping

operations, in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and the importance of
protection of children in armed conflict in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1379
(2001).

"The Council recognizes the increased risk
of the spread of communicable diseases and
certain criminal activities in post-conflict areas.
The Council welcomes efforts by the Secretariat
to sensitize peacekeeping personnel in the
prevention of HIV/AIDS and other communicable
diseases, in compliance with Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000), and encourages the
Secretariat to continue implementing its
guidelines on prostitution and trafficking.

"The Security Council recognizes that
effective peacekeeping operations should be part
of an overall strategy to consolidate and sustain
peace. In this regard, it stresses the need to ensure
from the outset the coordination, coherence and
continuity between the different parts of this
overall strategy, in particular between
peacekeeping on the one hand and peace-building
on the other hand. To this end, the Security
Council encourages closer cooperation between
all relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and international financial
institutions, regional and subregional
organizations and the private sector. Ensuring
lasting peace in the aftermath of conflict may
require sustained support from the United Nations
and its humanitarian and development partners.

"The Security Council notes that training is
increasingly becoming a critical element in
peacekeeping operations and recognizes the need
to utilize the expertise of experienced troop-
contributing countries. It encourages international
cooperation and support for the establishment of
peacekeeping training centres, which could
provide a wide range of training opportunities to
new and emerging troop contributors.

"The Security Council recognizes that
meeting the demands of an increasing number of
United Nations peacekeeping missions will
require the concerted efforts of the Security
Council, the General Assembly, the Member
States of the United Nations and the Secretary-
General so as to ensure that the necessary

resources and operational support are provided.
The Council encourages follow-up consultations
on the surge in demand and invites the Secretary-
General to provide regularly in a timely manner
to Member States assessments of evolving needs
and shortfalls in United Nations peacekeeping in
order to identify critical gaps and unmet
requirements as well as steps required to meet
these.

"The Security Council underscores the
useful role of its Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations in the consultation process at different
stages of peacekeeping operations. It encourages
the Working Group to pay special attention to
matters relating to the surge in demand in United
Nations peacekeeping over the coming year and,
as necessary, to report to the Council.

"The Security Council pays high tribute to
all the men and women who have served and
continue to serve in United Nations peacekeeping
operations for their high level of professionalism,
dedication and courage. It honours the memory of
those who lost their lives in the service of the
United Nations and the noble cause of peace."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/l6.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.35 pm.
