Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I wish you very success in
your duties.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
for the Secretary-General Martin Kobler for his
important briefing. We highly commend the continuous
efforts by Mr. Kobler to bring together the different
points of views among the Libyan political actors and
put an end to the political divisions and deterioration
in Libya. I would also like to thank Ambassador Skoog
of Sweden for the briefing in his capacity as President
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning the latest developments on the
sanctions dossier in Libya.

The United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has achieved the maximum possible level
of convergence of viewpoints of the different political
parties fighting over power. That convergence was
exemplified in the signing of the Libyan Political
Agreement on 17 December 2015. At the time, that
Agreement garnerned wide support from all over
Libya, as well as the approval of the majority of the
House of Representative and the General National
Congress. However, the intransigent positions of some
parties have stalled the aqequate implementation of the
Agreement. In that vein, we perceive the role played by
the United Nations to be an important one. The United
Nations ought to continue its efforts to surmount the
political bottlenecks, which may include undertaking
some limited amendments to the Political Agreement in
a way that would ensure the commitment of all parties
to implement it. That would lead the Government of
National Accord to be the sole legitimate Government
in Libya, which would pave the way for such a
Government undertake all governmental functions all
over Libya, including providing security.

Such an agreement requires the unification of the
military under one civilian leadership. Its primary
duty is to secure Libyan cities and borders and disarm
militias, as well as facing the different challenges in
the country, such as terrorism, illegal migration and
securing the oil fields.

In that context, we would like to inform the Council
that the security situation in Tripoli has recently
experienced great improvement after forces affiliated
with the Government of National Accord extended their
control over all vital facilities. That has paved the way
for the full return of UNSMIL to Tripoli.

I would be remiss not to commend the efforts made
by Libya's neighbours to bring about a convergence in
the differing points ofview among the parties. The most
recent communique issued by the ministerial meeting
of Libya's neighbouring countries, which was held in
Algeria on 5 June, stressed the need to abide by the
Political Agreement under the auspices of the United
Nations. It also stressed that there are no military
solutions to the crisis in Libya.

We express our appreciation for all endeavours
undertaken by the League of Arab states and the
African Union to close the gap among the political
parties and lead to a consensus that would contribute to
stabilizing the situation and alleviating the suffering of
the Libyan people.
Everyone is aware that my country faces numerous
crises as a result of the worsening security situation,
including the smuggling of fuel and oil products by
armed gangs of criminals. Those gangs partake in
many illegal acts, including human trafficking. In
that regard, we hope that the Council will take into
consideration the need to confront the perpetrators of
those and other illegal acts, in order to safeguard the
wealth of the Libyan people.

Turning to the frozen Libyan assets, according
to resolution 1970 (2011), the Council called upon all
Member States to freeze Libyan financial assets and
other economic resources in their territories without
delay in order to protect the interests of the Libyan
people. The freeze on Libyan assets was lifted under
resolution 2009 (2011), especially those relating to the
Libyan Central Bank. However, the freeze continues to
be imposed on a number of other entities, including the
Libyan Investment Authority, which faces huge losses
amounting to almost $1 billion annually. That is due to
its inability to issue instructions to the entities keeping
the books of those frozen accounts so that they might
manage assets adequately.

When it was first introduced, the regime was not
meant to punish Libya. Rather, it was a preventive
measure to protect the assets against dissipation during
the revolution and during the interim period after the
fall of the previous regime. The freeze is leading to
negative repercussions that hurt the interests of the
Libyan people. I would like refer to the letter sent by
Libya's Ambassador to the President of the Council
(S/2016/275). We hope that the Council will take
expeditious measures to amend resolutions 1970 (2011),
1973 (2011) and 2009 (2011) in order to allow for the
Libyan Investment Authority to openly participate in
managing funds in those frozen accounts and prevent
further losses of Libyan assets. In that connection, the
Libyan authorities are not calling for the lifting of the
freeze on any assets. Rather, we ask for a resolution
that includes an article that allows moving the money
deposited in frozen accounts, investing that money and
opening and closing accounts so that we can protect the
value of the assets and increase the returns while they
are frozen.

The meeting rose at 3.40pm.
