Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I would first like to thank
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Coordinator of United Nations
Operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his very
detailed briefing, based on the Secretary-General's
report on the activities of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his enlightening
report.

My delegation takes this opportunity to welcome
and support the outstanding efforts made by the
international community to implement the Peace
Accords in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the
encouraging results obtained in implementing the
Dayton Accords despite the many difficulties that have
been encountered. I would like to recall that the Dayton
Accords not only ended the war, but they established a
Viable constitutional framework. They are the pillar on
which a multi-ethnic, democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina must be built. I call upon the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and all other parties
involved to become more active in implementing the
Peace Accords.

In the political area, my delegation welcomes the
commendable efforts made in resolving the difficult
problems of ethnic reconciliation, establishing
democratic institutions and establishing the rule of law
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is now more urgent than
ever that the international community mobilize all
efforts to guarantee the political rights of the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We call upon all the inhabitants of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to commit themselves fully and work
together to build a democratic, multi-ethnic society in
which ultra-nationalist leaders will be marginalized.

Regarding the economy, my delegation believes
that institutional reform should be accompanied by
economic restructuring that enables Bosnia and
Herzegovina to become self-reliant. The establishment
and training of a border police force will make it
possible to increase State revenue.

Economic development is one of the best
guarantees of peace. My delegation calls upon the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue to
advance macroeconomic reforms and to cooperate with
the international financial organizations in order to
integrate the country into the Euro-Atlantic structures.

The establishment of an effective judicial system
that can mete out sound justice to the citizenry is of
great interest to my delegation. We welcome and
encourage the efforts made in reforming the judicial
system and the human rights institutions. The
continued presence of war criminals in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is surely a serious obstacle to peace and
inter-ethnic reconciliation. This is why we call upon
the States and the entities to do everything possible to
track down and turn over all indictees to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia.

In the humanitarian area, my delegation notes
with satisfaction the return of displaced persons and
refugees. This trend should be encouraged. All useful
measures should be taken to assist returnees whose
living conditions are precarious. Acts of violence
against minorities should be severely punished. The
training and establishment of a local, multi-ethnic and
impartial police force by UNMIBH, which we
welcome, should make it possible to put an end to such
misdeeds.
In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its support
for the enormous efforts made by UNMIBH in
implementing the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in the country. For us, the stabilizing role played
by UNMIBH is vital for peace-building in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. This is why we support the extension of
the UNMIBH mandate for a period of 12 months.

