Mr. Bale (Congo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to express my delegation's deeep
appreciation at seeing United States Secretary of State
John Kerry presiding over this ministerial meeting of
the Council. His presence among us today demonstrates
the great interest of the United States in the tragic
situation prevailing in the eastern Democratic Republic
of Congo, which is a threat to international peace and
security throughout the Great Lakes region. The report
of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2013/387), published barely one
month ago on 28 June, remains fully relevant in light of
the latest developments in that neighbouring country.
The resurgence of fighting clearly demonstrates
the volatility of the situation and the scale of the
challenges to be overcome, not only with regard to the
implementation of the Framework, but also given the
humanitarian tragedy and the various forms of violence
it encompasses, especially against civilians, including
the women and children who seem to be the victims of
choice. My country, which strongly condemns all those
forms of violence, believes that every effort should be
made to put an end to the suffering of the people of the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As tragic as it is, the deterioration of the situation
cannot be allowed to shake the oft-reiterated will of
our Heads of State, who have undertaken to support
the initiative of the Secretary-General through their
commitment to the Framework agreement and, in
a common spirit, have striven to meet the peace and
security challenge in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Great Lakes region in general. By
taking ownership of that important instrument, they
have played their rightful role in seeking to save that
brotherly country from its tragic fate of destabilization
and recurrent wars, which are impeding its progress
towards development. This is demonstrated by the
ongoing deployment of troops to the Force Intervention
Brigade; the domestic measures taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as announced by its Minister for Foreign Affairs in
this Chamber, in accordance with its obligations;
and the active participation of their respective high
representatives in the technical support committee,
which has already held two meetings in Nairobi in the
space ofa month.

The mini-summit, held on 24 March in Oyo in the
Republic of Congo, initiated by President Denis Sassou
Nguesso and attended by President Joseph Kabila
Kabange of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
President Paul Kagame of Rwanda and President Yoweri
Kaguta Museveni of Uganda is therefore rightly seen by
the Secretary-General as being among the diplomatic
and political initiatives inspired by the Framework
Agreement. It was held only one month after the
signing of the Framework agreement, on 24 February in
Addis Ababa, and is, in our view, a useful contribution
to the implementation of that important instrument and
a catalyst for building confidence among the parties
concerned. The same is true of the various consultations
that have taken place with its authors. It is clear that
the implementation of any agreement, even one signed
in good faith, can prosper only in a climate of mutual
trust.

The recent consultations with President Kabila
Kabange, held in Brazzaville on 19 July, must be seen
in that context. On that occasion, President Sassou
Nguesso reaffirmed his willingness to contribute to all
approaches and support all efforts to find lasting peace
in that fraternal country.

Allow me to associate the commitment made
by of our Heads of State with the decisive role of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson, whose actions are
a real driver for the implementation of the Framework
agreement. I wish particularly to underscore my
country's great interest in the regular consultations
that she is organizing with signatory countries and
their representatives in New York. This approach
is consistent with our vision of the partnership that
the United Nations must develop with the countries
of the region, building on the efforts and initiatives
undertaken at the regional and subregional levels. The
Congo supports such action and urges the countries of
the region and the international community as a whole
to support them in the implementation of the road map.

In the same vein, my country's Government calls on
the Council to work to effectively implement all of the
provisions of resolution 2098 (2013), while encouraging
the parties concerned to focus, to the extent possible,
on dialogue.

Here we call for strict compliance by all with
the provisions of the Framework agreement. That
mechanism represents an undeniable opportunity
for peace and stability, not only for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo but for the Great Lakes region
as a whole. As we belong to the same geographical area
and must focus all of our efforts on common economic
and social development, we have no other choice.

In order for the Framework agreement's integrated
peace, security and development approach to fulfil its
promise, each and every stakeholder - signatories,
guarantors and members of the international
community - must uphold their commitments so that
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region can finally vanquish the demons of
chronic instability and recurring war, so that their long-
suffering inhabitants can finally hope for a more secure
and prosperous future.
