The President: In accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, the
Council will now hold a second meeting to elect one
member of the International Court of Justice, by further
ballots for the one seat remaining to be filled.

May I take that the Council is now ready to proceed
to the vote?

It is so decided.

The Council will now proceed to a new ballot. I
request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

At the invitation ofthe President, Ms. Melikbekyan
(Russian Federation) and Mr. Bondiak (Ukraine)
acted as tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the names of the one
candidate for whom they wish to vote. I would remind
members of the Council that only those candidates
whose names appear on the ballot are eligible for
election, and that any ballot paper containing votes for
more than one name will be considered invalid.

>l<>i<>l<


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

***


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members that
in accordance with the established practice, the ballots
will not be counted until it has been verified that the
ballot papers in the General Assembly have also been
collected. The Council will remain in session pending
the receipt of that information.

***


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:
Number of ballot papers: 15

Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Dalveer Bhandari 6
Mr. Christopher Greenwood 9

Mr. Christopher Greenwood has accordingly
received the required majority of votes in the Security
Council. I have communicated the result of the voting
to the President of the General Assembly in writing.

I should like to inform the members of the Council
that I have just received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
45th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing the one
remaining member of the International Court of
Justice, Mr. Dalveer Bhandari obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the required
absolute majority of votes both in the Council and in
the General Assembly.

As no candidate has received the required absolute
majority of votes in both the Council and the General
Assembly, in accordance with Article 11 of the Statute
of the Court, the Council will proceed to hold a third
meeting to elect one candidate by further ballots for the
one seat remaining to be filled.

Accordingly, I shall adjourn the current meeting of
the Security Council. Following consultations with the
President of the General Assembly, it has been agreed
to hold the third meeting on the afternoon of Monday,
13 November.

The meeting rose at 6.50 pm.

