Mr. Oshima (Japan): My delegation appreciates
your presence, Sir, in the Security Council today to
preside over this important debate. Your initiative to
consider the Security Council's role in humanitarian
crises, with a focus on security sector issues, is
welcome. It is well-timed and thought-provoking.

In your note for this debate, you suggested three
major issues - the rule of law, security sector reform,
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) - as requiring special attention in achieving
sustainable peace in a post-conflict situation. We agree
with your view. When a conflict triggers a serious
humanitarian crisis, such as refugee flows and internal
displacement, the first response called for from
national and international actors is to provide
protection and emergency humanitarian relief to the
people affected. In a situation in which law and order
have broken down, which is often the case in war
situations, that becomes a difficult and often risky
undertaking. We are aware and we salute the fact that
many humanitarians do that job with extraordinary
dedication and courage.

In the continuum from conflict to post-conflict
situations, once a crisis is contained and peace
achieved, the next response called for is taking the
right measures to help consolidate the peace and, in so
doing, preventing a return to conflict. If the rule of law
is quickly re-established in a post-conflict society in
the reconstruction phase, the risk of a return to conflict
will be much reduced. Therefore, where United
Nations peace operations are deployed, it is important
to ensure that the rule of law and other security-related
perspectives be adequately incorporated into the
mission's mandate.

In establishing the rule of law under United
Nations peace operations, security sector reform,
encompassing a wide range of State and local public
security institutions and organizations, becomes an
important task. Those agencies may include the
military, the police, the judiciary, the penal system and
other public administrative bodies in charge of
security. Often, such reform becomes a highly sensitive
undertaking in terms of traditions, values and
objectives. In such circumstances, the role which a
United Nations peace operation is capable of playing
and should play in security sector reform must be most
carefully considered in the formulation of its mandate.

We believe that the United Nations role in
security sector reform should be tailored to a given
specific situation and discussed on a case-by-case basis.
For example, the United Nations has been reluctant to get
involved in the area of military assistance, and in our
view rightly so, leaving that aspect to bilateral
arrangements. Some have argued, however, that the
United Nations should play a certain role in military
reform, in view of security sector reform's relation to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and the
important role played by national armies in the security
sector. That issue requires further discussion.

In considering security sector reform, it is also
important to recognize the fact that significant
contributions are often made through bilateral
assistance and by the United Nations and other
international organizations, such as the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank. In those
situations, the role of the Secretary-General's special
representative should be enhanced to ensure the overall
effective coordination of efforts in a manner that
respects those contributions as well.

The rule of law and security sector reform are
closely related to DDR. One of the challenges for DDR
is to disarm illegal armed groups and to eliminate the
security threats posed by them. From our own
experience of playing a leading role in DDR in
Afghanistan, we believe that the critical part in the
process lies in convincing military commanders that
the peace process is irreversible and that there is no
other way than to participate in the political process
through elections. At the same time, combatants need
to be assured that they will be protected by law from
unlawful or unfair retribution. In their reintegration
into civilian life, former combatants should be legally
protected against unfair treatment.

It is clear that those three aspects - the rule of law,

security sector reform and DDR - are closely interlinked
and pose major challenges to United Nations peace
operations. In the planning of a United Nations peace
operation, therefore, adequate consideration must be
given to the United Nations role in providing
appropriate assistance in those three areas and their
relationship to other components, such as post-conflict
reconstruction and development. When the proposed
peacebuilding commission is established, it is expected
that those issues, among others, will be fully and
productively discussed.

The successful implementation of security
assistance for the rule of law, security sector reform
and DDR requires the deployment of a broad range of
civilian experts, including judges, prosecutors and
lawyers, as well as civilian police and military
advisers. For civilian police and military advisers, the
United Nations has been developing a system for quick
deployment, largely following recommendations in the
Brahimi report. That is to be commended.

On the other hand, the timely deployment of legal
and other civilian experts remains somewhat
problematic, due in part to difficulties in finding
qualified experts and in part to the time-consuming
recruitment process now in place. We understand that,
in order to improve the process, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has been promoting a roster
system, and we urge that it be fully developed. At the
same time, we wish to request the Secretariat to further
improve the recruitment process so as to facilitate the
timely appointment and deployment of qualified
individuals. We suggest that the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations consider, among other
options, the possibility of recruiting and dispatching
civilian experts, who would work closely with civilian
police and the military, following the same formula as
applied to the latter.

Finally, we wish to highlight one important piece of
practical advice that you, Sir, have noted in the discussion
paper, and that is the need to establish best practices.

Security concerns people's daily lives. In any
consideration of security sector assistance, one must
bear in mind the need to ensure that the local people do
not feel that alien laws and systems are being imposed
upon them. The United Nations should offer local
leaders and people several options and allow them to
select the most suitable. It is from that point of view
that the United Nations should develop best practices,
based on lessons learned through the various activities
it has conducted to date.

In concluding, let me assure the Council that
Japan will continue its active cooperation in the three
key pillar areas, including assistance in training and the
dispatching of qualified experts.

