Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative J an Kubis for his comprehensive briefing
to the Council today. His dynamic leadership and the
effective role of United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) continue to contribute
to stabilization in Afghanistan. We also welcome
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, to the Council and deeply appreciate his
statement as well as the perspective he has shared with
us.

Afghanistan stands at the threshold of a
consequential year. The people of Afghanistan will be
taking important steps in the coming months to shape
their destiny. We wish our Afghan brothers and sisters
success as they negotiate difficult political, security
and economic transitions.

The political transition requires a smooth electoral
process and inclusive, integrative reconciliation.
Timely, inclusive, transparent and credible elections
will have a salutary impact on efforts for peace and
stability. The Afghan Government is making extensive
preparations for the elections. Security challenges to
the electoral process ought to be addressed in the early
stages of planning, as underlined by the Secretary-
General.

Simultaneously, an inclusive, Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process must
take off and succeed. A political settlement is central
to that process. We have called on all stakeholders to
seize this opportunity and support the peace efforts.
That is imperative to reverse the destructive cycle of
conflict. For its part, Pakistan will not choose sides,
play favourites or interfere in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan, nor should any other State. The people
of Afghanistan must have the necessary strategic and
political space to make their own decisions.

Pakistan will continue to do all it can to help
Afghanistan sustain the reconciliation process. At the
request of the Afghan leadership, Pakistan appealed
to the Taliban to enter into dialogue with the Afghan
Government. We have released Taliban prisoners,
including Mullah Abdullah Ghani Baradar, and
facilitated his dialogue with the High Peace Council.
Our leadership at the highest level remains engaged with
that Council, which is making commendable efforts for
peace under the leadership of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani.

We feel that the potential of the Doha process or a
similar process must be explored to accelerate the pace
of reconciliation and political settlement.

The drawdown of NATO-International Security
Assistance Forces in Afghanistan should not lead to
a security vacuum. It is vital that arrangements be in
place beyond 2014 to bolster stability in Afghanistan
and its neighbourhood. The Afghan security forces
and institutions are gaining increased capacities and
capabilities, as the Secretary-General has noted in
his report (S/2013/721). The transformation of a war
economy to a peacetime economy will require greater
reliance on strong domestic growth and resources.
The Secretary-General's report indicates a slowdown
in economic growth because of the uncertainty
surrounding the political and security transitions. That
can be turned around by the active involvement and
continued assistance of the international community
for Afghanistan's reconstruction and economic
development. That is important not just for economic
viability but political stability.

Pakistan, despite its own resource crunch, is
contributing to Afghanistan's economic reconstruction.
During his recent visit to Kabul, Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif announced the enhancement of our assistance
for reconstruction and socioeconomic development in
Afghanistan, from $385 million to $500 million.

The peoples of Pakistan and Afghanistan are bound
by strong bonds of geography, history and kinship.
Those bonds will never be atrophied or severed. A
peaceful, stable, united and prosperous Afghanistan
is in Pakistan's interests. During his recent visit to
Kabul, Prime Minister Sharif said "your stability is our
stability".

In developing its relations with Afghanistan,
Pakistan is focused on three interlocking dimensions,
namely, the Afghan peace and reconciliation process;
a strong, comprehensive bilateral relationship with
an emphasis on trade and economic partnership; and
regional economic cooperation.

We appreciate the Secretary-General's positive
evaluation of the constructive engagement between
Pakistan and Afghanistan on economic cooperation,
security issues and the peace process. Today
Mr. Kubis mentioned the positive momentum in
Pakistan-Afghanistan relations to build trust and foster
cooperation. I welcome his remarks.

Prime Minister Sharifis reaching out to the Afghan
leadership in pursuit of his vision for a peaceful and
prosperous neighbourhood. In their three meetings - in
Islamabad, London and Kabul - Prime Minister Sharif
and President Hamid Karzai resolved to draft a strategic
partnership, address common challenges of extremism
and terrorism, and work for economic development that
benefits the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan, as
well as the entire region. Our two countries have agreed
to enhance connectivity, including through a motorway
between Peshawar and Kabul and rail links between
Peshawar and J alalabad and Chaman and Spin Boldak.
We are planning for a hydropower project on the Kunar
River. We are also confident that our two countries
will be able to enhance bilateral trade to reach up to
$5 billion by 2015.

We have assured Afghanistan of optimum utilization
of the Afghanistan-Pakistan transit trade agreement
so as to facilitate its access to foreign markets through
Pakistani seaports and land routes. People-to-people
contacts have also increased. This year, another 600
Afghan students joined thousands of others who were
already pursuing higher education studies in Pakistan.

On the regional plane, we also agreed to accelerate
transregional projects, including the Central Asia-
South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project,
known as CASA-1000, and the gas pipeline involving
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India, known
as TAPI.

The international community, led by the United
Nations and the Afghan Government, should work to
create conducive conditions for the early return and
sustainable reintegration of over 3 million registered
and undocumented Afghan refugees still in Pakistan.
Pakistan has renewed their stay and legal status until
the end of 2015. Pakistan will not be able to absorb
fresh inflows of refugees.

The report of the Secretary-General refers to record
levels of poppy cultivation and opium production in
Afghanistan. Illicit drugs production and trafficking
fuels instability and ruins health and security
conditions, involving hundreds of millions of lives,
as Mr. Kubis noted in his briefing today. Pakistan is
directly affected by the narcotics trade. We have been
taking part in regional efforts in that regard and hope
that the Afghan Government will be able to eliminate
poppy cultivation with the support of regional and
international organizations.

It is incumbent on us to secure the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border through constant vigilance,
effective management and real-time communication.
Militants should not be allowed to trigger rounds of
escalating tension by pitting border security forces
against each other. More importantly, we should
have regular contacts between the armed forces and
intelligence agencies of the two countries so as to
prevent periodic volatility along the border.

The United Nations role in supporting the Afghan
people and Government will be crucial in the post-2014
period. We agree with the Secretary-General that the
United Nations should concentrate on good offices, the
support of Afghan-led political processes and coherent
approaches to equitable and sustainable development.

Let me conclude by quoting Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif, who, during his recent visit to Kabul, said,

"Pakistan has a vital stake in Afghanistan's success
and in its journey to peace and development, and I
reassure you that Pakistan will stand by and support
the Afghan people every step of the way".

