Ms. Plepyte (Lithuania): Allow me to start by
commending the United Kingdom for convening this
exceptionally important open debate. My delegation
also thanks the Secretary-General and the briefers for
their insightful presentations.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union, as
well as the statement delivered by the representative of
Turkey behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation.

Lithuania fully shares and acknowledges the
importance of the conceptual shift from conflict
management to conflict prevention, advocated so
tirelessly by Secretary-General Guterres. We strongly
welcome and support the focus of the Secretary-
General on mediation. Alongside other efforts,
mediation is an important tool for defusing conflicts
or, better still, preventing them from happening.
Every mediation success story means fewer conflicts,
less human suffering and more possibilities for
development. In that regard, we believe it is crucially
important to ensure continued and stable funding for
all mediation-related efforts.

Far too often, mediation and peace processes remain
male-dominated. While women are disproportionately
affected by conflict, their critical role in negotiating,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in their communities
is often overlooked. Equal and effective participation
and the full involvement of women at all levels, all
stages and in all aspects of conflict prevention and the
peaceful settlement of disputes needs to be ensured.
Women should be part of the process as mediators and
as peace negotiators.

We strongly support the Secretary-General in his
efforts to enlarge the pool of high-level envoys and
senior mediators with a focus on women mediators. In
turn, countries should offer more women candidates
for the United Nations mediation roster. We must
also acknowledge that both mediation and dialogue
facilitation need to be approached as a professional
activity requiring specialized knowledge, expertise and
operational guidance.

Faced with the emergence of new crises and the
persistence of protracted conflicts, international
and regional organizations must strengthen their
capabilities for effective mediation and dialogue
facilitation. The Security Council should play its role
in providing political support to such efforts. Visits by
the Council are critical in signalling political support
for a mediation effort.

Regional organizations can be particularly helpful
in the early identification of potential crises and
mediation. The African Union, the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the Council of Europe, inter alia, are offering their
mediation and good offices to that effect. Regional
organizations are well placed to develop preventive
capacities. The efforts of subregional organizations
in Africa and elsewhere aimed at conflict prevention
offer a promising alternative for the future. We also
encourage regional and subregional organizations to
continue to appoint women as mediators and members
of mediation teams.

Mediation could play a role in all stages of the
conflict cycle, including conflict resolution. Where
agreements need to be implemented, formal mediation
efforts may need to continue to help resolve possible
disputes that may arise from the implementation itself.
That is critical so as to avoid a breakdown or relapse
into violent conflict. Therefore, we should not forget
to engage local communities in third party-supported
dialogue processes in order to facilitate implementation
processes and peacefully address any additional issues
that may emerge.

Sustained political, financial and administrative
support must be guaranteed for all mediation processes,
and all States parties to a conflict must be engaged
in order to reach a settlement. In the absence of such
political will, the possibilities for meaningful mediation
and dialogue facilitation are very limited.

