Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join other in
expressing our sympathy to all those who suffered from
the devastating hurricanes here in the United States, in
the Carolinas, as well as in the Philippines and China.

We thank the United States delegation for having
convened today's meeting and Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for her valuable update. We
are also glad to see our colleagues from South Korea
and Japan at this table.

Since this is the first public meeting this year on
the issue, I would like to briefly express my country's
position regarding the developments taking place on
the Korean peninsula.

Unlike in the past, this year there have been many
positive and historic events that demonstrate the
relevance of the chosen path of political and diplomatic
efforts. We can say that this is a perfect example of the
spirit of creating and strengthening confidence-building
measures, which are the optimal and most pragmatic
way of resolving bilateral and multilateral issues.

This is exactly what my President called for at the
January high-level thematic briefing of the Security
Council on non-proliferation and confidence-building
measures (see S/PV.8160). He believes that this is an
essential element in maintaining the global security
architecture and strengthening peace. He has always
been convinced that all conflicts and problematic
issues related to weapons of mass destruction should be
resolved through confidence-building and trust.

I would recall that President Nursultan Nazarbayev
also stressed the need to resolve the issue of North
Korea's nuclear programme by restoring these missing
elements, especially among the United States, Russia
and China. We would not like to see the contrary occur,
which could send the wrong signal.

Unity in the Council must be preserved and
used to achieve the overarching task at hand: the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. Kazakhstan
supports the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), which is
called upon to achieve this task by exclusively peaceful
and political means. We acknowledge that sanctions
in this regard are only interim measures until tangible
steps on verified denuclearization have been taken on
the ground in North Korea.

We recognize that the workload of the Group of
Experts of the 1718 Committee is of the broadest scope
and also the most complex. It is entirely permissible
for the content and conclusions of the Panel's report
to, at the same time, cause some controversy and
disagreements among the Member States. We underline
in this regard that it is not only important but imperative
to ensure full proof and the veracity of all the facts
and evidence as well as statistical data. This is crucial
in order to elaborate proper recommendations and
further measures.

As for the controversial points that have caused
disagreements among some members of the Council,
we hope that a speedy settlement can be reached on
the basis of mutual respect and patience. Only then we
can seek a common understanding and a pragmatic and
comprehensive solution.

Today the situation on the Korean peninsula is
much better and more favourable than ever before
and prompts us to focus more on further developing
goodwill, openness and mutual concessions.

Kazakhstan, which has practical personal experience
in disarmament, understands how complex the process
of denuclearization is. We therefore hope that the
parties will be able to remain patient, redouble their
determination and political will, and bring to bear
extraordinary diplomatic skills and resources in order
to successfully move towards achieving a denuclearized
Korean peninsula.

We are firmly committed to the cause of nuclear
disarmament and are ready to contribute in the most
constructive way to all possible collective efforts in
this direction.

