Mr. Ham Sang Wook (Republic of Korea): I would
like to first commend the Polish presidency's timely
initiative to convene today's open debate on the critical
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

The war in Syria has now entered its eighth bloody
year. To date, more than 500,000 people have lost their
lives, including a disproportionate number of civilians.
And, tragically, I am afraid that Syria is just one of
the many countries where civilians are being killed in
armed conflicts.

At the same time, forced displacement of civilians
in armed conflict is at its highest levels in decades,
with the number of refugees and internally displaced
people - over 65.6 million - now higher than ever
since the Second World War. Armed conflict also
disproportionately affects vulnerable groups, such as
women and children, and compounds their suffering.
Even worse, sexual violence continues to be employed as
a tactic of war and terrorism against those populations.
Under that grim backdrop, the Republic of Korea
supports today's timely initiative to draw renewed
attention to the essential issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would like to stress the
following three points.

First, to protect civilians from conflicts, we need
to focus on prevention. As the Secretary-General
has highlighted, prevention is the paradigm-shifting
approach that closes the gap between commitment
and reality. That supports the direction commonly
underscored by the reviews on peace operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the women and peace
and security agenda. In that sense, Iurge the Secretary-
General to employ his powers under Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations to bring imminent
or unfolding large-scale attacks on civilians to the
attention of the Security Council. I urge the Council
to respond in unity to such calls from the Secretary-
General to save lives.

Secondly, we must ensure accountability for the
crimes being carried out against civilians in clear
violation of international law. Impunity must be
made unacceptable in each and every corner of the
world. Indeed, it is imperative that violators be held
accountable for their crimes through prosecution in
national and international criminal justice systems,
including the International Criminal Court. Even
in cases where justice systems are not yet available,
we need to collectively prepare for the emergence of
justice and accountability in future. In that regard, the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for the Syrian Arab Republic serves as a good example.

Thirdly, we must make the most of existing
United Nations peacekeeping missions to enhance
the effectiveness of efforts to protect civilians on the
ground. In resolution 1894 (2009), the Security Council
stressed that mandated protection activities must be
given priority in the use of available capacity and
resources. However, we must also acknowledge that
United Nations peacekeeping missions cannot fulfil
that mandate in the face of the growing number and
complexity of challenges unless they are supported
by appropriately strengthened capacities. As such, we
should continue to explore ways to qualitatively enhance
such capacities by ensuring that peacekeeping missions
are better equipped with essential technologies, such as
unmanned aerial vehicles, Global Positioning System
equipment and other advancements, to facilitate
civilian protection.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
Republic of Korea's commitment to working with other
Member States with a View to protecting vulnerable
people from suffering in armed conflicts.

