The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

I wish to begin by expressing my country's
gratitude to Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his
inspired words at the beginning of this meeting. I
should also like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Kenzo Oshima, for his presentation of
the third report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2002/1300). In addition, I should like to
thank the Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Angelo Gnaedinger,
for his very valuable contribution to this debate.
Moreover, my delegation welcomes the participation of
delegations from countries that are not Security
Council members, whose ideas and recommendations
will help to guide the Council's work and will
contribute to the formulation of the statement that will
be issued later as an outcome of this debate.

The nature of wars has changed dramatically in
the past century, particularly in the past decade. In the
First World War, 5 per cent of victims were civilians; in
the Second World War, that figure reached 50 per cent;
and in the conflicts of the final decade of the twentieth
century, it exceeded 90 per cent.

We are living during not only a terrible
humanitarian crisis, but a crisis in the global
humanitarian legal regime. Armed conflicts have
worsened. Today, terrorism has taken that worsening to
its maximum - terrorist acts are brutal and
unbelievably cruel.

We are here at the United Nations to preserve
universal public assets: the dignity of each and every
human being, the right to life and the right to live
without fear. These are public assets that can be
preserved only by all of us working together in
cooperation. That is the dimension of our shared
responsibility. Here we see the relevance of the United
Nations and understand the inescapable need to
strengthen it so that it is able properly to deal with such
new threats.

New wars and terrorism make it clear that the
problem is no longer that crimes are being committed
against civilians during armed conflict, but that - and
this is even worse - current armed conflicts
deliberately target unarmed civilians, civilian
installations and civilian means of transportation. The
victims are defenceless civilians.

When the first report on this subject was
presented to the Council we had not formulated clear
ideas about it. But 8 September 1999 was very different
from 11 September 2001. In that earlier year, other
reports commissioned by the Secretary-General, such
as those dealing with the fall of Srebrenica and the
chilling genocide in Rwanda, made it abundantly clear
that civilians were the victims of terrible atrocity.
Those two terrible tragedies should have been
sufficient to remind us once and for all that great
humanitarian tragedies can be avoided, or at least made
less severe, if we learn from our mistakes and
omissions.

Indeed, the Security Council has appropriate tools
to protect civilians in armed conflict, as provided for in
Chapters VI and VII of the Charter, as well as in
various resolutions adopted in recent years on, inter
alia, conflict prevention, children in armed conflict, the
illicit trade in small arms and the fight against
terrorism. I would like today to highlight in particular
resolution 1325 (2000), in which the Council focused
on the protection of women and the role that women
play in conflict prevention and peacekeeping.

Colombia agrees with the comments of the
Secretary-General in the section of his report
(S/2002/ 1300) entitled "Rule of law, justice and
reconciliation", that the restoration of the rule of law is
fundamental to a country's capacity to emerge from a
period of conflict into a sustainable peace and that,
furthermore, it is necessary to strengthen its institutions
for security and justice and to protect the fundamental
rights and freedoms of its people.

We also agree with the Secretary-General's
comments that there can be no long-term solution to
security problems until a State has a national army and
a police force that are well trained, well equipped,
fairly paid and operating within a framework of a fully
functional criminal justice system.

Colombia associates itself with those ideas
because they reflect the elements that underlie the
democratic security policy advanced by President
Alvaro Uribe Velez. It is a comprehensive policy
whose strategies are designed to salvage and
consolidate the democratic content of the concept of
security, to re-establish public order and to promote
economic and social development. The policy is also
designed to ensure the presence of the State in every
part of national territory, to guarantee democratic
debate and to provide the security needed by
individuals for their own personal development and the
full exercise their fundamental rights.

The clear determination of the national
Government to achieve these objectives has had a truly
encouraging effect. Colombians today appear more
willing to play their civic role in the re-establishment
of national security and to associate themselves with
the State in restoring the rule of law. Our objective is to
continue demonstrating these results in the conviction
that the support of society as a whole is the best way of
confronting those isolated groups that have been trying
to destabilize our country for decades.

The spilling over of certain domestic conflicts, or
the internationalization of such conflicts as a result of
their association with criminal activities, shows us that
a national problem cannot always be overcome or
resolved at the strictly national level. It is necessary to
approach such conflicts in the context of shared
responsibility if we are to deal with related phenomena
such as the worldwide problem of illicit drugs. This is
particularly true at a time of terrorism, which
constitutes a global threat to the community of
democratic nations.

I should like, therefore, to reflect briefly on one
of the important elements that the Secretary-General
has reported as having emerged recently in connection
with the protection of civilians: the commercial
exploitation and illegal financing of both conflicts and
terrorism. Colombia believes that three activities form
part of this commercial exploitation and illegal
financing that we must learn about and combat.

The first is the prosperous criminal industry of
illegal drugs in all of its stages, which is much more
profitable than the trade in blood diamonds and other
resources that fuel armed conflicts. The second activity
is the growing kidnapping industry, which seeks large
ransoms in money or property and is sometimes used
as a weapon of political blackmail - a substitute for
the lack of popular support for such violent groups.
The third is the criminal alternative to kidnapping: the
widespread use of extortion.

All of these activities target defenceless civilians.
In many cases, they encourage attacks against the vital
infrastructure of a country, such as water supply
systems, power lines, bridges and even sites such as
churches and cultural centres that have traditionally
been left alone. Furthermore, they sow destruction,
death and anguish and cause damage that is either
irreparable or very costly, thus negatively affecting the
precarious well-being of millions of civilians. The risks
are greater for civilians than for those who are trained
to protect them.

We the people of the United Nations have a great
challenge before us. This noble institution was created,
among other reasons, "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war and to reaffirm faith in
fundamental human rights, in the dignify and worth of
the human person".

In this mission, we have made undeniable
achievements. Today there is an entire culture of
human rights and respect for life, which we must now
defend against new forms of violence and terrorism.
We will make every sacrifice and spare no effort in
continuing to proclaim and safeguard these universal
public assets.

In this commitment, the global anti-terrorist legal
regime, and in particular resolution 1373 (2001), must
be swiftly, fully and rigorously complied with. Thus
the certainties that crumbled on 11 September will
begin to reassert themselves. Barbarity cannot be
allowed to impose the cruelty of its methods.

Our commitment to combat all forms of barbarity
must prevail. Our ideals must prevail also, so that our
work is not so much protecting civilians in armed
conflict, but rather preventing, in a timely way, intra-
State and inter-State armed conflicts. We must work
relentlessly in our campaign to eradicate the scourge of
terrorism.

Colombia agrees with the idea that there is a
shared responsibility in the lofty task of protecting
human dignity. It is a responsibility that our country
assumes with full determination.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Denmark. I invite her to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

