Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation
appreciates the convening of this meeting, which
affords us another opportunity to review developments
in Kosovo as well as the important work being carried
out by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) in the implementation of resolution 1244
(1999).

We thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi
Annabi for his useful briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his latest report on the work of UNMIK
and on the challenges that remain. We acknowledge the
presence of the Foreign Minister of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and take note of the statement
he has just made to the Council.

My delegation welcomes the appointment of Mr.
Hans Haekkerup as the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Kosovo and Head of UNMIK. We
extend our best wishes to Mr. Haekkerup on his
appointment and new assignment. Given his leadership
skills and experience, we have every confidence that he
will lead UNMIK effectively and efficiently, building
upon the successive achievements that the Mission has
made thus far in implementing its mandate. As a
contributor to the UNMIK police force and to some
modest reconstruction efforts in Kosovo, Malaysia
pledges its full support and cooperation to the new
Special Representative, as we did with respect to his
predecessor, Mr. Bernard Kouchner.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express its profound appreciation and gratitude to Mr.
Kouchner. With his dynamic leadership and energetic
efforts, Mr. Kouchner has successfully led UNMIK in
dealing with the disastrous consequences of the recent
war and the ethnic repression and cleansing that
preceded it. He has turned those enormous challenges
into new possibilities, thereby providing new hopes
and aspirations for the people of Kosovo and building
concrete foundations for their freedom and self-
government within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999).

My delegation is gratified that in the first year
and a half of its deployment, UNMIK has already made
significant progress in the core areas of its mandate -
providing humanitarian assistance in the immediate
aftermath of the conflict, the rebuilding and
consolidation of sectoral facilities, the establishment of
the provisional institutions for democratic and
autonomous self-government and laying the foundation
of long-term development and reconstruction for
Kosovo.

The municipal elections of 20 October were a
remarkable success and the culmination of continuous
and strenuous efforts by UNMIK, in cooperation with
S/PVAZA')

 

KFOR and with the strong and sustained support of the
international community. We take note of the steps that
have been taken to implement the outcome of the
elections and to establish functioning municipal
assemblies. We urge all the leaders and people of
Kosovo to respect the outcome of the elections and to
cooperate with UNMIK in consolidating this
achievement. We are therefore concerned over the
refusal by Kosovo's Serbs to participate in the elected
assemblies in the municipalities of Mitrovica and
Strepce, as highlighted in the Secretary-General's
report.

Significantly, the strenuous efforts made by
UNMIK to engage the local population in the
establishment of substantial autonomy and self-
governance in Kosovo have produced tangible results.
The Joint Interim Administrative Structure is being
further consolidated. The Mission is on the right path
towards giving Kosovars greater responsibility for self-
determination and self-governance, as well as the
opportunity to have trust and confidence in the
democratic process. We certainly look forward to
UNMIK organizing Kosovo-wide general elections and
note the careful planning and preparation under way
for them to be held in the near future.

The precarious security situation in Kosovo
remains a matter of serious concern to the international
community and a major challenge to both UNMIK and
the Kosovo Force. The continuation of violence, such
as the incident that took place in the town of Leposavic
last Sunday, is clearly unacceptable and should be
condemned. Extremism, regardless of its source,
should be rejected.

We fully support the continued efforts of the two
missions to tackle the security problems in Kosovo
effectively, as well as the efforts to contribute to
normalizing the situation in the ground safety zone.
Indeed, the tense situation in the ground safety zone is
worrisome. The Council pronounced itself on this
matter last Wednesday. At this critical juncture it is
imperative that all concerned exercise maximum
restraint, avoid any form of provocation and work
constructively towards finding a peaceful solution.

In Kosovo the resolution of inter-community
tensions is to a large extent linked to the overall issue
ofjustice and to the issues relating to missing persons
and the continued detention of Kosovars in Serbian
jails. We therefore reaffirm our full support for the
ongoing work of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in Kosovo and for
the efforts by UNMIK and Ambassador Henrik
Amneus to find an early solution to the twin problems
of detainees and missing persons. In this regard we
underline the importance of cooperation and concrete
actions by all concerned. We look forward to the full
cooperation of the new Government in Yugoslavia in
resolving this issue once and for all.

Finally, the international community should View
peace in Kosovo as a long-term process. The
international community has come a long way in
assisting the people of Kosovo to establish viable
foundations for peace, democracy and self-government.
The success of this enormous achievement and of the
enormous investment by the international community
will depend on continued strenuous efforts and
vigilance on the part of the international community
and on the cooperation of all the leaders and people of
Kosovo. Their commitment is crucial to ensuring that
the progress achieved thus far will not be reversed.

