Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
a real pleasure to have Carl Bildt with us this morning
and to hear his important analysis of the overall scene
in the Balkans and what we need to do in the stage
ahead. It is also a marvellous occasion to have with us
today the High Representative for the European Union
Common Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier
Solana. He has made a powerful statement of the
European Union's input into Balkans policy. It was,
after all, time that the European Union's role in the
Balkans should be comprehensively stated in the
Security Council, and it is good to see the
representative ofthe United States acknowledging that.

I have nothing whatsoever to add to what Mr.
Javier Solana has said. The United Kingdom obviously
supports his statement 100 per cent. But, Mr. President,
you asked us to be interactive this morning, and I want
to pick up one or two things from statements and
events from earlier in the day.

First of all, the fuss about the status of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia: it was a train wreck
waiting to happen. The current position of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in this Organization is wrong
and unsustainable. It is no good their continuing to ask
to speak at events like this, when the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia should be seeking to establish its status
in this Organization. I hope that many of us will try to
make that happen. The United Kingdom is for
universality in this Organization. It is not just a matter
of the unacceptable policies of Belgrade at this stage.
There is a status problem here that needs to be sorted
out.

Second is a point about security. Carl Bildt's
statement to us this morning amounts in some its
aspects to an early warning on Montenegro, on the
unsustainability of security in the Balkans while
Belgrade takes its present approach to regional matters
and on the persistence oftensions there anyway.

Not many people have referred this morning to
the important role of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in
Kosovo. Like Jamaica, we welcome the recent seizure
by KFOR of a large cache of weapons in the Drenica
valley. KFOR is leading the ongoing task of finding
and confiscating illegal weapons with increasing
success. These actions are actually fundamental to
undermining extremist minorities that prefer violence
and intimidation to tolerance and cooperation, and we
must keep them going.

There are times when the judicious use of force is
necessary to set the limits of brutal behaviour. That
includes last year and this in Kosovo.

Then there is the action of the Tribunal, which
this morning has been called "politicized". Well, when
political leaderships are involved in the brutality that
we see in the Balkans, of course there are going to be
political aspects, but when there is such substantial
evidence that those political leaderships have been
involved in crimes against humanity, difficult decisions
have to be made and those decisions should be
supported by this Council, which created the Tribunals
in question.

Thirdly, I just want to mention Bosnia. General
elections are coming up in Bosnia in November and it
is time- and I think Carl Bildt pointed to this by
expressing concern about the aid dependence of
Bosnia - for political leadership there to begin to take
a responsibility for the future of the people of Bosnia.
It would be wonderful if Bosnia could show an
example to Kosovo in this respect and take up again
the responsibility of political leadership that has been
so sadly lacking in this particular region.

I return again to the important role of the
European Union (EU) in this whole question. I think
that, with the greater regional cooperation that we are
seeing now in the Balkans and the dynamic
engagement ofthe EU, we can encourage all the people
of the Balkans to resolve their differences
pragmatically and peacefully. That is the way to go and
I hope this Council can support it.

