Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunals for
their reports.

With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the Tribunal's President
and Prosecutor Jallow have both described the
considerable efforts that were made in recent months
by the entire staff of the Tribunal in order to complete
the trials under way and to preserve evidence under
rule 71 bis, in the event that the three high-ranking
fugitives 4 Felicien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and
Augustin Bizimana - are arrested one day. France
appreciates the work accomplished.

The transfer of the Uwinkindi case to Rwanda, if
confirmed, will also be an important step forward.
Judicial procedures are continuing in France with
respect to the Laurent Bucyibaruta and Wenceslas
Munyeshyaka cases. We look forward to hosting the
Prosecutor in France next week to assess the status of
the procedures.

Nine accused, including three who are high-
ranking, remain fugitives. We welcome the efforts of
the Prosecutor to find and to arrest those fugitives. We
note that the Prosecutor expects increased cooperation
from Kenya in the Felicien Kabuga case.

More disturbing, the Prosecutor also mentioned
the presence of Protais Mpiranya in Zimbabwe. That is
a major concern. Everyone's cooperation with the
ICTR is required in accordance with Security Council
resolutions. Undoubtedly, we will find a way to remind
every one of their obligations.

Lastly, the ideas presented by Judge Khan with
regard to ensuring the Tribunal's legacy warrant our
full attention.
With respect to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), France
welcomes the progress that has been made, as no
fugitives remain at large following the arrest of Goran
Hadzic', on 20 July. That is a crucial milestone in the
work of the Tribunal and sends an important message
to all of those who, even today, continue to attempt to
obtain power or remain in power by planning and
ordering attacks against civilians. It also sends a
message to all of those who are being sought under an
international criminal warrant for the commission of
war crimes, crimes against humanity or the crime of
genocide who believe that they can rely on the
Council's inaction or lassitude to evade justice. It is
important that the Council maintain its determination
in that regard.

Given the complexity of the cases before the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, it is understandable, as the Tribunal's
President and Prosecutor have explained, that the
proceedings require time. There is therefore a need to
ensure that the Tribunal has all of the means necessary
to work effectively, and in particular that it can address
the challenge of staff retention.

We listened attentively to the sensible proposals
of Judge Meron, whom we commend on assuming his
new functions. The proposals, which Judge Khan
supports, are important as they are specific and easy to
implement, as is the case with the recommendation on
the recruitment of interns. We are ready to ensure
follow-up under the leadership of the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
the Ambassador of Portugal.

With respect to cooperation with the ICTY, a
question that arose when we listened to the
Prosecutor's report concerned the reasons as to why the
arrest of fugitives in Serbia has taken such a long time.
Another question concerns the escape of a criminal
who was imprisoned in Foca, and who has not yet been
caught.

Lastly, generally speaking, the lack of
cooperation of States in the region in tracking and
prosecuting mid-level criminals is disturbing. We must
stress that for the European Union, cooperation with
the ICTY and regional cooperation have always been,
and will remain, important considerations.

In its resolution 1966 (2010), adopted in
December 2010, the Security Council set a timeline for
the completion of the work of the two Tribunals and
established the Residual Mechanism to complete the
proceedings. We will soon elect the judges for the
Residual Mechanism. We would like to thank the
representatives of the Tribunals as well as the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat for their efforts made in
order to respect the timeline and to ensure the effective
operation of the Residual Mechanism.

