Mr. Longchamp (Haiti) (interpretation from French): My delegation wishes to express its gratification
at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the work of the Council
for the month of July. We have no doubt that your proven
diplomatic skills, your clear-sightedness and your savoir-
faire have ensured the success of the work of the Security
Council throughout this month.

The delegation of Haiti sincerely thanks the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), which the
Council, in resolution 940 (1994), entrusted with assisting
the Haitian Government in its task of sustaining the
secure and stable environment established during the
multinational phase, professionalizing the armed forces,
creating a civilian police force distinct from the army, and
organizing and holding the necessary municipal and
legislative elections needed to ensure the irreversible
establishment of democracy in Haiti.

Our delegation fully concurs with the views of the
Secretary-General to the effect that UNMIH personnel are
performing their tasks in an exemplary manner.

Thanks to UNMIH's assistance, political violence
has markedly decreased, along with the crime rate, which
at one time was strongly undermining the Haitian
people's confidence in the process of restoring
constitutional order to the country. These days, night life
has been restored, especially in Port-au-Prince, as
illustrated by the successful holding of a cultural festival
this past weekend, by the "Bouyon rasin" group, at the
Sylvio Cator stadium in Port-au-Prince, whose
performances ended only in the wee hours of the
morning. Of course, total security is a long way away, but
the general feeling of uncertainty is lifting.

Ironically, the unexpected collapse of Haiti' s security
forces has contributed to this situation. Therefore, in order
to ensure the security of key installations and within the
framework of professionalizing Haitian armed forces,
special training units have been set up. In addition to the
presidential guard, a ministerial security unit, a judiciary
security unit, a port security unit and an airport security
unit have been set up. Other bodies, such as the border
guards and the coast guard, will shortly become
operational.

 

Furthermore, the interim police force is performing its
task very satisfactorily. Three successive classes of the new
police academy have already been deployed in various
Haitian cities: Petion-Ville, Delmas, Port-au-Prince, Cap-
Haitien and Gona'i'ves. The current Government is confident
that on 7 February 1996, when power is transferred to the
new Government, Haiti will have the appropriate
infrastructure and personnel to ensure the security of the
population and of its institutions and to protect the
territorial integrity of the country.

Along with the creation of security institutions, the
Government is engaged in a vast reform of the penal and
judicial system. A new justice academy has been set up,
and retraining courses have been organized for judicial
personnel already in their posts. Special emphasis has been
placed on the management of detention centres. Many of
them have been, or are in the process of being, renovated.

More qualified staff have been recruited and training
courses have been held for the prison guards. In order to
ensure that the sufferings of the people who were victims
of the coup d'etat are taken into account, a new National
Commission for Truth and Justice has been set up by the
Government to carry out inquiries into violations of human
rights that took place between 29 September 1991 and 15
October 1994.

All these initiatives have helped to create the right
environment for the holding of the legislative and municipal
elections that took place in the month of June. Despite a
number of problems which prevented many from voting,
the popular turnout was considered to be reasonable. The
organizational conditions were far from ideal, and some
incidents took place which led either to the postponement
or the cancellation of elections in certain areas. For that
reason, before the holding of the second round of balloting,
partial elections will take place in those areas where it was
not possible to hold elections on 25 June.

However, given the dissatisfaction of certain political
organizations and the threatened boycott of the second
round by certain candidates, the Provisional Electoral
Council has been reorganized, following the resignation of
its chairman. It is to be hoped that the organization of
complementary elections and the second round will take
into account the shortcomings of the first round.

Generally speaking, normal life in Haiti is beginning
to be organized on a democratic basis, to the great
satisfaction of Haitians. Unfortunately, the effects of the
coup d'etat on the country's economy, which was already
in poor health, are for the moment the greatest
impediment to stability. Despite significant budgetary
performance and the generosity of the international
community, the bulk of the Government's activities up to
now have been aimed solely at the balance of payments,
the operation of State institutions, urgent humanitarian aid
and the restoration of stocks.

To facilitate the transition of most Haitians from
subhuman destitution to poverty with dignity remains the
fundamental aim; only by achieving this goal can the
programme of national reconciliation of the Government
of J can-Bertrand Aristide be completed. For this purpose,
the Government is developing and setting up flexible
mechanisms which can take available resources and turn
them into sources of employment.

Exactly a year ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 940 (1994). At that time, Haiti was under the
yoke of a ferocious military dictatorship; there was no
freedom in the country, not even freedom of religion.
Though all is not yet rosy, at least there is now hope. For
the people of Haiti have once again won the right to
decide on their own destiny, and I am certain that they
will make good use of it. I should like here to hail the
courage of that people, whose resolve has rewarded the
support of the international community and made it
possible to restore constitutional order to Haiti.

My delegation anticipates with satisfaction the
decision that the Security Council is going to take to
authorize the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH), and wishes to express
its thanks to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General in Haiti, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, to the personnel
of UNMIH, and to all those who have done their utmost
to make the Mission the success it is. The Government of
J ean-Bertrand Aristide will continue to work closely with
the United Nations Mission in Haiti during its time in
office so that these successes can be made permanent.

