Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on the issue of drug trafficking in West
Africa and the Sahel, a topic to which my country
attaches great importance. I would also like to thank
the Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa for their statements.

Drug trafficking, like all transnational criminal
organization, is a thorny issue, whose effect on the
sociopolitical situation and the economies of States is
halting their ability to develop, grow and prosper. In
addition to institutional destabilization, drug trafficking
also brings with it devastating consequences for the
health and cohesion of local communities.

For more than two decades, West Africa and the
Sahel region have been known to be a preferred area
for drug traffickers. Given their geographical location
near the sea and with Atlantic air connections, those
two regions attract international groups and networks
involved in transnational crime, drug trafficking and
other criminal activities. The particular situations of a
number of countries in the region have even shown that
no trade activity can generate as much income as drug
trafficking. The money made from that trafficking
often and unfortunately becomes part of the financing
of armed activism and terrorism in the Sahel region and
West Africa. The violence and political crises that some
countries in the region are facing, at times fuelled by
the desire of some drug traffickers to control the State,
demonstrate the potential destabilizing effect of that
scourge on countries.

The renewed interest of drug traffickers in West
Africa and the Sahel following a change in the strategic
orientation of Latin American drug cartels is explained
by clear evidence of vulnerability linked to the lack of
the rule of law, corruption and insufficient resources
to deal with it, as well as poverty, all of which hamper
the successful fight against drug traffickers. Drug
trafficking networks in the two regions, apart from the

experience of practices gained in other countries, have
acquired the ability to modify their modus operandi
to circumvent the actions of States to track those
networks. They are also prone to vary the transit and
distribution routes on account of changes taking place
on the ground.

Moreover, the environments in West Africa and the
Sahel region are characterized by a number of structural
issues, such as porous borders and informal networks
of activities that promote drug trafficking and thwart
national development efforts. The combination of those
factors has therefore encouraged the proliferation
of local criminal groups and transnational criminal
organizations. In the light of that situation, we welcome
and encourage the priority that the States of both
regions have given to the fight against drug trafficking,
as reflected in their political commitment.

The extension of the regional action plan of the
Economic Community of Western African States
(ECOWAS) for the period 2013-2018 illustrates the
commitment of States to respond in a comprehensive
manner to the growing problem of illicit drug
trafficking, organized crime and drug use in West
Africa. We are pleased that that plan is supported
by several projects of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for strengthening existing
systems to combat money laundering and the financing
ofterrorism and that it is receiving specialized technical
assistance available to member States of ECOWAS
as part of the criminal justice component of the fight
against terrorism.

In addition, within the context for implementing
the Bamako Declaration and Strategic Framework on
Impunity, Justice and Human Rights of 2011, which
details practical recommendations for the fight against
organized crime, terrorism and piracy, we also welcome
the development and implementation, with the support
of UNODC and other international organizations, of the
inter-institutional West Africa Coast Initiative, which
provides equipment and specialized training for law
enforcement agencies of the countries concerned. We
likewise welcome the airport communication project
and the Global Container Control Programme.

Moreover, there remains a continuing need for
cooperation among the States of the subregion to
ensure that, despite financial constraints, criminals are
identified, investigated, tried and convicted, especially
in view ofthe need to enhance the credibility ofnational

institutions and Governments with their populations
and external actors.

Togo undertook early on to wage a determined
struggle against organized crime in all its forms.
Concerned about the negative impact ofillicit trafficking
and drug use on health, public safety and the national
economy, the Government of Togo adopted numerous
legislative and institutional measures to combat the
scourge and to stem its financial consequences.

The adoption of those measures has led in
particular to the establishment of a central anti-drug
and anti-money laundering office and the creation ofthe
national Financial Intelligence Unit. In 2010, Togo also
established a comprehensive national plan to combat
drugs and crime, whose development has benefited from
the expertise of several partners, including France, the
United States of America, the European Union and the
ECOWAS Commission.

In addition, in recent years, increased monitoring
by Togolese customs authorities enabled us to seize
several kilograms of drugs at the borders, most of them
arriving by air from South America, and to dismantle
trafficking networks. Those results are partly due to
the support and cooperation of partners, to whom we
express our renewed gratitude.

Far from representing a challenge only to the
States of the West African subregion and the Sahel,
drug trafficking and organized crime easily travel from
regions where they are repressed to areas with less strict
controls. That is why today the most threatened areas
need support from the entire international community
to act decisively to eradicate the niches that continue to
encourage insecurity and the emergence of trafficking.

The resolution of those problems therefore calls
for stronger cooperation at the State level, both in
the subregion and internationally. It also implies the
demand for the full implementation by all States of
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and its Protocols.

Moreover, the international community must
protect less equipped areas by providing technology, by
strengthening the capacity of national services involved
in the fight against the phenomenon of transnational
organized crime and by promoting cooperation among
States.

International support should not be limited,
however, to the issue of security. It should play a part
in conflict prevention, governance and development
in order to take into account the aspirations of local
populations and to ensure that the affected populations
are identified and that they support various interventions
in the fight against trafficking drugs.

Finally, the fact that the Security Council has had
to take into account the need to incorporate the fight
against organized crime and drug trafficking into the
mandates of the various United Nations missions in
Africa also helps to curb the problem at its source; in
other words, in the countries where drugs originate.

Barring unforeseen circumstances, this is Togo's
last statement in an open meeting of the Security
Council before the approaching end of its term of
office. I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
our sincere thanks and deep gratitude to the Member
States that placed their trust in my country, on the one
hand, by supporting its candidacy, and on the other, by
supporting us throughout our term.

I wish in particular to reiterate our deep gratitude to
all the members of the Council, in particular to France,
the United States and the United Kingdom, for their
assistance to Togo at the start of its term. We also thank
the staff of the Secretariat and the Security Council as
well as the interpreters assigned to the various meetings
of the Council.

Togo's election to the Security Council on 21 October
2011, as members will recall, was not an easy matter.
While hailing from a region accustomed by tradition to
clean-slate elections, my country was elected only after
three separate ballots, with a tally of 131 votes. Perhaps
there were some who underestimated Togo's ability to
serve on the Council. However, looking back over the
course of our mandate, now in its wane, we have the
sense of a task well done.

According to a popular adage in Togo, the person
who is dancing is incapable of appreciating himself;
however, we can say without exaggeration that the
Togolese delegation has dispelled the most pessimistic
predictions about its ability to fulfil its responsibilities
as a member of the Council.

Although the role of a non-permanent member of the
Security Council remains generally more limited, at the
initiative of Togo, the Council adopted 10 resolutions,
presidential statements and press statements. We led the
Council early in our term, beginning in February 2012,
to consider the question of the impact of transnational
organized crime in West Africa and the Sahel region.
That debate may have been prescient with respect to the
adoption of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel. My country also brought before the Council
the issue of terrorism in Africa. Moreover, we await
a report from the Secretary-General that should allow
for more coordinated attention to that issue, which is of
grave concern to the African continent.

With particular regard to the situation in Guinea-
Bissau, our delegation was in the forefront of the
pragmatic approach rightly pursued by Mr. Jose
Ramos-Horta since he assumed his post as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
that country.

On matters related to international criminal
justice, the views expressed by the Togolese delegation
may well have resulted in some progress. However,
we must not give way to self-congratulation when so
many crises and bloody conflicts continue to demand
the Council's attention, particularly in Africa and the
Middle East. In spite of the Council's accomplishments
over the past two years, we believe it could have risen
higher to meet expectations. However commendable
the progress made in 2012 and 2013, we must not lose
sight of the failures, especially the paralysis that this
body has often shown.

If that has been the case, it is largely because
the Member States of the Council, in particular its
permanent members, are often unable to agree on the
appropriate decisions that the Council should take
according to the Charter of the United Nations in order
to end the suffering and humanitarian tragedies faced
by populations in areas of conflict - for example, in
Syria.

The propensity of certain members of the Council
all too often to promote their own national interests, as
well as the consequences of certain decisions previously
taken, such as the intervention in Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), whose implementation has not
borne out the hopes of certain States, justify in large
measure the harsh criticism that has rightly been
directed towards the Council.

We deeply believe that the world can be liberated
from the scourge of war, provided that more efforts
are made in the prevention and peaceful resolution of
conflict.

We know, of course, that we can rely on the members
that will sit on the Security Council beginning in 2014,
especially those that have just been elected, namely,
Chad, Chile, Lithuania, Jordan and Nigeria, to whom
we send our renewed congratulations.

