Mr. Nazeer Sultan (Pakistan): Allow me first to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October and your predecessor for the competent manner
in which he presided over the Council last month.

The conflict in Afghanistan continues to rage with
intense ferocity, spreading death and destruction and with
each passing day assuming an even more ominous
dimension for regional peace and security.

The land of Afghanistan, rich in history and culture
and proud of its independence, today presents a pathetic
picture of turmoil and turbulence. To attribute this to the
ambitions of some selfish leaders of Afghan factions or
to differences among them would be a travesty of the
facts. These ambitions would have been contained and
these differences resolved had we not had competing
regional and extraregional Powers fuelling the fire and
seeking to turn Afghanistan into a battlefield for the
pursuit of their own narrow strategic and political
interests.

It is easy to dismiss Afghanistan as a failed State or
to ascribe the present situation to a civil war engendered
by the Afghans themselves. In so doing, the international
community may salve its conscience, but the truth is that
Afghanistan is neither a failed State nor engaged in a
simple civil war. It is a country that was systematically
ravaged by long years of foreign military occupation.
That occupation was resisted by a heroic people, with the
active support and assistance of the free world. It was a
resistance rooted in fierce nationalism and in strong
religious beliefs. In times of adversity, it is only natural
that such beliefs are clung to with greater tenacity. But it
was also a fact that, in assisting the struggle against the
forces of hegemonism and totalitarianism, the free world
deliberately sought to heighten such sentiments.

 

The war was won. The foreign military occupation
ended, but rather than helping the Afghan people to repair
the physical, moral and psychological damage done to the
land and to the people, the victors and the vanquished
walked away, leaving the Afghan people to cope with the
internal consequences in a society where traditional
structures had been deliberately broken to facilitate the war
of liberation. Let us look at the facts.

In April 1978, President Daoud was killed in a coup
d 'e'tat by Nur Mohammad Taraki with the support of the
former Soviet Union.

Resistance to his alien Marxist philosophy prompted
his replacement by Hafizullah Amin, who initiated an even
more alien programme of scientific socialism.

His failure led, in December 1979, to the installation
of Babrak Karmal, who arrived in Kabul astride a foreign
tank and as the vanguard of a foreign occupation force.

Millions of refugees left Afghanistan, 3.5 million of
whom sought shelter in Pakistan and 2 million in Iran,
while another 1.5 million were displaced within
Afghanistan itself. In short, more than half of Afghanistan's
population became refuge seekers.

The Afghan national resistance, supported by the free
world, continued for nine years, obliging the alien
occupation forces finally to withdraw from Afghanistan on
15 February 1989. The result of that occupation was more
than a million Afghans killed, a million more disabled,
hundreds of thousands orphaned, towns and villages
destroyed, the country's beautiful terrain infested by anti-
personnel mines and millions of refugees and displaced
persons left homeless and without hope.

The cold war having been won at the expense of
Afghan lives, the free world then abandoned Afghanistan
with its problems to a fate it does not deserve. The
unfurling of the flag of the Islamic State of Afghanistan in
April 1992 and the installation of the first mujahidin
Government in Afghanistan should have ushered in a
process of promoting reconciliation and peace, giving hope
and solace to the Afghan people.

President Rabbani was installed as a result of the
Islamabad Afghan accord of 7 March 1993, which was
subsequently ratified by all Afghan parties in Makkah Al
Mukaramah. In the terms of that Accord, Professor
Rabbani's term as President of Afghanistan was to end on
28 June 1994. Rabbani's obstinate refusal to step down was

 

the principal factor in the widespread disaffection of the
Afghans against his illegitimate regime, whose control of
the Afghan State apparatus, always nominal, did not
extend to more than five of Afghanistan's 32 provinces.

The continuous efforts of the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to promote intra-
Afghan harmony, dialogue and peace produced some
dividends, but these were quickly and deliberately
subverted. The Rabbani regime continued to depend for
its survival on the massive foreign assistance it received
in its efforts to serve competing regional and
extraregional interests in Afghanistan at the expense of
the Afghan people.

On the other hand, the Afghanistan student militia,
popularly known as the Taliban, fed up with factional
strife, sought to restore order and relative peace. Through
exhortations, it secured the defection of Afghan military
commanders and gained control of the two thirds of the
country which it now holds.

On 27 September 1996, the Taliban militia entered
Kabul. A new interim Government was constituted in
Afghanistan. The Taliban affirmed its commitment to
promoting peace and solving its problems with General
Dostum in the north through negotiations and dialogue.

We have in the past few days witnessed a marked
intensification of the conflict, which is again directly
attributable to the massive foreign interference in the
internal affairs of Afghanistan.

Prompted by their narrow strategic political interests
in Afghanistan, regional and extraregional Powers have
again chosen to compound the miseries of the Afghan
people by fusing alliances and counter-alliances.

Eighteen planeloads of ammunition have landed in
Mazar-i-Sharif. Tanks and helicopter gunships are being
supplied to factions, and batteries of missiles are being
ferried to Bandar Sheikhan. Fleets of AN-l2 and AN-32
planes bring deadly weapons each day to replenish the
arsenals at Taloqan airfield.

Instead of a concerted regional and international
effort under the auspices of the United Nations for the
restoration of peace in Afghanistan, what we are
witnessing today is a brute power play by those who
merely claim to have and those who have no legitimate
interest in the unity and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan.

 

It is indeed incredible that the international community
is led to believe that, in Afghanistan, a country inhabited by
devout Muslims who have lived for centuries in peace with
their neighbours, a new ideological threat has been born. It
is indeed incredible that, instead of concentrating on ways
and means to end the terrible trials and tribulations of the
people of Afghanistan, some of us remain preoccupied only
with the social aspects of the situation. Others have been
more direct in their pronouncements, and have chosen to
take a more objective view of the situation, of the threat to
peace and security in the region, and of their national
interests. We have noted that, among the immediate
neighbours of Afghanistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan
participated in the Almaty summit, which was convened on
4 October 1996 with a view to responding to the
developments in Afghanistan. We construe the Almaty
statement as an affirmation of the need for the international
community, particularly the United Nations, to step up its
efforts to promote durable peace and reconciliation in
Afghanistan. Indeed, any other course is fraught with grave
consequences for peace and stability in South-West and
Central Asia.

The time has come for the Security Council to act
decisively for the cause of peace in Afghanistan. We hope
that this debate will prove to be a milestone in international
efforts towards building an international alliance for peace
in Afghanistan. Let us act in accordance with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Let us use our
resources, both material and moral, to overcome the
apparent political impasse. Let us act now before it is too
late.

Pakistan believes that the Security Council, which had
forgotten Afghanistan for almost eight years, must now
adopt a binding resolution under Chapter VII of the
Charter. We have already circulated to the members of the
Council a draft resolution which essentially would have the
Council: call for the immediate cessation of all armed
hostilities in Afghanistan; demand that all the Afghan
parties abide by the ceasefire; support the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission to promote peace and
reconciliation; affirm the unity, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Afghanistan; call upon all States to respect the
principles of non-intervention and non-interference in
Afghanistan; impose an immediate arms embargo on
Afghanistan; and establish a monitoring mechanism to
verify compliance with the ceasefire and the arms embargo.
We are sanguine that the Secretary General and the
members of the international community, individually and
collectively, as well as in cooperation with other concerned
organizations such as the Organization of the Islamic

 

Conference, will be able to mobilize the necessary
personnel and resources for enhancing United Nations
efforts for peace in Afghanistan and for implementing
such a resolution. It is also evident that the international
humanitarian relief effort must be stepped up to care for
the victims of the conflict, as well as for the millions of
Afghan refugees in neighbouring countries.
Pakistan is committed to supporting the efforts of the
United Nations Special Mission, and of the Security
Council, to restore peace in Afghanistan. We have stood
with our Afghan brothers in times of adversity. We have
shared the sufferings of our Afghan brothers. The
situation in Afghanistan continues to impact severely on
Pakistan. We have no favourites in Afghanistan. We
firmly believe that only an intra-Afghan political process,
leading to the setting up of a broad-based government,
will allow durable peace to return to that troubled land.
We are ready to cooperate with all members of the
international community, and particularly with the
immediate neighbours of Afghanistan, with a view to
harmonizing our efforts to promote peace and tranquillity
in Afghanistan and our region.

We recognize the State of Afghanistan. We have
done business with every regimes in Kabul, regardless of
whether it was led by Nur Mohammad Taraki, Hafizullah
Amin, Mojadedi or Rabbani. We desire normal, mutually
beneficial relations with Afghanistan. For centuries we
have shared with the Afghan people, ties of blood,
history, culture and religion. It is therefore incumbent on
us and on all freedom-loving people of the world to
renew our pledge to support the Afghan people in
restoring peace and rebuilding their country. It is
incumbent on all of us to respect and uphold the unity
and territorial integrity of Afghanistan. Indeed, this is a
commitment which flows from the Charter of the United
Nations, which the Security Council is especially obliged
to uphold.

It is important that all States Members of the United
Nations enhance their efforts to obtain an objective
understanding of the grim realities in Afghanistan. This
can only be done by first-hand contact with the people of
Afghanistan. It can only be done by listening to all views
in Afghanistan. It can only be done by affirming political
support and pledging material support for the efforts
being made by the Special Mission under the able
leadership of Mr. Norbert Holl.

It is our fervent wish that this important debate in
the Council on the situation in Afghanistan will conclude

 

by the adoption of an appropriate draft resolution by the
Council.

