Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First, I
wish to express sincere condolences on the passing of
President Hafez Al-Assad of Syria. This was an
immense loss not only for Syria, but also for the Arab
world as a whole because Mr. Al-Assad had great
personal qualities and did so much for the cause of the
Middle East and the Arab cause. For 25 years he
worked tirelessly and generously for his nation and his
people. May God receive him in his mercy.
(spoke in French)

Thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. I also wish to express our appreciation to
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia
and Herzegovina for all his work.

The Secretary-General's report on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) is instructive in several respects. It informs
us on developments in the situation, which on the
whole are positive. UNMIBH's five priority areas of
action have all, to varying degrees, seen positive
developments towards the objective of consolidating
peace in the region.

The municipal elections, held on 8 April 2000
without any major incident or disruptions and with a
relatively high rate of participation, were in our view,
another test demonstrating the determination of the
people to move towards coexistence. These elections
call for the international community to continue its
effort and to support the parties that have chosen to
cooperate with UNMIBH to attain the goals set for the
restoration of lasting peace and the establishment of a
democratic and multi-ethnic State.

Progress made in registering police personnel, as
well as the representation of minorities within the
police force, should be commended. The agreement on
the voluntary transfer of police officers wishing to
return to their former duty stations significantly
improves the prospects for creating a multi-ethnic
police force. We are convinced, however, that these
efforts are inadequate and that we need to strengthen
efforts in these areas.

The role ofthe police at this crucial stage is more
than obvious. It is not merely a question of ensuring
respect for the law and promoting social harmony, but
also one of combating the scourges of drugs and
organized crime. At this point, I would like to welcome
the cooperation between UNMIBH and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
preparation of the report currently under way, which
we eagerly await.

We welcome the results attained by UNMIBH in
the past year. The establishment of the State Border
Service and the integration of the Ministry of the
Interior in canton 7 attest once again to the importance
of the results achieved. In the same canton, we also
take note of some equally important progress, namely,
the appointment ofjudges from different ethnic groups.
An independent and impartial judiciary is a guarantee
of equality for defendants and of lasting social
harmony.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is a
major concern in implementing the Peace Agreements
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Ensuring the security and
well-being of all refugees, particularly minorities, is
also a major responsibility. We welcome the massive
return of refugees, who should have the support of
actors on the ground. We stress the very positive role
played in that regard by the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

In order to give peace a solid foundation it is
necessary to base that peace on the moral values of
tolerance and respect for others' differences. In this
connection, we think schools should play a primary
role in educating future generations. It therefore seems
to us that it is important to work towards establishing a
unified and multi-ethnic university in Bosnia and
Herzegovina where young people can learn to live
together and to coexist despite their differences.

In order to consolidate peace we need to give
Bosnia and Herzegovina a major political plan to which
all parties will adhere. The Stability Pact being put
forward by the European Union is an interesting
platform for making this project a reality. My
delegation believes that economic vitality should be
strengthened in the region in order to attain this goal.

It is clear that when the parties have shown that
they want to cooperate with the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, important results
have been attained. The full cooperation of all parties
is a condition for the success of this operation, and we
therefore call on the parties to cooperate further with
UNMIBH.

We are aware of the seriousness of the obstacles
hampering the smooth implementation of UNMIBH's
mandate. But those obstacles should not discourage us
from continuing our efforts to make a better future for
all the inhabitants of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
international community should support the tangible
results achieved by UNMIBH and renew its mandate.

