Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Ijoin other
speakers in congratulating you, Sir, on having
convened this public information meeting on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in thanking Ms. McAskie, through you, for her most
edifying briefing.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
country of continental scope. Its stability has
repercussions for that of the entire African continent
and directly affects that of its nine neighbouring
countries. The re-establishment of regional peace and
stability will require the restoration of respect for the
fundamental principles clearly reaffirmed by the
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, chief
among which is that of the unity and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the inviolability of its borders. At the same time, the
neighbours of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
also have the right to live in security within defined
borders, free from destabilizing activities launched
from Congolese territory.

The other factor essential to the stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is national
reconciliation. A third, additional factor for stability is
the humanitarian situation, because, as members are
aware, humanitarian crises often give rise to conflicts,
but just as invariably conflicts give rise to
humanitarian crises.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs has just painted a picture of the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That picture could just as easily depict
the human rights situation, as the statistics, refugees
and displaced persons attest. The poverty, destitution,
disease and famine rampant in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo constitute in and of themselves
violations of human rights.

This situation is a source of deep concern to my
delegation, for the heavy price being paid by civilians
in this conflict is unacceptable. It is equally intolerable
that the intense fighting is hindering the access of
humanitarian agencies to many regions, particularly the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, depriving
vulnerable populations of the precious assistance they
so sorely need.

It has been stressed innumerable times by the
Council that humanitarian problems must receive direct
attention, not only during the negotiation of peace
agreements, but also from peacekeeping operations.
This would indeed guarantee the prior planning
required by the humanitarian elements of peacekeeping
operations and allow the immediate mobilization of
necessary resources. Moreover, the success of a peace
agreement often depends, at least in part, on
humanitarian intervention, particularly that which
enables the return and reintegration of refugees and
displaced persons, assistance to demobilized
combatants, the restoration of sources of income for
war-affected persons and help for ex-combatants in
finding new means of subsistence. My delegation
reminds the signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement that this instrument has numerous
provisions for the simultaneous protection of civilians
and their human rights, as well as for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance via humanitarian corridors and
the establishment of conditions conducive to providing
emergency assistance to displaced persons, refugees
and others.

Furthermore, similar provisions are to be found in
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. All the Council's
resolutions must be accorded the same degree of
importance and must therefore be implemented without
discrimination or procrastination. In this respect, all the
signatories and the international community,
collectively or individually, must assume their
responsibilities, for, more than ever before, the gravity
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its disastrous humanitarian consequences
require every effort to be made to relaunch the peace
process.

Today's meeting affords my delegation the
opportunity to pay tribute to and thank the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the World Health Organization, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, all
the humanitarian agencies and the many
non-governmental organizations that are actively
seeking to address the catastrophic humanitarian
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
also thank the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) for
its very positive role in supporting and assisting
humanitarian operations. This humanitarian dimension
of MONUC should be encouraged and developed.

In conclusion, Mali remains convinced that
United Nations coordination, backed by a fully
deployed MONUC - and I stress "fully deployed" -
will allow us to improve the effectiveness of the
humanitarian assistance that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo so sorely needs today.

