Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): We wish at the outset to thank Mr. Egeland
for his report.

In April this year, the Council adopted a
resolution recognizing the threats faced by civilians in
armed conflict and condemning all acts of violence and
human rights abuses committed against unarmed and
vulnerable populations. Many of the peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Council have as part of
their mandate the protection of civilians under
imminent threat of violence.

Unfortunately, the world continues to be plagued
by violent conflicts, and civilians often bear the brunt
of such crises. Civilians are now the major category of
casualties in conflicts worldwide. Violence against
civilians in armed conflict includes rape and other
forms of sexual violence, torture, execution, forced
conscription - sometimes of children - forced
labour, and displacement. The primary responsibility
for protecting civilians lies with the parties to a
conflict. In such situations of violent conflict, we must
do everything appropriate to protect innocent civilians
from the impact of armed conflict. In situations where
a State is unable or unwilling to protect its civilians,
the international community has a distinct role.

We must also continue to focus our efforts on the
prevention of conflict itself. To help prevent conflict,
we must focus on the critical signs that an
unrepresentative and corrupt Government is in place.
These include demonstrated disregard for the rule of
law, human rights and basic democratic values such as
freedom, equality, transparency and free and fair
elections. When these conditions exist, political unrest
may be festering. We all are aware of countries
exhibiting those traits. What we as a Council choose to
do about such situations in their earliest stages can
make the difference between life and death for
countless innocent civilians.
Let me now turn to some specific cases of
concern. We continue to be gravely concerned about
the ongoing crisis in Darfur and especially the impact
of the conflict on civilians in that region. Civilians
continue to be directly targeted; more than 2 million
remain displaced from their homes, and most have
been victims of severe abuses, including sexual
violence.

Mr. Egeland's recent briefing to the Council
following his mission to the Sudan painted a stark
picture of a humanitarian and human rights situation
that has not improved and could be on the brink of
even larger-scale catastrophe.

In addition, humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers have increasingly been facing harassment
and intimidation in the Sudan. This continuing
insecurity has had a direct and detrimental impact on
the international community's ability to deliver
assistance and to provide basic services for the victims
of the conflict. The situation in Darfur illustrates
clearly a situation in which the international
community has a role to play in safeguarding civilians
in armed conflict, including those who are internally
displaced, since traditional means of protection have
broken down.

It is also important to reiterate that internally
displaced civilians living in camps are not always
protected from serious human rights violations. Several
other countries, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, face delicate situations of transition with
protection challenges. United Nations peacekeeping
and humanitarian missions, together with support from
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), help ensure
that civilians in those regions are not denied the
dividends of peace.

We are encouraged by the fact that the Security
Council has been more consistent in addressing the
regional dimensions of civilian protection. Resolution
1674 (2006) and recent mandates have highlighted key
issues that affect civilians in armed conflict, including
the deliberate targeting of civilians, forced
displacement, sexual exploitation and abuse, gender-
based violence, the recruitment and use of child
soldiers in violation of international law, the need for
access by humanitarian personnel to civilians in need
of assistance, and the need to promote the safety of
United Nations and associated humanitarian personnel.
06-63968

As we once again reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening and reinforcing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, let us ensure that our words
and intentions translate into action.

