Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today we are to take a decision on a draft
resolution to establish in Eastern Slavonia a new mission,
a United Nations civilian police support group.

We are approaching the expiration of the two-year
period provided for under the Basic Agreement and the
scheduled conclusion, on 15 January 1998, of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in the region
(UNTAES). The lessons and experiences of this operation,
one of the largest peacekeeping operations of the United
Nations in recent years, a successor to the United Nations
Protection Force and the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia, will continue to be
reviewed and analysed. However, it is already clear that we
can talk about the fruitfulness of international efforts in the
context of UNTAES only if there is long-term, full and
unconditional adherence by the Government of Croatia to
the process of genuine reintegration of people and the
achievement of a multi-ethnic reconciliation for all citizens.

Russia took an active part in all three United Nations
operations in Eastern Slavonia. Our peacekeepers have been
serving there since the summer of 1992, and we are
sincerely interested in positive results for the international
efforts aimed at settling that conflict.

Unfortunately, there are still quite a few sore points
which require priority attention and additional efforts before
the conclusion of the transition period and beyond. These
remaining problems have to do with the return of refugees
and displaced persons and include settling the problems of
ownership of property, the functioning of local public
bodies, the continuing discrimination against and violation
of the rights of the Serbian population, doubts about the
proper implementation of the amnesty law, problems of
trust in the police and other issues. All of this shows that
the obligations of the Croatian Government in
reintegrating Eastern Slavonia have not yet been fully
complied with. We need additional measures, on the basis
of the results of the last two months, during which the
Government of Croatia has indeed taken a number of
serious positive steps.

The continuation of the active involvement of the
international community and its help in strengthening the
positive dynamics of the reintegration process are of
special significance. An important role in this should be
played by regional organizations, first and foremost by
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We expect a speedy and full deployment in the
region of that Organization's long-term mission. We
proceed from the premise that the closest coordination
and interaction will be established between the United
Nations and the OSCE missions.

We believe that it is extremely important to continue
the activities of United Nations specialized agencies,
particularly those of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

A further increase in the potential of bilateral
relations between the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia would be a positive factor.

The continued presence of the United Nations in
Eastern Slavonia, which will continue in the form of a
civilian police operation after 15 January 1998, will
enable us to ensure the sorely needed guarantees for
strengthening trust among the local population, especially
in a period of mass returns of displaced persons. As set
forth in the draft resolution, of which Russia is a sponsor,
the parameters for the mandate of the support group retain
some continuation of the police component of UNTAES.

Our View of the way to carry out the tasks mandated
by the Security Council aimed at the peaceful
reintegration of the region is based on the long-term
nature of the Basic Agreement and the more than 20 other
agreements between UNTAES and the Croatian
authorities, which constitute a legal basis for the long-
term reintegration process. Compliance by the
Government of Croatia - which bears major
responsibility for successful reintegration - with its

 

obligations is a major prerequisite for ensuring that the
process of reconciliation and the restoration of trust in the
region is irreversible. We are convinced that the
Government of Croatia will fully recognize the measure of
its responsibility and, with international support, will not
allow a process in which so much effort has been invested
to be undermined.

