The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

Let me begin with some comments on the
situation in Mali. Like others in the Council, I have
been shocked by the hostage crisis in Bamako today.
I express solidarity with the Malian Government and
its people in their fight against terrorism. I offer my
sincere condolences to the victims of the attack and
deep sympathy for the fear and injuries inflicted on
those held hostage. We commend the swift and decisive
action by the Malian security forces, supported by
French forces and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The Security Council will remain closely engaged
in the stabilization of Mali through MINUSMA, and
the Government and the people of Mali have our full
support at this difficult time.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General not just
for his briefing but also for his initiative in setting up
the peace operations review (see S/2015/446) and his
follow-up to that review, including through this meeting
of the Security Council. As we have heard today, the
Council needs to play a significant role in empowering
peace operations if we are to meet the challenges of
current and future conflicts.

For the United Kingdom, this means improving the
way the Council mandates missions and changing how
we discuss the work of the United Nations in fragile
and conflict-affected States. At its best, United Nations
peacekeeping can save lives, rebuild communities
and replace fear with hope. But not all United Nations
peacekeeping is as good as the best. In particular, the
United Nations must respond robustly to all allegations
of sexual exploitation and abuse. Like New Zealand and
others, we therefore support the Secretary-General's
recommendations and stand ready to help implement
them. On this and all other issues related to peace
operations, it is time now to stop talking and to start
taking action to make a real difference. Let me make
three practical suggestions on how we can do so,
focusing on the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) as an example.
First, we need better phased or sequenced
mandates with more prioritization of mandated tasks.
The Council initiated that in the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, and I hope
that we can continue by looking at greater prioritization
and sequencing of tasks when we come to renew the
mandate of UNMISS next month. We must set a clear
direction for UNMISS as it evolves over the coming
months to support the peace agreement. We will, of
course, be guided by the technical assessment of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We should
also take this opportunity to think hard about UNMISS
priorities, how they are sequenced and how best to
expand the Mission so that it delivers what is needed
on the ground.

Secondly, we need to get our political messaging
right. When the Council speaks, it is the voice of the
international community. We must use that voice to
support the work of our missions across the globe, as
well as the peace processes that we and others lead.
We must make use of all tools at the Council's disposal
to speak out when there are repeated violations of
status-of-forces agreements. We also need to keep
in mind the impact that our political messaging can
have in preventing conflicts and in responding to
situations of emerging conflict. This means using
press statements, resolutions and Council visits to the
region to send clear and unambiguous messages; and
yes, it means being prepared to impose sanctions and
arms embargoes where appropriate. It also means that
if States demonstrate and deliver a firm commitment
to peace, we should respond to that commitment with
equal determination.

Finally, the United Kingdom believes that we
need more feedback and better analysis to improve
our ability to protect civilians. To inform the phasing
of the Mission, the Council needs to be provided with
evidence of how the Mission is fulfilling its tasking and
why there are shortfalls. This should include whether
or not the current Mission configuration and military
components are sufficient to deliver. All of this requires
greater strategic analysis and planning at earlier stages
by the Secretariat. We fully support the Secretary-
General's proposal to enhance those capabilities and to
engage with the Security Council at an earlier stage.

We can put this into practice by thinking about what
tools UNMISS needs to protect civilians better. What
additional or different police or military capabilities
are required? What levels of good offices are needed
to support the parties' political commitment to the
ceasefire so as to reduce the threat of violence against
civilians? Engaging with the local community will
also be vital - putting people at the centre of what we
do and really thinking about what the United Nations
Mission can do to deliver for those who live there. We
should listen carefully to the local community about
how it can support the work of the Mission.

I look forward to continuing these discussions as
we approach the mandate renewal for UNMISS in the
coming weeks. Ifwe take these steps and more, I believe
that we can make a tangible improvement in the work
both of UNMISS and United Nations peacekeeping
more broadly, and in doing so we can help improve the
lives of the people of South Sudan and beyond.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
