The President: I should like, at the outset of the
meeting, to extend, on behalf of the members of the
Council, a most sincere and warm welcome to
Ambassador John Bolton, the new Permanent
Representative of the United States, as he begins his
work at the United Nations and in the Security
Council. We all look forward to working closely with
Ambassador Bolton in the months ahead, and we also
look forward to benefiting from his contributions to the
work of the Council, based on his long and rich
experience and his distinguished diplomatic career.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused by
terrorist acts

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Samaida'ie
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/494, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Romania, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and
the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution. Unless I
hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to
the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1618 (2005).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


