Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to begin
by thanking Mr. Mladenov, the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing on the
situation in Israel and Palestine and welcome Ministers
for Foreign Affairs Al-Malki and Safadi of the State of
Palestine and of Jordan to the Security Council.

As we and many other delegations have stated in
the Council before, the only true and just resolution to
the situation in the Middle East is one built on the two-
State solution, based on the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as the capital of an independent, sovereign
Palestinian State, in keeping with resolution 242 (1967),
of 22 November 1967.

The continued disrespect and disregard for the
prevailing and long-standing peace process, such as the
systematic foreclosing offinal status issues, particularly

with regard to the borders, the status of Jerusalem and
continued settlement expansion, is deeply disturbing.
The recent pronouncement by Israel on the possible
annexation of large parts of the West Bank has gone
unchallenged and further undermines prospects for
peace. The continued expansion of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories deliberately violates
international law, undermines prospects for peace and
contravenes decisions of the Security Council.
Since 1948, or 71 years ago, the Council has adopted
numerous resolutions, including resolution 42 (1948),
of 5 March 1948, resolution 43 (1948), of 1 April 1948,
and others in 1944, 1945, 1947, 1948 and 1949 - we
can go on and on. All in all, there has been a total of 72
Council resolutions, with zero implementation. What
does that say about the Council?

As we sit here today, thousands of Palestinians live
in fear of having their homes and schools destroyed,
their property confiscated and their already severely
limited freedoms further curtailed. Yet the Council
has been unable to act to address these ongoing blatant
violations of international law. Just yesterday, it
deliberated on the protection of civilians and the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8623). When
will the Council address these same concerns with
regard to the Palestinian people? When?

The Security Council's lack of action reduces it
to a body unable to uphold its own decisions, whose
credibility is being eroded. Therefore, South Africa
continues to insist on the full implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) and underscores that violations
of Security Council resolutions would in any other case
lead to strict measures against the party responsible.
In this regard, and in accordance with resolution 2334
(2016), my delegation also strongly calls for written
reports by the Secretary-General on the matter.

South Africa believes that the Council should make
every effort to restore trust in the legitimate peace
process that has been pursued for decades and prevent
the further development of antagonism between Israel
and Palestine. The exchange of hostilities, including
rocket fire and bombings in Gaza, remains a case in
point and is deeply concerning. My delegation remains
deeply troubled by the continued violations of human
rights in the occupied territories and emphasizes that
such violations only contribute to fostering hatred
and divisions between Palestinians and Israelis. In the
place of such antagonistic gestures as the building of
additional barriers and walls, the closing of schools and
the killing of civilians, the Council should encourage
gestures of hope and the building of trust between Israel
and Palestine, which have been lacking in recent times.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate
our call for the Council to reconsider its long-delayed
visit to the region. We would like to again suggest that
should some members of the Council be unwilling to
participate in the visit, the Council might consider a
mini-mission, which would include those Council
members interested in taking part. A visit to the region
would be a clear indication that the international
community has not washed its hands of the core and
oldest conflict in the Middle East. Similar to the
Council's other field Visits, like the one we will take
next month to Juba, it will also offer Council members
an opportunity to meet relevant actors on the ground,
including members of the Government in Israel and
Palestine, civil society actors and all role-players, and
ask them to embrace peace efforts, respect one another,
coexist and live in harmony, as we all do in our own
countries and regions. We in South Africa are ready to
assist in that direction if we are asked to do so.

