Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): I would like to thank
Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, for
his insightful remarks. I also thank Mr. Enver Hoxhaj
for his statement. I congratulate Mr. Farid Zarif on his
appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and thank him for the update on the
situation in Kosovo.

The last few months have been marked by intense
activities related to efforts to address the border
incidents in northern Kosovo. The Council met on
several occasions to address the crisis and to create a
non-confrontational atmosphere. In addition, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
other actors have also engaged the parties in order to
arrest the deteriorating security situation and foster
peace in Kosovo. Those responses were, in our view,
timely, as they directly contributed to defusing the
tension in the territory.

We are, however, under no illusion that the
problem is solved. Yesterday's incident seems to
confirm our fears. Those disturbing events, in addition
to the deteriorating inter-ethnic relations, remind us
once again of the imperative of a decisive response to
the outstanding issues in the territory.

We share the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2011/675) that the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
International Security Force in Kosovo should actively
engage with the northern Kosovo Serbs to increase
coordination and information-sharing and build
confidence in the communities. The parties should
engage assiduously in promoting reconciliation and the
peaceful settlement of pending issues through
negotiations rather than resorting to unilateral action or
violence.

It is also essential that all international presences
in Kosovo strengthen their cooperation and
communication in order to maximize the impact of
their common efforts to maintain peace and stability on
the ground. To underpin those efforts, regional and
international actors must speak with one voice and
work together to preserve peace and security in Kosovo
and the region.

The resumption of European Union-facilitated
talks is a positive development; the parties have a lot to
gain from them. Indeed, the agreements reached during
the meetings in September and the positive
developments which followed in the area of trade are
indicative of the benefits derivable from such talks.
The international community, including the Security
Council, should do more to build confidence and trust
among the parties in order to sustain the momentum of
peace talks.

We are concerned by the low number of returns
recorded during the reporting period. The Special
Representative has attributed those developments to,
among other reasons, fewer housing reconstruction
projects. It is important to invest more resources in
providing the infrastructure necessary to promote the
viability and conditions of return. In addition,
concerted efforts on the part of law enforcement
authorities in preventing harassment and attacks on
returnees will go a long way towards promoting safe
returns, as well as reconciliation and the long-term
stability and development of Kosovo. We urge the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the international
community to continue to promote an environment
conducive to returns.

Nigeria wishes to underline the need to bring to
justice those persons involved in inhuman treatment
and the illicit trafficking in human organs. We are also
convinced of the need to accommodate the views and
concerns of all stakeholders in designing the form for
these investigations, which, as we have previously
indicated, will ensure that the final outcome of such
investigations will enjoy the broadest possible support.

We commend UNMIK for its efforts to promote
security and stability in Kosovo and the entire region.
UNMIK's unrelenting engagement with the parties to
the agreements with regard to such areas as the rule of
law, cultural and religious heritage, returns,
reconciliation and respect for human rights in Kosovo
continues to enjoy strong support. We express our
appreciation to Special Representative Zarif and the
staff of UNMIK for their valuable contributions and
ensure the Mission of Nigeria's support in its work.

