Mr. ElBaradei: For the past 60 days, the
inspectors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) have been engaged in the process of verifying
the existence or absence of a nuclear-weapon
programme in Iraq. Today, pursuant to paragraph 5 of
resolution 1441 (2002), I have submitted to the
President of the Security Council an update report on
our progress since we resumed our nuclear-verification
activities in Iraq - in terms of the approach we have
adopted, the tools we have used, the specific results
achieved, the degree of cooperation we have received,
and, finally, our view on how we should proceed.
Copies of the report are available in this Chamber. Let
me in this statement outline the key aspects of this
report.

To understand the approach of IAEA inspections
over the past two months, it is important first to recall
what was accomplished during our inspections from
1991 to 1998, in fulfilment of our Security Council
mandate to eliminate Iraq's nuclear-weapon
programme. In September 1991, the IAEA seized
documents in Iraq that demonstrated the extent of its
nuclear-weapon programme. By the end of 1992, we
had largely destroyed, removed or rendered harmless
all Iraqi facilities and equipment relevant to nuclear-
weapon production. We confiscated Iraq's nuclear-
weapon-usable material - highly enriched uranium
and plutonium - and by early 1994 we had removed it
from the country. By December 1998, when the
inspections were brought to a halt with a military strike
imminent, we were confident that we had not missed
any significant components of Iraq's nuclear
programme.

While we did not claim absolute certainty, our
conclusion at that time was that we had neutralized
Iraq's nuclear-weapon programme and that there were
no indications that Iraq retained any physical capability
to produce weapon-usable nuclear material.

During the intervening four years of our absence
from Iraq, we continued our analytical work to the best
of our ability, using satellite imagery and other
information. But no remote analysis can replace on-site
inspection, and we were therefore not able to reach any
conclusions about Iraq's compliance with its Security

Council obligations in the nuclear field after December
1998.

Against this backdrop, when Iraq agreed last
September to reopen its doors to inspection, and
following the subsequent adoption by the Security
Council of resolution 1441 (2002), which strengthened
the IAEA's authority and the inspection process, the
first goal of our inspection activities was
reconnaissance. In this phase, we sought to re-establish
rapidly our knowledge base of Iraq's nuclear
capabilities, to ensure that key facilities had not been
reopened, to verify the location of nuclear material and
relevant non-nuclear material, and to identify and begin
interviewing key Iraqi personnel.

Over these first two months of inspection, we
have made good progress in our knowledge of Iraq's
nuclear capabilities, with a total of 139 inspections at
some 106 locations to date. The bulk of these
inspections have taken place at State-run or private
industrial facilities, research centres and universities -
either at locations where Iraq's significant technical
capabilities were known to have existed in the past, or
at new locations suggested by remote monitoring and
analysis. All inspection activities have been carried out
without prior notification to Iraq, except where
notification was needed to ensure the availability of
required support. IAEA inspectors have taken - and
will continue to take - full advantage of the
inspection authority granted by resolution 1441 (2002).
In doing so, the inspectors have been instructed to
make every effort to conduct their activities with
appropriate professionalism and sensitivity.

While we are continuing to some extent with this
reconnaissance work, our inspections are now well into
the investigative phase - with particular emphasis on
determining what, if anything, has occurred in Iraq
over the past four years that is relevant to the
re-establishment of Iraq's nuclear capabilities. These
investigative inspections focus on areas of concern
identified by other States; facilities identified through
satellite images as having been modified or constructed
since 1998; and other inspection leads identified
independently by the IAEA.

In parallel with these inspection activities, the
IAEA has been conducting an exhaustive analysis of
supporting information obtained from various sources.
In this context, we have integrated the new information
submitted by Iraq, including the declaration submitted
on 7 December in response to resolution 1441 (2002),
with the records we had accumulated between 1991
and 1998 and the additional information we had
compiled through remote monitoring since 1998. The
Iraqi declaration was consistent with our existing
understanding of Iraq's pre-l99l nuclear programme;
however, it did not provide any new information
relevant to certain questions that have been outstanding
since 1998, in particular regarding Iraq's progress prior
to 1991 related to weapons design and centrifuge
development. While these questions do not constitute
unresolved disarmament issues, they nevertheless need
further clarification.

In addition to on-site inspection and offsite
analysis, IAEA inspectors have employed a variety of
tools to accomplish their mission. Taking advantage of
the signature of radioactive materials, we have resumed
the monitoring of Iraq's rivers, canals and lakes to
detect the presence of certain radioisotopes. A broad
variety of environmental samples and surface swipe
samples have been collected from locations across Iraq
and taken to IAEA laboratories for analysis, and we
have reinstituted routine car-borne and hand-held
gamma surveys for the detection of undeclared nuclear
material.

The inspectors have also conducted a great
number of interviews of Iraqi scientists, managers and
technicians - primarily in the workplace in the course
of unannounced inspections - as a valuable source of
information about past and present programmes and
activities. The information gained has been helpful in
assessing the completeness and accuracy of Iraq's
declarations.

Resolution 1441 (2002) also clearly gave IAEA
and the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission the authority to determine the
modalities and venues for conducting interviews with
Iraqi officials and other persons. The first two
individuals whom the IAEA requested to see privately
declined to be interviewed without the presence of an
Iraqi Government representative. This has been a
restricting factor. Although the Iraqi Government
recently committed itself to encouraging Iraqi officials
and other personnel to be interviewed in private when
requested, regrettably the third request, made two days
ago, for a private interview was again turned down by
the interviewee.

The IAEA will continue to determine the
modalities and locations of the interviews, including
the possibility of interviewing Iraqi personnel abroad.
We will continue to report to the Security Council on
our efforts to conduct interviews according to our
preferred modalities and venues and our degree of
success in that regard.

Let me summarize briefly a number of the
findings that have resulted from our inspection
activities thus far.

First, we have inspected all of those buildings and
facilities that were identified, through satellite imagery,
as having been modified or constructed over the past
four years. IAEA inspectors have been able to gain
ready access and to clarify the nature of the activities
currently being conducted in these facilities. No
prohibited nuclear activities have been identified
during these inspections.

A particular issue of focus has been the attempted
procurement by Iraq of high-strength aluminium tubes
and the question of whether these tubes, if acquired,
could be used for the manufacture of nuclear
centrifuges. Iraqi authorities have indicated that their
unsuccessful attempts to procure the aluminium tubes
related to a programme to reverse engineer
conventional rockets. To verify this information, IAEA
inspectors have inspected the relevant rocket
production and storage sites, taken tube samples,
interviewed relevant Iraqi personnel and reviewed
procurement contracts and related documents. From
our analysis to date, it appears that the aluminium
tubes would be consistent with the purpose stated by
Iraq and, unless modified, would not be suitable for
manufacturing centrifuges. However, we are still
investigating this issue. It is clear, however, that the
attempt to acquire such tubes is prohibited under
Security Council resolution 687 (1991).

Another area of focus has been to determine how
certain other dual-use materials have been relocated or
used - that is, materials that could be used in nuclear-
weapons production but also have other legitimate
uses. A good example is the Iraqi declaration
concerning high-explosive HMX, which states that, of
the HMX under IAEA seals in Iraq at the end of 1998,
some had been supplied to cement plants as an
industrial explosive for mining. The whereabouts and
final use of the removed material are matters that will
require further investigation, although it will be
difficult to verify the disposition of the HMX that is
declared to have been used.

A fourth focal point has been the investigation of
reports of Iraqi efforts to import uranium after 1991.
The Iraqi authorities have denied any such attempts.
The IAEA will continue to pursue this issue. At this
stage, however, we do not have enough information
and we would appreciate receiving more.

We are also making progress on a number of
other issues related, for example, to the attempted
importation of a magnet production facility.

In addition to the new authorities granted by
resolution 1441 (2002), I believe that the unified
resolve of the Council to support the inspection process
has been a vital ingredient and must remain so if we
are to achieve a peaceful resolution of the situation in
Iraq. I trust that the Council will continue its unified
and unequivocal support for the inspection process in
Iraq.

Over the next several months, inspections will
focus ever more closely on follow-up of specific
concerns as we continue to conduct visits to sites and
interviews with key Iraqi personnel. We have begun
helicopter operations, which increase the inspectors'
mobility and their ability to respond rapidly to new
information and allow wide-scale radiation detection
surveys. Laboratory analysis of environmental samples
is continuing and we will be reinstalling air samplers
for wide-area environmental monitoring. We also will
reintroduce surveillance systems with video cameras in
key locations to allow near-real-time remote
monitoring of dual-use equipment.

By its very nature, the inspection process, both in
Iraq and elsewhere, is based not on trust, but on a
thorough process of fact-finding supported by access to
all available information. Where applicable, this should
include information available to States that may be
relevant to the purpose of the inspection. We have
begun in the last few weeks to receive more actionable
information from States - that is, information of
direct and current value for inspection follow-up. I
would continue to call on States that have access to
such information to provide it to the inspecting
organizations so that the inspection process can be
accelerated and additional assurances can be generated.

Finally, we have urged Iraq once again to increase
the degree of its cooperation with the inspection
process. In support of the IAEA inspections to date, the
Iraqi authorities have provided access to all facilities
visited, including presidential compounds and private
residences, without conditions and without delay. The
Iraqi authorities also have been cooperative in making
available additional original documentation in response
to requests by IAEA inspectors.

In our discussions with Iraqi officials last week in
Baghdad, we emphasized the need to shift from passive
support - that is, responding as needed to inspectors'
requests - to proactive support - that is, voluntarily
assisting inspectors by providing documentation,
people and other evidence that will assist in filling in
the remaining gaps in our information.

One example of how Iraq could be more
proactive was illustrated by the inspection of a private
residence just two weeks ago, which resulted in the
retrieval of a sizeable number of documents, some of
which were classified and related, in part, to Iraq's pre-
1991 efforts to use laser technology for enriching
uranium. While these documents do not appear to
reflect new or current activities related to nuclear
weapons in Iraq, they may enhance our detailed
understanding of certain aspects of Iraq's pre-1991
nuclear programme. It is urgent and essential,
therefore, that Iraq, on its own initiative, identify and
provide any additional evidence that would assist the
inspectors in carrying out their mandate.

This proactive engagement on the part of Iraq
would be - as we have told them - in its own best
interest and is a window of opportunity that may not
remain open for very much longer. Iraq should make
every effort to be fully transparent - with a
demonstrated willingness to resolve issues rather than
requiring pressure to do so. The international
community will not be satisfied when questions remain
open with regard to Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction; the world is asking for a high level of
assurance that Iraq is completely free from all such
weapons and is already impatient to receive it. The
sooner such assurance can be provided by the
inspecting organizations, the sooner the prospects that
a peaceful resolution will translate into a plausible
reality.

Inspections are time-consuming. I should mention
that even in the case of South Africa, where full and
active cooperation was forthcoming, it took the IAEA
approximately two years to complete the process in
that country. However, if inspection is successful, it
can ensure disarmament through peaceful means. It is
worth recalling that in our past experience in Iraq, the
elimination of its nuclear weapons programme was
accomplished mostly through intrusive inspections. It
is also worth recalling that the presence of international
inspectors in Iraq today continues to serve as an
effective deterrent to, and insurance against,
resumption of programmes to develop weapons of mass
destruction, even as we continue to look for possible
past activities.

To conclude, we have to date found no evidence
that Iraq has revived its nuclear weapons programme
since the elimination of the programme in the 1990s.
However, our work is steadily progressing and should
be allowed to run its natural course. With our
verification system now in place, barring exceptional
circumstances and provided there is sustained,
proactive cooperation by Iraq, we should be able within
the next few months to provide credible assurance that
Iraq has no nuclear weapons programme. These few
months, in my view, would be a valuable investment in
peace because they could help us avoid a war. We trust
that we will continue to have the support of the Council
as we make every effort to verify Iraq's nuclear
disarmament through peaceful means and to
demonstrate that the inspection process can and does
work as a central feature of the international nuclear
arms control regime.

