The President (spoke in Spanish): Before
proceeding with the approval of the agenda, I would
like to express the honour that I feel to preside over
this meeting on the sixth anniversary of the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
dealing with the participation of children in armed
conflicts.

I wish to highlight the presence of distinguished
guests, particularly the Minister for Development
Cooperation of Belgium, Mr. Charles Michel, and the
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Italy,
Mr. Vittorio Craxi. In addition, I offer special
acknowledgement to Permanent Representative of
France, Ambassador Jean-Maurice Ripert, for the
excellent work that he has done chairing the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2007/757)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Benin, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Colombia, Cote d'Ivoire, Egypt, El Salvador,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland, Iraq,
Israel, Japan, Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Mexico,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Slovenia,
Sri Lanka, Switzerland, Thailand, Uganda, United
Republic of Tanzania and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.

It is so decided.

Also, in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive Director of
the United Nations Children's Fund.

It is so decided.

Also, in accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Jo Becker, Representative of
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict.

It is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 7 February 2008 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2008/88, and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council to be held on Tuesday,
12 February 2008, regarding children and armed
conflict".

I propose, with the consent of the Council to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and previous practice in
this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
08-2361]
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took the seat reserved for him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/757, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.

I shall now give the floor to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.


