Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
We, too, thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing on the implementation of the mandate
entrusted to the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) under resolution 1770 (2007). We also
thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his statement on the
activities of the Multinational Force in Iraq.

We also welcome the presence at this debate of
our colleague, the Permanent Representative of Iraq.

As many have noted here, Iraq is still facing
major political, security, humanitarian and economic
challenges. Regarding the political process, the
challenges to be met remain numerous, particularly
with respect to power-sharing and the distribution of
the country's wealth. It is all the more urgent to
achieve consensus in those areas given Iraq's enormous
wealth, of which its people await the opportunity to
enjoy the dividends mortgaged by war.

We note, however, some progress towards
national reconciliation thanks to the compromises
achieved among various parliamentary groups, which,
following the adoption of the Justice and
Accountability Law on 12 January, were able to enact
the Law on Governorates not Organized into a Region,
the General Amnesty Law and the 2008 budget. Such a
climate should help to strengthen democratic openness
and establish greater trust among the political players.

08-3196]

However, regarding the regional implications of
the conflict, it is encouraging to note that the Iraqi
Government has launched significant initiatives to
strengthen Iraq's cooperation links with neighbouring
countries and regional organizations, in particular the
League of Arab States. Bahrain's announcement of its
intention to reopen its embassy in Iraq and the
prospects for the opening of other diplomatic missions
represent tangible results and are the sign of a certain
revitalization of State institutions. We also welcome
the efforts that have led to the withdrawal of Turkish
forces from northern Iraq.

The security situation remains generally difficult
in terms of incidents, including suicide attacks, that
continue to occur throughout the country, sowing
massive and indiscriminate destruction. Clearly, that
state of affairs is closely linked to the political
situation, which it is absolutely necessary to pacify.
The extension of the freeze on military activities
announced by Moqtada al-Sadr and the joint action
conducted by the Iraqi Government and the
Multinational Force in Iraq to neutralize and prevent
attacks are important in that regard, since they should
help to strengthen national security and unity.

On the humanitarian and human rights level, we
are particularly concerned about the tragedies
experienced daily by the civilian population, women
and children in particular, as well as about the
difficulties encountered in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to those vulnerable sectors. We urge all
parties to ensure strict respect for humanitarian law.

On a more positive note, we welcome the recent
decision of the Iraqi Government to ratify the United
Nations Convention against Torture, the full
effectiveness of which we hope for and encourage.

The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is
a major actor in the mobilization of domestic and
external efforts and energies to ensure the restoration
of peace to Iraq, as well as reconstruction and national
development. My delegation recognizes UNAMI's
decisive action, especially as reflected, first, in the
maintenance of ongoing contacts with the political,
governmental, parliamentary, diplomatic and other
authorities, and with the military offices based in
Baghdad, to encourage political dialogue and the quest
for national reconciliation. Second is its contribution to
the search for a solution to the problem of the borders,
which it has made a priority. Third is its participation,
together with several political and religious figures, in
activities dealing with the political process and the
establishment of a liaison with local authorities,
making it possible to have a better grasp of realities in
the field, particularly in Kirkuk, Mosul, Tikrit and
Irbil.

The fourth action is good cooperation with the
Independent High Electoral Commission and the
governmental and parliamentary authorities to ensure
the proper conduct of the electoral process so that the
elections are credible and the results will be accepted
by the Iraqi people. For that, as has been noted in the
Secretary-General's report, the relevant political
decisions must be taken to ensure the success of this
process.

The fifth and final action is the contribution to
international coordination and mobilization, as well as
to the strengthening of national capacities within the
framework of the Iraq 2008 consolidated appeal. Here
we congratulate the Mission and the entire United
Nations system for their unprecedented dedication. The
international community must continue to further
express its solidarity to the Iraqi people. We hope that
it will take advantage of the opportunity provided by
the Stockholm conference of 29 May 2008 on the
Compact with Iraq, and we wish all success in that.

The contributions to the initiatives for a
settlement of the internal border conflicts and to
strengthening capacity in the areas of human rights and
Iraq's relations with its neighbours also must be
credited to UNAMI.

With regard to regional dialogue, my delegation
welcomes the holding on 22 April 2008 in Kuwait of
the third expanded ministerial meeting of countries
bordering Iraq. The results of that significant meeting,
we believe and hope, will contribute to the
establishment of a better climate of confidence in the
region.

Iraq is at a turning point in its development. More
than ever, it needs the firm support of the international
community to emerge from the crisis and to rebuild.
The international community must also strengthen its
support for UNAMI's efforts, to which it has given the
mandate to assist the country along that path.

