Mr. Erwa (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, I would like to congratulate you, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are fully confident of your ability
and wisdom. We would also like to thank Sir Emyr
Jones Parry, the Permanent Representative of the
United Kingdom, for the wise way in which he
conducted the work of the Council last month.

We have returned to the Security Council for the
second time in less than a month because of Israel's
repeated violations of international law. God only
knows how long and how often we will have to
continue to come to the Council.

My delegation has followed with great concern
Israel's violation of Syrian and Lebanese air space and
its acts of aggression against the territory of both
countries that targeted a civilian site north-west of
Syria's capital, Damascus, and that caused material
damage. My delegation considers that act of aggression
to be a dangerous escalation that could threaten
international peace and security and make an already
bad situation vulnerable to incalculable and
uncontrollable repercussions. At the same time, my
delegation also condemns Israel's aggression against
Lebanese and Syrian territories, which we consider yet
one more in a long series of Israeli violations of
international norms and law and instances of Israeli
contempt for international legitimacy.

My delegation reaffirms its support for, and
solidarity with, the Syrian Arab Republic. We also
reaffirm its right to self-defence and to respond to this
act of aggression.

My delegation further asks the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility and to intervene
immediately to prevent Israel from continuing its
provocative acts of aggression against Syria, against
the Palestinian people and against neighbouring Arab
countries. My delegation reaffirms that is necessary to
abide by the provisions of the United Nations Charter
and by international law.

The blatant aggression committed this morning is
not an isolated event. It was preceded by another such
act on 8 January in the demilitarized zone between
Syria and Israel. Now Israel has once again returned to
its previous behaviour by committing another act this
morning. The Security Council is called upon to take
the necessary measures to ensure that Israel does not
continue its terrorist acts, and that it returns to its
senses and understands that its security lies in
withdrawing from the land it occupies and putting an
end to its acts of aggression against the Palestinian
people and its attacks against neighbouring Arab
countries.

