Mr. Sautter (Germany): I would like to thank Mr. James Swan and Mr. Francisco Madeira for their briefings, and I welcome Ambassador Osman _ to today's meeting. I would like to make five points. First, with regard to the electoral process, we would like to underscore that credible, free, fair and direct elections in late 2020 will be key to the building of a democratic State in Somalia. The elections will be the yardstick by which the current Somali Administration will be measured. We acknowledge that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) makes this much more difficult, yet the existing proposals on the table are, in our view, not sufficient. That has been made clear by other delegations, and we agree with them. A return to previous forms of governance, where a few groups decide for the whole country, must be avoided. What we need to see now is concrete progress towards implementing the principle of one-person, one-vote, wherever possible. Secondly, with regard to the political cooperation between the federal Government and the federal member states, such cooperation is key. We take note of some positive developments, including the July leaders' summit. At the same time, we feel that more progress will be necessary. The speedy nomination of the new prime minister would be an important step towards ensuring an inclusive process. At the same time, it is a basis for achieving sustainable progress, including on the question of elections and the transition plan. Thirdly, with respect to human rights, we are, like others, deeply concerned about the bill entitled "law on sexual intercourse-related crimes", proposed by a parliamentary committee. This is particularly concerning given that Somalia does not, unfortunately, have a good track record on sexual violence. Let me remind my colleagues that the Secretary-General, in his most recent report on children and armed conflict in Somalia (S/2020/174), reports that Somali security forces and regional forces were responsible for one in three crimes involving sexual violence between 2016 and 2019. We therefore strongly urge Somalia to respect its international human rights obligations and return to an inclusive and non-discriminatory text. In this context, we would like to welcome the agreement in the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict on the Somalia conclusions. These conclusions must now be implemented. Fourthly, with regard to security, the complex attack on the Elite Hotel this past weekend shows that the security situation remains a major challenge. We condemn attacks by Al-Shabaab on Somali civilians, security forces, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations and the international community. We extend our condolences to the victims and their families. We encourage all stakeholders to increase their efforts and speed up the work on the update and implementation of the security-transition plan. In this respect, we are looking forward to the AMISOM independent assessment, which will contribute to the assessment of the abilities and gaps in the Somali security forces. While this is no replacement for a stakeholder agreement it is still important. Fifthly, and briefly, on climate and security, we appreciate and support the work the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia has been doing in this field in particular.
