Mr. De Gucht (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all, Mr. President, I would like to thank you very
much for convening this briefing. I would like also to
thank our colleague Miguel Angel Moratinos Cuyaube,
in his capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), for his briefing on the activities of the OSCE,
which gave us a practical, comprehensive overview of
his highly appreciated chairmanship. As a former
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE and still a member of
its Troika, I am very well placed to understand the
challenge represented by the chairmanship. I should
like to assure him of Belgium's full support for his
efforts to advance the OSCE's agenda, which was
decided at the most recent Ministerial Council, held in
Brussels last December.

As a regional organization under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE continues
to be an important regional actor. Through its unique
concept of security, which includes the political,
military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions, and through its presence on the ground,
the OSCE is a stabilizing factor in the region.

Ijust want to say a brief word on Kosovo. For the
OSCE, which is very much present on the ground,
mandate problems are not an issue. There is certainly a
way to further strengthen the ties between the United
Nations and the OSCE while respecting their
respective mandates. In that regard, I am thinking
primarily of practical and operational cooperation on
the ground and between the two secretariats.

The tense situation in Georgia, both in Abkhazia
and in South Ossetia, is clearly a concrete example
justifying such cooperation between the organizations.
With specific regard to the 6 August incident in
Georgia, I thank the Spanish chairmanship for the
efforts made to try to clarify the origins of that
incident. I call on all actors concerned to shoulder their
full responsibility so that such incidents can be
prevented in the future.

I thank the Chairman-in-Office for his briefing. I
should like to wish him every success at the Madrid
ministerial meeting. I assure him of Belgium's full
support as a member of the Troika.
