Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2399
(2018), renewing the sanctions regime on the Central
African Republic. Following the adoption of resolution
2387 (2017), renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
last November, this resolution is a new Sign of the
Council's full attention to the situation in the Central
African Republic. In that context, that I would like to
underline three points.

First, the resolution similarly renews the measures
concerning the arms embargo, the travel bans and the
assets freeze. This system is still very relevant in the
light of the current situation in the Central African
Republic. Armed groups are, unfortunately, still
present in a large part of the territory and continue
to obtain supplies through illicit flows of arms and
ammunition from neighbouring countries. They also
exploit the illicit trafficking of natural resources to
enrich themselves. In this context, it is absolutely
essential that all Member States come together to fully
respect the sanctions regime so that it can be effectively
implemented in the service of peace in the Central
African Republic.

In addition, the exemption and notification
procedures remain effective tools allowing for the
Central African defence and security forces to be trained,
equipped and armed, while limiting the risk of arms
proliferation. They also support the Central African
authorities in their security sector reform process and
in their strategy of extending State authority.

To conclude on this point, it is important to
support the efforts of MINUSCA in the fight against
arms trafficking. To that end, the tasks of the working
group established within the Mission are specified so
that it can contribute to a better implementation of
the embargo. For example, it will be able to transmit
recommendations concerning weapons seizures when
trafficking routes have been identified.

Secondly, the resolution also sheds light on
incitement to violence, whether ethnic, religious or
against MINUSCA. Such incitement is a scourge for
the Central African Republic and at the root of violence
that claims too many casualties, among both the civilian
population and the Blue Helmets. In that context, the
perpetrators of these incitements to violence must
now know that their actions will not go unpunished.
Beyond the action undertaken by the Central African
justice system and international justice, the sanctions
regime on the Central African Republic will now
punish individuals who incite to violence, given their
potential to undermine peace, stability and security in
the Central African Republic. There can be no lasting
peace in the Central African Republic if such incitement
continues, and the Security Council intends to assume
its responsibilities.

In the same vein, I would also like to point out that
attacks on humanitarian workers are now recognized
as a designation criterion equal to, for example, attacks
on MINUSCA. The proliferation of such attacks, which
make the Central African Republic one of the most
dangerous countries in the world for that profession, is
unacceptable. Once again, we have sent a strong signal
to those who would attack the women and men whose
work is indispensable for people in need.

Finally, the resolution paves the way for the
development of criteria to assess the impact of the
arms embargo on the Central African Republic. While
we are not considering, in the short term, a loosening
of the arms embargo, taking into account the current
situation in the country, this is a question of showing
that the arms embargo will be able to evolve at the
right time, including in the light of progress of security
sector reform.

In the specific case ofthe Central African Republic,
sanctions are obviously not an end in themselves, but a
means to contributing to our shared goal, which is the
stabilization of and the return of lasting peace to the
Central African Republic.

In that context, I will conclude by reiterating
France's full support for President Faustin Archange
Touadera, as well as for the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
in their efforts to reach a comprehensive political
agreement and reconciliation of all those of the Central
African Republic.

