Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): We deeply appreciate
your having convened this important open debate,
Mr. President.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Pakistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference, as well as
with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. However, given the importance of the
issue, we have asked for the floor in order to
underscore our position.

Before doing so, however, allow me express my
deep appreciation to Special Coordinator Michael
Williams for his detailed report to the Security Council

this morning, as well as for his tireless efforts in his
capacity as Special Coordinator. I would like to take
this opportunity to wish him the best in his new role.

Year after year, we have held many debates on
the situation in the Middle East, including the occupied
Palestinian territories. Many important resolutions
have been adopted, some with strict binding mandates,
such as those of the Security Council. Yet the impasse
continues, with an end nowhere in sight. While we wait
in frustration for better times, the escalation of
violence and bloodletting and the continued Israeli
occupation of Arab lands and Israel's brutal
suppression of innocent men, women and children in
the occupied territories bring further outrage to our
conscience. Sadly, the factional infighting and
divisions among the Palestinians themselves also add
fuel to the fire, negating the prospects for genuine and
lasting peace in the region. Nonetheless, we are
somewhat encouraged by ongoing attempts to
consolidate national unity. We fear that those efforts
might be frustrated unless the parties concerned
demonstrate real and sincere will to move beyond the
status quo.

We remain deeply concerned at the continued
killing, arrest and detention of defenceless Palestinian
civilians by Israeli forces. We are also dismayed at the
worsening humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. It is of particular concern that
the planned Israeli blockade on the Gaza strip has
brought its economy to the verge of irreversible
collapse, thereby triggering a humanitarian disaster of
great proportions.

It is unfortunate that Israel is continuing its
illegal activities, in total disregard for international
sentiments and in contravention of United Nations
resolutions aimed at preserving the sanctity of the Holy
City of Jerusalem - Al-Quds Al-Sharif. The
excavation works below the Holy Al-Aqsa compound
is a specific issue that we spoke against at a previous
meeting of the Security Council. The ongoing
construction of the separation wall, in flagrant
disregard of the International Court of Justice advisory
opinion, is yet another instance of Israel's deliberate
defiance of international will. Such acts obviously do
not promote the cause of peace; rather, they set the
process back. We would therefore urge determined
efforts by the United Nations to bring those illegal
activities to an immediate end.
Although there have been many setbacks, my
delegation is nevertheless encouraged by some
glimmers of hope. We are heartened by the resumption,
albeit on a modest scale, of the Israeli-Palestinian
dialogue. We believe that will have a positive bearing
on the outcome of the Quartet meeting scheduled for
next month and on the United States-led international
conference scheduled for November. The Israeli
President's proposal to release all Palestinian detainees
in exchange for the cessation of all military operations
against Israeli targets merits attention. The release of
some 250 Palestinian prisoners and of some tax
revenues are steps in the right direction.

We recognize that a number of constructive
diplomatic initiatives and mediation efforts by the
international community are in place to provide fresh
impetus to the peace process. Similarly, we believe that
the recent Japanese-led initiative aimed at achieving
peace through economic development holds good
prospects for the peace process in the Middle East. We
urge the international community, particularly the
developed countries, to come forward with economic
development projects to resuscitate the war-ravaged
Palestinian economy.

My delegation reaffirms its full support for the
legitimate and inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to a sovereign and independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side with
Israel in peace, security and harmony. We maintain
that, if a just and sustainable peace is to take root,
Israel must withdraw its forces from all the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, and meet all its
obligations under the Geneva Conventions, the relevant
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and other peace initiatives, including the Road Map
drawn up by the Quartet. We urge all parties concerned
to return to talks and negotiate a breakthrough in the
peace process.

Although there has long been a broad consensus
in the international community that the Middle East
crisis must be resolved, peace in the region has
remained as elusive as ever. Have we lacked the
genuine will and determination to translate our words
into actions? Or have we failed to meet our collective
commitments? Either way, it has been a failure on our
part. Yet we should not wring our hands in utter
resignation; we must seize every opportunity to bring
the peace process back on track. We hope that our
deliberations here today will contribute, even if in a

very modest way, to the achievement of our long-
cherished goal of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

