Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): The Security
Council has just adopted resolution 2285 (2016) to
renew the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).
Angola abstained in the voting for a number of reasons
that we would like to outline, the first of which was a
desire to reaffirm the expression of our political will
and hope that it is never too late to correct mistakes.
Angola, as a member of the African Union, is ready
and remains fully engaged with regard to the search for
a just solution for the people of Western Sahara. We
regret that every proposed amendment to the draft,
which were presented by a number of Member States,
including Angola, met outright rejection. Indeed, there
was no meaningful negotiation on this text. We made
constructive proposals that, in our view, addressed the
legitimate concerns of the international community but
were not given due consideration.

Although we welcome the request for briefings by
the Secretary-General at least twice a year, we deem
it imperative to shorten the reporting period. The
Security Council needs to be informed and constantly
updated on developments on the ground. We believe
that the current yearly report does not fit such a need,
although the period has been reduced. The situation is
too volatile, and the Council needs to remain seized.
It must never miss the opportunity to act, as it did
recently when unfortunate decisions that changed the
operation of the Mission were made. The decisions
made last month by one of the parties to the controversy
have entailed serious consequences for the Mission's
ability to fulfil its mandate. The decision on staffing
has created a dangerous precedent for peacekeeping
missions around the world, and for the very reputation
of the Security Council, which is responsible for their
deployment and management. The resolution adopted
fails to address the situation with the seriousness and
engagement that it deserves. One of our colleagues this
morning referred to it as "significantly uncertain".

We would like to underscore that the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western
Sahara, dated 19 April, states that

"[w]ithout a suitable and fully staffed
international civilian component, the Mission
cannot fulfil a core component of its functions"
[and that] "the expulsion of most of the MINURSO
international civilian component can be expected
to be exploited by radical elements" (S/2016/355, para. 93).

And the Council is quite aware of the fact that,
unfortunately, those radical elements are very much
present in the region. The resolution should have
requested the immediate return of MINURSO to full
functionality without preconditions. That is one of the
main reasons why we abstained in the voting earlier.

We believe that the Security Council should
assume its responsibilities and address the failing
parties by imposing appropriate measures as it has
done in similar cases before. Angola cannot support the
adoption of what we consider to be a biased resolution
that validates double standards. The resolution should
also have reaffirmed the mandate of MINURSO,
including its political mandate, which is to assist
the parties to achieve a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. We
believe that MINURSO should also be given a human
rights mandate to monitor the human rights situation in
the territory, which is of great concern to members of
the Council.

In conclusion, Angola reaffirms its commitment
to continuing its constructive engagement in order to
support MINURSO's activities, with its full capacity,
as mandated by the Security Council and in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

