Ms. Stiglic (Slovenia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the initiative of Mexico to convene
this important open debate and for the personal
dedication and leadership of Ambassador Heller in
chairing the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered earlier by the acting head of the delegation of
the European Union, by the representative of Costa
Rica on behalf of the Human Security Network and by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of children and armed conflict.

We would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the other
distinguished guests for their presentations today. My
delegation was particularly touched by the testimony,
this morning, of a former child soldier, Manju Gurung.
We sincerely commend her for her courage and
strength, and we wish her all the best.

A great deal of progress has been made since the
issue of children and armed conflict was put on the
United Nations agenda. However, as we have heard
today, the situation of children in some parts of the
world is still alarming, and the international
community is faced with new challenges in addressing
the issue of children and armed conflict. We have noted
with regret that new parties engaged in the recruitment
of children have been added to the annexes of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/181).

Slovenia welcomes the latest report and the
recommendations contained in it. Stronger steps should
be taken to address accountability and end impunity for
perpetrators of violations, especially with respect to
those groups and individuals who persistently commit
grave violations against children and have been listed
in the report for more than five years. Slovenia is
convinced that the work of the International Criminal
Court and other international tribunals will help break
the culture of impunity for such crimes.

In this respect, we particularly support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to include
child recruitment and use in the mandate of all its
sanctions committees, to streamline the sharing of
information between the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict and its sanctions
committees, and to ensure briefings by the Special
Representative on Children and Armed Conflict to the
sanctions committees.

We also believe that specific provisions for the
protection of children should continue to be included in
the mandates of all relevant United Nations
peacekeeping operations, as well as political and
peacebuilding missions, including by means of the
deployment of Child Protection Advisers. We welcome
the efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in mainstreaming child protection into
peacekeeping missions.

Following the adoption of Security Council
resolutions 1882 (2009) and 1888 (2009), it is
important to improve collection and verification of data
on sexual violence against children and to develop the
capacity to document incidents and trends on killing,
maiming and sexual violence against children. We have
also noted the recommendation in the report that in
order to ensure the broad and effective protection of
children, including for the purposes of preparing action
plans, contacts between the United Nations and
non-State actors should be allowed.

The issue of children and armed conflict, as a
cross-cutting issue, needs a comprehensive approach,
where human rights, security and development go hand
in hand. It is important to efficiently and sustainably
address the short-, medium- and long-term impacts of
armed conflicts on children in an effective and
comprehensive manner. It is therefore not only
essential that children be released by armed forces and
groups and returned to their families and communities,
but it is essential also to address their psychosocial
well-being and to ensure their development and their
future without fear or threats of recruitment or the
commission of other grave violations against them.

This year the Security Council celebrates the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
which established the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. Moreover, we are commemorating the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional
Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We fully support the campaign for universal
ratification of the Optional Protocols to the
Convention. We welcome and encourage further
cooperation among the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Violence against Children,
UNICEF, other relevant bodies and civil society.
Finally, let me take this opportunity to encourage
the Security Council to continue to address the issue of
children and armed conflict and to seek the most
effective means to improve the situation of children.

