Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of October. I trust that, with your abilities and
wisdom, you will be able to guide our deliberations on
this important and critical issue so that the Council can
assume the role of maintaining international peace and
security that has been entrusted to it by the entire
membership of the United Nations.

The Government and the people of Egypt are
enraged not only because our Palestinian brethren are
suffering as a result of Israeli acts of aggression,
violence and oppression, but also because of the
intransigent and truth-denying position of Israeli
officials, who will not even admit Israel's clear
responsibility for the bloody events that have taken
place before the eyes of the entire world.

We meet in the midst of an explosive situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories brought about as a
result of rage and oppression. That rage exists because
of last week's provocative visit by the leader of the
opposition party to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Without any
sense of shame, that leader declared that his visit was
aimed at asserting what he referred to as Israel's right
to the holy place that is home to the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the Dome of the Rock. Those two monuments bear
within themselves clear testimony to the sovereignty of
the Islamic and Palestinian nation over them.

Everyone knows that the opposition leader is a
staunch opponent of the peace process and of the
legitimate restoration of the rights of Palestinians, as
well as someone whose aim is to inflame feelings and
incite anger and violence among the Palestinian people.
What we should really wonder about is the position of
the Israeli Government. On the one hand, that
Government claims that it is working for peace and the
achievement of a permanent solution to the Palestinian
conflict. On the other hand, we see that Government
allowing such a provocative visit to take place, even
providing tight security for it.

That situation makes us wonder seriously about
coordination between the Government and the
opposition in Israel. We see it as a desperate attempt to
bring pressure to bear on the Palestinian party with
regard to the issue of sovereignty over the holy sites in
Jerusalem, and in particular over Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

With regard to oppression, I do not really feel the
need to discuss that issue in detail before the members
of the Council. International media have recently
shown us the sad and tragic pictures of Palestinian
children, youths and men being gunned down by the
Israeli army. We have all seen the bloody and tragic
scene of the death of a Palestinian child in the arms of
his father. I hope that those scenes, which have broken
our hearts in Egypt and in the Arab world, will prompt
the members of the Security Council to act decisively
against the perpetrators of those atrocities.

The crux of this serious crisis can be seen in one
major element, namely, the question of Jerusalem -
East Jerusalem and the Old City in particular, which
have been forcibly occupied by Israel since 1967, as
have all other Palestinian territories. The international
community, members of the Security Council and
world public opinion have once again seen, from the
repercussions of the provocative visit to Al-Haram
Al-Sharif by the leader of Israel's Likud Party, how
deeply Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims feel about the
Holy City. The people of the world may also appreciate
how indignant they themselves would be if their
sanctuaries were to be similarly defiled.

The repercussions of recent events also prove to
everyone that Israel's claim that 98 per cent of the
Palestinian people are under Palestinian rule is totally
unfounded. Israeli tanks encircle Palestinian cities.
Live ammunition is used against demonstrators in the
West Bank and Gaza. The Palestinian people are still
under occupation. Even those places that were liberated
are stifled by Israeli forces when and as they please.

Some say that political measures, regardless of
when they occur and under what circumstances, must
target peace and support the peace process, and that
that can happen only if the Security Council is kept out
of political developments in the region and if such
measures are confined to the respective parties. We
believe that the achievement of peace in the region is
Egypt's first priority, as is well known. Egypt is
working tirelessly, with determination and wisdom,
with the co-sponsor of the peace process, the United
States of America, and with other parties for the
realization of this objective.

This does not mean, however, that the Security
Council is exempt from its responsibilities under the
Charter. The truth is still there, before our very eyes.
There is an occupying force, an occupied people and
occupied territories. There are international
conventions applicable to these territories and to the
situation and the status of the people. Foremost among
these conventions is the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, the applicability of which was confirmed by the
Security Council in its earlier resolutions. The Council
reiterated that these provisions apply to all Palestinian
territories, including Holy Jerusalem.

Accordingly, we call on the Security Council to
take measures that guarantee the non-entry by the
armed Israeli forces, including security and Army
forces, into the courtyard of Al-Haram Al-Sharif;
demand the immediate cessation of any harassment by
the Israeli Army of the Palestinian people; condemn
the acts perpetrated by the occupying Power in the
Palestinian territories; and call on the occupying Power
to abide by international legality and the provisions of
the relevant conventions, foremost among which is the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

We also call on the Security Council and its
members to reiterate their position that the Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, are occupied
territories, to which the Geneva Conventions apply.
Secondly, we call on the Council to investigate the
shameful events that have occurred and to hold
accountable the Israeli officials who opened fire on
Palestinian civilians and to bring them to justice.
Thirdly, the Council must condemn the provocative
visit of the leader of the Israeli opposition party.
Fourthly, it must work to guarantee the right to
compensation of the Palestinian civilians who were
injured or killed by these Israeli acts of aggression.

President Hosni Mubarak has already sent an
invitation to Chairman Arafat and to the Israeli Prime
Minister, as well as to Mrs. Madeleine Albright, the
American Secretary of State, to visit Egypt on
Thursday to discuss recent events and determine their
cause; to put an end to Israeli provocations and see to it
that they do not recur; and to reinvigorate the peace
process, to which we attach great importance.

A just and equitable peace is our common
objective. However, achieving this peace calls for
sincere determination on the part of both parties.
Sensationalism and negative provocations such as the
recent visit I spoke of earlier should not be allowed to
overshadow the sincere efforts of the American co-
sponsor of the peace process and the concerned parties.

If the Israeli side believes that it is in its interest
to escalate the situation so that it can achieve some
political gains, we would like to warn it, before the
Council, that such an approach will greatly jeopardize
the peace process. Israel must understand the
sensitivity of the situation with regard to the status of
Jerusalem. It must stop using military oppression to
defend political positions that it knows full well lack
any basis in international law or international
legitimacy. It knows also that such positions lack any
international support.

Al-Haram Al-Sharif is, and will remain, an
Islamic site. East Jerusalem is a Palestinian occupied
territory. Israel must terminate its occupation sooner or
later. We hope that the Council will understand the
gravity of the situation and act accordingly.

