Mr. E] Oumni (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by congratulating Argentina on
its successful presidency of the Security Council last
month. I also congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the Council's presidency. We wish you
every success.

I also thank Ambassador Gary Quinlan for his
quarterly report on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), as well as the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010).

The briefing given to us today shows that the
Committee continues to consider every case referred
to it, in particular reports of the Panel of Experts
concerning developments that undermine the provisions
of resolutions adopted by the Security Council. In that
regard, the Committee should overcome differences in
order to respond to potential violations of the sanctions
and proceed to consider the recommendations of the
final report (S/2013/33l, annex) ofthe Panel of Experts,
with a View to arrive at consensual conclusions on
implementing them.

We also encourage the Committee to positively
consider the possibility of signing a cooperation
agreement with INTERPOL, while fully abiding by the
relevant resolutions of the Council. We hope that the
Committee will continue to benefit from the impartiality
and professionalism of the Panel of Experts. However,
the cooperation of all Member States, including with
regard to requests for information, is essential to
fulfilling the mandate entrusted to the Committee by
the Council. We call on the Committee to continue to
make available to Member States any information and
clarifications that could facilitate the implementation
of the Council's relevant resolutions.

The summary to the most recent report
(GOV/2013/40) of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) indicates that, in spite of the stepped up
dialogue with the Islamic Republic of Iran since January
2012, it has not been possible to arrive at an agreement
on the structured approach document to settle pending
questions concerning the possible military aspects of
Iran's nuclear programme. In the light of the most recent
developments in the Islamic Republic of Iran, we hope
that that country and the IAEA will be able to swiftly
arrive at an agreement to begin substantial work on the
issue. As the relevant agency in the area of safeguards,
the IAEA should enjoy all the necessary cooperation in
order to make concrete progress on pending matters.
Based on our ongoing commitment to dialogue and
negotiation to peaceably resolve differences, regardless
of their nature, complexity or the sensitivities involved,
we welcome the continuation of talks between Iran and
the five permanent members of the Security Council
plus Germany (P5+l). We hope that this dialogue will
make it possible to make progress towards a solution
that is acceptable to the parties. The efforts of United
Nations bodies should aim to support the role and
work of the IAEA and encourage the stepping up of
talks between Iran and the P5+l to reach a negotiated
solution.

It is of crucial importance to prevent any weakening
of the non-proliferation regime and to work to ensure
that all States fulfil their safeguards obligations under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The strength and impact of the NPT and the
pursuit of the strategic objective of nuclear disarmament
remain dependent on the respect of all States for their
obligations arising from that fundamental instrument.

My country continues to support the global
objective of nuclear disarmament and to recognize the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for exclusively
peaceful ends. The non-proliferation regime is based on
a delicate balance between States' rights and obligations
that must be protected, preserved and strengthened
through the full respect of its provisions.

