Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Jallow and Brammertz for their reports and their very
comprehensive briefings. France reiterates its thanks to
all the staff of the Tribunals for the work carried out to
complete the pending proceedings.

We also welcome the transition that has been
taking place since 1 January 2012 in accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010) to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) branches of
the Residual Mechanism in order to allow the work of
justice to continue and run its course. We note in this
regard that 76 per cent of those recruited were from
the Tribunals' teams, which should contribute to the
effectiveness of the work and to support provided for
the completion of the Tribunals' work.
France pays close attention to the Tribunals as
they strive to reach their goal of delivering justice
in the context of the completion strategy and in full
respect for procedural safeguards. It is to that end that
the Council adopted resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194
(2014) on 18 December 2014.

Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, difficulties arising from
the departure of key personnel and the advanced age
of some of the accused are all factors that help to
explain the delay in meeting the deadlines established.
This delay makes resolute measures for an optimal
allocation of resources all the more necessary in order
to prevent gaps. As stated in resolution 2193 (2014) of
18 December 2014, the ICTY must continue its efforts
to complete its work as quickly as possible and facilitate
the earliest possible end closure in order to wrap up the
transition to the Mechanism. France welcomes in this
regard the transfer of ICTY records to the Mechanism,
which began in January 2015.

With respect to the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, France wishes to acknowledge the
importance of the closure of the Tribunal by the end of
2015, according to the timetable contained in resolution
2194 (2014). The continued downsizing of staff charged
with administrative and judicial activities is a positive
sign of a transfer of powers to the Mechanism, which
has already shouldered its responsibility to handle the
first appeal of a Tribunal judgment on 18 December
2014.

The arrest and transfer of the remaining fugitives
and the relocation of the 11 persons released after
acquittal or completion of sentence, who are still in
Arusha, will remain priorities for the Mechanism.
France reiterates that it will provide the same support
to the Mechanism as that given to the ICTR and calls
on all States to cooperate in this regard. Furthermore,
I would reiterate that France will spare no effort, in
particular as regards the two cases referred by the ICTR
to the French courts.

The twentieth anniversary of the Srebrenica
massacre, which has been described as genocide by both
the ICTY and the International Court of Justice, will
be commemorated this year. On that occasion, we must
welcome the important work carried out by the ICTY.
The Tribunal is the guarantor of the right to truth, the
exposure of facts, the fight against impunity and the
duty to remember. Through its judgements, its decisive
role in cooperation and mutual assistance between
various State prosecutors to prosecute so-called
intermediary criminals and its scope, it has played a
central role in national and regional reconciliation and
in reconstruction.

We continue to believe that regional and national
cooperation is the heart of an effective transition.
It is now up to the countries concerned to continue
to build States in which the rule of law prevails and
the independence of the judiciary is ensured. The
prosecution of so-called mid-level criminals must
remain a priority in that respect. Progress made in the
Strpci case, with the arrest by the Serbian authorities in
March of eight persons suspected of involvement in the
Srebrenica massacre, is an encouraging example but
must be part of an ongoing strategy.

The International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda are a major step in the fight against impunity.
While the Tribunals are implementing their completion
strategies, we need to recognize their work in terms
of jurisprudence, which must be kept alive. Archive
management, the dissemination of this work and
capacity-building are an essential link for the victims
and the international community as a whole.

