Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): I would
first like to warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, on
your country's presidency of the Security Council and
on the professionalism with which you are conducting
its work for the month of January. I also congratulate
your predecessor, the representative of the United
States. I welcome the significant contribution of the
Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste to our debate
this morning. I would also like to thank you, and
through you the other members of the Security
Council, as well as the Secretary-General, for their
valuable contributions to this open debate on
institution-building in the framework of post-conflict
peacebuilding.

Institution-building is a crucial factor in
stabilizing and strengthening sustainable peace in
countries emerging from conflict. Its modalities must
be studied in order to identify the conditions necessary
for it to succeed fully in the countries affected. In this
regard, I would like to share some modest reflections
with the Council.

One of the most difficult and key challenges is to
ensure that countries emerging from a devastating
conflict do not relapse into violence. Here, I welcome
the importance that the Council attaches to the efforts
of the international community to promote peace
processes. The first cardinal principle is to respect the
need for national ownership based on the specifics and
realities of each country concerned. The sole aim of
external support should be to strengthen national
capacities in order to establish and restore State
institutions, centrally and locally. It must also mobilize
civil society in order to credibly legitimize the exercise
of power and the modalities for managing public
affairs. The aim is to ensure as early as possible that
peacebuilding plans launch a participatory and
inclusive process that can restore basic services and
restart economic activity in order to bolster confidence
in and commitment to the peace process.

In designing different plans, we must seek to
identify national capacities and establish a partnership
with them so as to enable the established legal
authorities to be self-sustaining, to develop their own
expertise and ultimately to be capable on their own of
providing essential services and of earning legitimacy
in the eyes of their people. In order to help achieve
such a partnership between local actors and external
contributors, the United Nations must focus on
knowledge transfer and require it as an essential
criterion when recruiting external actors. The
permanency of the institutions established depends on
this requirement, and the Security Council should
supply the directives necessary in that respect.

In this context, Benin has solved the problem of
transfer of expertise by designating, for each foreign
expert recruited to supervise a project, a national
counterpart assigned to work in tandem with him or her
in order to ensure that projects under way can be
effectively carried out. Such experts are as likely to
come from countries of the South as of the North, but
they will come increasingly, we hope, from the South.
We hope that the forthcoming report on civil capacity
will address these issues.

Successful institution-building, in our opinion,
involves strengthening analytical capacities and
designing national strategies for a country's recovery
and development, while establishing an optimal
balance between the structural and functional
approaches. That will allow us to determine whether
new institutions must be established or if coordination
and cooperation mechanisms can be set up to carry out
specific functions to meet particular needs. Identifying
and meeting needs effectively requires the
establishment of a hierarchy of true priorities on the
ground in order to create the conditions necessary to
the success of activities under way, even in the face of
the fact that, in a post-conflict country, every need can
seem to be a priority.

Nonetheless, laying the groundwork in close
cooperation with national actors can help to identify
the absolute top priorities. Such work can help decide
which measures to take immediately and which to
implement in the short- and medium terms, with the
criterion for setting deadlines being their importance to
maintaining functions crucial to people's lives and the
stabilization of the country. Such work must also seek
to identify the most vulnerable populations to target for
emergency programmes and the restoration of basic
services.
In any case, it is always necessary to better
integrate all efforts involved, including those relating
to the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons; to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes; and to institution-building
and the restoration of economic activity. This can be
promoted through the granting of local procurement
contracts through peacekeeping operations in order to
rebuild local production capacity. That helps to
generate resources locally in a way that can promote
ownership of the recovery process. Thanks to its
purview and broad membership, the Peacebuilding
Commission is particularly sensitive to the causal links
that can lead to a better analysis of data collected on
the ground, which in turn can bring synergy to efforts
to help synchronize peacekeeping and peacebuilding

efforts.

In that context, the Council can make use of the
lessons learned by the Peacebuilding Commission in its
work in various theatres of operation in the countries
on its agenda. The mandates of peacekeeping
operations must incorporate peacebuilding perspectives
that take institution-building and the need for
synchronization into account at an early stage. That
will help to shorten the duration of peacekeeping
operations and to transition as soon as possible into
less complex peacebuilding missions designed to last
longer because of the nature of their tasks and related
long-term objectives.

The idea of devoting a part of the peacekeeping
budget to financing priority peacebuilding activities in
the countries affected must be expanded in order to
alleviate pressure on the resources of the Peacebuilding
Fund so that the Fund can truly serve the aims of
conflict prevention in the broad sense of the term,
including not only preventive institutional or
operational support activities, but also post-conflict
activities.
Current international affairs have many lessons to
teach us on the need to demonstrate greater flexibility
in applying criteria for the use of the Fund. It must
remain a rapid-reaction instrument for promoting
multilateral preventive diplomacy in all its forms and
for supporting Member States in difficulty, whether or
not they are classified as fragile States.

