Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I should like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting, as
well as Assistant Secretary-General Mueller for her
comprehensive briefing.

The humanitarian situation in Syria remains
catastrophic. We are extremely worried about the
escalation of violence in Idlib. The Al-Assad regime
continues to kill civilians and destroy civilian
infrastructure. The regime is more brutal, blatant and
outrageous than ever. Al-Assad knows that the reaction
of the international community will be limited to calls
and condemnations. Al-Assad knows that the Security
Council will meet, talk and adjourn. That is why he
continues with business as usual - why he continues
to kill. He does not need a message; he needs to see that
his actions will not go unpunished.

The presence of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham and other
terrorist extremist groups is an additional reason for
fragility of the situation in the region. However, the
killing of civilians under the pretext of fighting against
terrorism cannotbe accepted. International humanitarian
law must be respected under all circumstances. Let me
recall once again that the ongoing escalation in Idlib
is triggering new waves of displacements, potentially
leading to a chain reaction. As of this morning, 50,000
people have been moving towards the Turkish border
from the Idlib area, which will affect not only Turkey,
but beyond. We must therefore all make every effort to
preserve the status of Idlib as a de-escalation zone.

In the Operation Peace Spring area, in the north-east
of the country, the normalization of life is under way,
thanks to our cooperation with Russia and the United
States. The strip of land stretching from Afrin all the
way to Iraq along the Turkish-Syrian border has been
freed from terror organizations and the situation is more
secure and stable. Turkish agencies have been providing
humanitarian aid to the region since mid-October.
Following the previous two operations that Turkey
carried out in north-western Syria, more than 370,000
people have already returned voluntarily to their homes
and lands. We are working towards the same objective
in the north-east. All returns will continue to be
voluntary, safe and dignified, in close cooperation with
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
Some 123,000 people have already returned to their
areas of origin in the north-east. Local populations that
have been expelled from the north-east since 2011 want
and continue to return to their homes.

We all heard the statement delivered by Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller. There is one
undisputable fact - the United Nations cross-border
mechanism is vital for millions of people in Syria. This
is not a political matter; it is a humanitarian urgency.
This afternoon, when the Council votes, the choice is
between the needs of the Syrian people and the wishes
of the Al-Assad regime. The Council will either decide
to extend a lifeline to the Syrian people or extend a
helping hand to the Syrian regime. Members of the
Council must leave aside their political calculations and
focus on the humanitarian consequences.

The first revised draft resolution included the
addition of Tall Abyad to the crossings mandated for
use by the United Nations. The importance of the Tall
Abyad crossing point for United Nations operations
has already been explained by the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, as well as by
Assistant Secretary-General Mueller this morning. It is
an old and functional crossing point that was promoted
to category A in 2008. The Bab Al-Hawa and the Bab
Al-Salam border crossings, which are also among
the cross-border mechanism crossing points, are also
designated under the same category. The Tall Abyad
area is convenient to establish a United Nations logistics
cluster for the collection and distribution of aid items.

In the short term, the Tall Abyad crossing point
will serve the needs of the current population and
will be instrumental to reach people in need in Raqqa
and Al-Hasakah, which have a total population of
approximately 450,000. In the medium and long
terms, humanitarian aid delivered through the Tall
Abyad crossing point can also be expanded to other
regions in the north-eastern part of Syria. Throughout
the negotiations, a great majority of Member States
supported the inclusion of the Tall Abyad crossing
point in the mechanism.

It has been claimed that the addition of the Tall
Abyad crossing point is an attempt to legitimize the
situation in the north-east. Turkey does not need the
blessing of any other country to defend itself against
terrorist threats. Operation Peace Spring was a limited
cross-border counter-terrorism operation to fight
terror organizations, such as the Kurdish Workers
Party, the Democratic Union Party and the People's
Protection Units and Da'esh. As President Erdogan has
emphasized on multiple occasions, Turkey cannot and
will not tolerate any terrorist activity along its borders.

During the negotiations, no objection was raised
as to the benefits of the addition of the Tall Abyad
crossing point. All the counter-arguments were
political in nature. Discussions on the draft resolution
and the addition of the Tall Abyad crossing point must
focus only on humanitarian issues and needs. The
politicization of this issue will not serve the needs of
the Syrian people. It is high time for the Council to do
what is right and to renew the cross-border mechanism
for 12 months, with the addition of Tall Abyad to the
crossing points mandated for use by the United Nations.

The meeting rose at 12.40p.m.
