Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I speak today as the representative of one ofthe
main parties concerned in the item on today's agenda.

How is it possible, in the twenty-first century,
for the United Nations to accept Israel's continued
occupation - an occupation that is military, racist and
colonial, an occupation that involves heinous crimes
and violations and supports terrorism? How can we
continue to allow the United Nations to fail to uphold
its legal and historic responsibility for ending the Israeli
occupation that has plagued our lands for more than half
a century? That is despite the fact that the Organization
has adopted hundreds of resolutions calling for an
end to this racist, colonizing occupation that bears a
strong resemblance to apartheid. Do we need more
commissions of inquiry, fact-finding missions, expert
groups and quartets to convince us of the gravity of
the Israeli occupation? The United Nations is being
severely tested. If we want to maintain what is left of its
credibility, some countries will have to end their policies
of hypocrisy, double standards and trafficking in their
peoples' interests. Member States must act with deeds
rather than words by taking practical measures that can
force Israel to implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions, so that we can put an end this colonizing
occupation and the unprecedented tragic suffering that
Arab citizens have endured for decades in the Syrian
Golan and other occupied Arab territories.

There are those among us who should not deceive
themselves and the rest of the world by continuing to
provide excuses and justifications for Israel's policies.
We are all well aware that successive Israeli Governments
have never cared about peace but have been eager to
continue with their policies of occupation, settlement
and aggression. They have occupied and annexed the
Syrian Golan and Palestinian Jerusalem. They have
committed crimes of aggression and war against
humanity; they have killed United Nations envoys and
peacekeepers; they have attacked Christian and Muslim
religious sites and are now trying to Judaize the State.
Israel's current Prime Minister has stated clearly that
he rejects a two-State solution. In 1991, Israel's former
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said in a statement on
the margins of the Madrid Conference that the Israeli
delegation had instructions simply to keep the talks
going for 10 years in order to buy time. It is shocking that
here in the Security Council there are those who would
deny Palestinians their most basic rights, including the
right to establish a State on their national territory and
to set a deadline for ending the Israeli occupation. They
continue to support Israel economically, diplomatically
and politically. They continue to guarantee its military
superiority and acquisition of nuclear weapons, as well
as protecting it from any accountability.

Israel has occupied the Syrian Golan since 1967.
It has imposed a bitter reality on Syrian citizens there
that must be ended by every possible means guaranteed
under international law. The United Nations must
therefore shoulder its responsibility for dealing with
that reality with full seriousness and through the
implementation of the relevant resolutions, particularly
Security Council resolution 497 (1981). Israel must end
its systematic and grave violations of human rights.
There should be an end to the policies of settlement,
terrorism, repression, racial discrimination and theft of
the Golan's natural resources, including water, oil and
gas, as well as halting the arbitrary arrests of Syrian
citizens. In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General
and the Security Council to exert the humanitarian
efforts needed to force Israel to release all Syrian
detainees, most importantly the Nelson Mandela of
Syria, Sedqi Al-Maqet, who was arrested again in
February for no reason except his documentation of the
relationship of Israel's occupation forces with terrorist
groups in the area of separation in the Syrian Golan.
He was imprisoned in Israeli detention centres for
27 years on no legal grounds, simply because he would
not renounce his allegiance to Syria and refused to
carry an Israeli identity card.

There is international silence around such Israeli
practices. Israel has violated the 1974 Separation of
Forces Agreement, endangered the lives of staff of
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) and undermined UNDOF's mandate by
supporting terrorist groups in the area of separation,
including Jabhat Al-Nusra, which is linked to Al-Qaida,
including by providing such groups with all kinds of
logistical support, even treating their injured members
in Israeli hospitals. We therefore demand that this
grave issue receive serious and immediate attention.
The Secretariat and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have ignored it, and there can be no
justification for that.

In that regard, I would like to point out that it is clear
to all of us that some speakers' misleading statements
are designed only to fabricate areas of contention
in order to distract the Security Council's attention,
reduce pressure on Israel and mask the fact that Israel
has rejected a two-State solution and the entire peace
process. To the representatives of the United Kingdom
and the United States, I say here that they must stop
their hypocrisy and lies. If they are concerned about
the situation of Palestinian refugees, they should not
support Israel, which constitutes the main reason for
the ordeal that those refugees have endured since
1948. They are partners in creating and continuing
that ordeal, whether inside or outside Syria. They
have used the veto dozens of times in order to protect
Israel's failure to implement the right of return under
General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Syria has taken
in those refugees, considering them to be its brothers
and sisters, welcoming them and treating them with
the same generosity we show to Syrians, and we will
continue to make every effort to protect them from the
terrorism supported by the United States, the United
Kingdom and other regional and Arab States, until they
can return to their homeland in occupied Palestine.

Finally, the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia used shameful and unacceptable words to refer
to my country. I will not address his political incitement,
which is based not on information but on ignorance. He
has forgotten that this item on the agenda concerns the
Palestinian question, and he has been doing a service
to the Government of Israel and its allies. Zionism and
Saudi Arabia are at the root of terrorism, fanaticism and
the culture of hatred in the world. It is the culture of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. The culture of
beheading is a culture from Jahili times; it is takfiri,
Wahhabi and it comes from Saudi Arabia.

Saudi Arabia's policies have sowed the seeds of
sectarian sedition in the region. It will pay the price
for that mistake. The threats made by its representative
against my country and his claims that Saudi Arabia
is ready to help the Syrian people only confirm that
the hands of his country's rulers are red with Syrian
blood and that they are deeply involved in funding,
harbouring and supporting Wahhabi terrorists. Saudi
Arabia sends mercenaries from all over the world to
Syria so that they can undermine its stability.

Saudi Arabia continues to be the centre of the
culture of hatred and sectarianism. It is very much like
Zionist Israel. Ifthe Ambassador of Saudi Arabia really
has the authority to threaten my country as he just did,
then I shall test him now. I ask him, before all present,
to show us what he can do against my country. We will
cut off any hand that tries to hurt Syria; the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia will receive the punishment that it
deserves.

