Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Lowcock for his
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria.

We would first like to comment on the Council's
adoption just now of resolution 2449 (2018),
extending the mandate for the cross-border delivery
of humanitarian assistance into Syria. Our position on
that non-transparent - to put it mildly - mechanism
is well known. The new realities in the Syrian Arab
Republic demand that it be rejigged with the ultimate
goal of being gradually but inevitably removed. That
fact that that view was not reflected in the resolution
determined our position on the vote. We were not
about to block it altogether, owing to humanitarian
considerations and appeals from our partners in the
region. However, we want to point out that its text is
divorced from reality and is based on four-year-old
formulas. For example, why keep the Dar'a-Ramtha
cross-border checkpoint on the list when the Syrian
authorities have been controlling it from the Syrian side
for a long time now? In the next few months we intend
to monitor the supply of humanitarian assistance under
the cross-border mechanism carefully and demand
proper transparency and accountability.

The Secretariat's methods for preparing its reports
on the humanitarian situation in Syria should also be
carefully reviewed. The current report (S/2018/1104)
does not cover such important points as assistance in
rebuilding infrastructure, the trends in the return of
refugees, the impact of unilateral sanctions on people's
lives and mine-clearance issues. We urge our colleagues
to reconsider the inflexibility of their approaches,
which have little to do with the current situation in
Syria, and to join in the collective efforts to improve
the country's difficult socioeconomic situation, restore
what the terrorists have destroyed and assure the
inalienable right of refugees and internally displaced
persons to return. In that context, we would like to
point to the announcement by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that more than 250,000
Syrians are ready to return home next year.

In our view, a selective approach to the provision
of assistance to the Syrian people is unseemly.
Politicizing issues related to humanitarian assistance is
unacceptable. People cannot openly defame the Syrian
Government while ignoring the unilateral steps taken
by other actors in the Syrian conflict. At the very least,
it is unethical to pretend that Raqqa does not exist. And
yet 80 per cent of the city's civilian infrastructure lies
in ruins. They are still pulling bodies out from under the
rubble of people who died in the campaign to liberate
the city from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), who according to some estimates number more
than 8,000. Incidentally, at the time no one supported
the proposal to introduce humanitarian pauses in order
to get civilians away from the bombardments.

We need to urgently resolve two issues that are
critical to improving the situation in Syria. The first
is lifting the unilateral sanctions introduced by a
number of States without delay. Those restrictions
harm ordinary Syrians most of all, as independent
experts, including some in the United Nations system,
have acknowledged, by the way. Secondly, we have to
end the illegal occupation of Syrian territory, which
is not only undermining its territorial integrity and
sovereignty but also strengthening separatist trends
there, and that represents a threat to the national
security of neighbouring countries.

Withdrawal from the 55-kilometre so-called
security zone established by the United States around
the Syrian town of Al-Tanf is the main precondition for
a lasting solution to the Rukban problem. As we know,
the conditions in the camp there, which according to
various estimates is housing as many as 50,000 people,
are very difficult, in fact bordering on a humanitarian
disaster, with the residents basically being held hostage
by the illegal armed groups active in the area that are
linked to ISIL. Considering the deteriorating situation
in the camp, at the beginning of November Russia
supported sending a United Nations humanitarian
convoy and made significant efforts to help organize
it, including through its contacts with the Government
of Syria. Unfortunately, the humanitarian operation
within the 55-kilometre zone was not well organized.
The distribution of the humanitarian aid was farmed
out to militants from the Maghawir Al-Thawra group.
The staff of the United Nations and the Syrian Arab
Red Crescent had very limited access to the distribution
process, which resulted in part of it falling into the
militants' hands. That means that the next delivery of
humanitarian aid to Rukban must be carefully thought
through and the shortcomings of the first convoy
eliminated. We have to agree on parameters that
will ensure maximum transparency and the targeted
distribution of assistance without the participation of
illegal armed groups, and the Americans occupying the
area have the responsibility for that.

The fact that the trend towards stabilization is
strengthening in Syria is undeniable. Despite the
continuing problems, there has been genuinely positive
progress on the humanitarian front that is particularly
noticeable in the territories controlled by Damascus.
As we have repeatedly stressed, at this critical time the
international community must now extend a helping
hand to the Syrians in order to help them overcome
the devastation and restore normal life for those who
have made the decision to return voluntarily to their
homeland. Incidentally, since the Russian initiative on
this was launched in July the total number of returnees
is now in the tens of thousands.

Today our American colleagues gave us
disinformation squared. In April the Syrian Government
was blamed for a staged chemical attack in Douma
in eastern Ghouta. The outcome of the investigation
is still unknown. The experts are apparently still
collecting something or other. Might that be because
admitting the provocation would mean acknowledging
full-on involvement in the illegal act of aggression in
April for which the provocation served as an excuse?
And now, when we have reliable information that shells
containing chlorine were used by the same militants
who had used them before - which our Western
partners had admitted - they have come up with a new
tactic, accusing Syria and Russia of disinformation and
forgery. The Syrian Government has invited specialists
from the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons to Syria, but for some reason they are in no
hurry to arrive. Apparently they are studying something
remotely. Where other areas were concerned, they
were in a rush to get there, although it is true that they
did their evidence-collecting in spots far from where
the incidents had actually taken place. And yet now
Washington has borrowed a brilliant formula originally
dreamed up by London whereby the Syrian Government
poisoned its own citizens with tear gas and then blamed
the militants. Gentlemen, this is all dreadfully clumsy
and we can see right through the propaganda.

The Astana guarantors are now focusing on
the situation in Idlib within the framework of the
implementation of the 17 September stabilization
memorandum. However, it must be understood that the
importance of a sustainable ceasefire does not negate
the need to continue working to effectively combat
terrorism. We note Turkey's serious efforts within
its existing commitments to separate the terrorists
from moderate groups. It would be helpful if those
who originally supported those groups with the aim
of replacing the legitimate Government made efforts
to educate them. That would be a more fundamental
contribution to the efforts to reach a settlement than the
constant barrage of groundless questions and demands
directed at Russia and other States about what to do and
how to do it.

Russia and the other guarantor countries will
continue their intensive efforts on the political front
with regard to implementing the decision taken by the
Syrians in Sochi to form a constitutional committee.
Right now, the negotiations are at a particularly intensive
stage. We continue to believe that all the parameters
for the activity of a constitutional committee should
be approved by the Syrians themselves. That is the
only way that it can be effective and functional. We
want to emphasize that there is no viable alternative to
a constitutional committee. We urge everyone to join
in the collective work of establishing a comprehensive
political process, which is crucial to Syria, the Middle
East and the entire international community, under
the auspices of the United Nations and in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

