Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank you, Madam, for convening this open debate
under the Argentine presidency on the working methods
of the Security Council. We commend this initiative
and the exemplary manner in which this issue has been
addressed under the direction of the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters for two
consecutive years.

My country endorses the statement to be made
by the representative of Switerzeland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group.

The results of our work allow us to highlight what
it is possible to achieve in the Council when our efforts
are characterized by commitment, tenacity and team
spirit. In particular, we believe that the consensus
adoption of six notes of the President, addressing
issues of key importance to the dynamic of this body,
its greater openness to the enlarged membership and
accountability, deliver added value to our work.

The working methods of the Security Council,
designed to improve its efficiency and transparency,
have a direct impact on the legitimacy of our decisions,
and thus in the exercise of democratic practices.
Chile, as a non-permanent member of the Council,
appreciates the performance of the Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and the
progress made in the various issues proposed, aware
that their effects extend beyond this principal organ of
Nations.

One of the issues of greatest concern to Chile with
respect to the Council's working methods is the need for
greater transparency, inclusiveness and accountability,
and to safeguard the effectiveness and efficiency of
its proceedings. In that respect, we support the two
proposals guiding this debate, concerning the extension
of the mandate of the Office of the Ombudsperson and
the effective follow-up of situations referred to the
International Criminal Court.

In that regard, Chile values the role that has been
played by the Office of the Ombudsperson since 2009
and its contribution to strengthening due process
through a review system for those who request to be
removed from the list of sanctions of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities. Our country supports the initiative to ensure
that other Committees can benefit from this entity, with
a possible extension of the Office's mandate to other
sanctions committees as a mechanism for promoting
respect for due process in our procedures. While we are
aware that there is room to improve the 1267 Committee
mechanism, as suggested by the Omburdsperson
herself, we are also convinced that the very existence
of the post of Ombudsperson provides the necessary
guarantees of human rights and due process, given
that she can make recommendations to the Al-Qaida
Committee independently and impartially.

Regarding the monitoring of Security Council
referrals to the International Criminal Court, Chile
considers that the responsibility of this organ should
not be understood as being limited to its referral
of situations to the Court and its hearing of an
occasional brief presentation of its Prosecutor. The
Council is responsible for maintaining appropriate
dialogue with the Prosecutor and for undertaking
responsible follow-up - and adopting the necessary
measures - of the information that the Prosecutor
and the Court communicate to the Council. That is
so because two years ago the Council, in the context
of its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security, embraced the goal of ensuring justice
and accountability for the most heinous crimes
against humanity, pursuant to the Rome Statute. The
Council's silence, the Prosecutor's briefings and the
communications of the Court and the President of the
Assembly of States Parties point, in our opinion, to a
failure in meeting that responsibility. We believe that
enhancing cooperation and communication channels
between the Council and the International Criminal
Court on these cases is desirable and feasible, and we
are willing to pursue this line of work.

We cannot conclude without recalling that the
greatest political challenge that we must continue to
address is the comprehensive reform of the Security
Council. That is why we wish to reiterate in this context
that Chile favours a serious debate in the General
Assembly on the French proposal to limit the veto in
cases of crimes that involve the responsibility to protect,
and to strengthen the preventive role Security Council.
This is one aspect of the irrevocable commitment of
my country to United Nations action and to promoting
the protection, dignity and fundamental rights of all
people.

