Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I should
first of all like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
placed this very important issue concerning children
on the agenda of the Security Council under Germany's
presidency. I also congratulate Ms. Zerrougi on
her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
I wish her every success in her work. Lastly, I would
like to thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his introduction of the
report (S/2012/261) ofthe Secretary-General, as well as
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. David Tolbert, President of the International Center
for Transitional Justice, for their relevant contributions
to this debate.

It is evident that armed conflict has always posed
a grave threat to peace and security where children are
concerned, including to protecting their rights. Quite
often, they become deliberate targets and collateral
victims of such conflicts, while not themselves being
the cause for them. It is therefore a source of great
concern to note that, in most conflicts throughout the
world, children are forced to play an active role by
participating actively in combat or by taking on other
roles incompatible with their status as children.

In the world today, approximately 250,000 child
soldiers are subjected to grave violations oftheir rights,
specifically through recruitment, sexual violence,
death and mutilation and attacks against schools. In all
of that, they are the primary victims. It is difficult to
explain such attacks against the honour and dignity of
children against the backdrop of the 20 November 1989
international Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which calls for respecting and protecting children's
rights. The reason for that is clearly owing to the inability,
difficulty or refusal to implement the provisions of the
Convention, as well as similar legal instruments. But it
is also due to a lack of national policies to safeguard the
well-being of children. Moreover, where Governments
have taken steps or adopted action plans on children,
implementation suffers from the lack of follow-up and
a low level of real involvement on the part of local
authorities and civil society.

My country would nevertheless like to commend
the decisive role of the United Nations in protecting
children's rights, which is manifested in the adoption
of the Convention as well as numerous resolutions of
the Security Council on this issue. That constitutes real
commitment and advocacy on behalf of protecting the
rights of children.

In that regard, I would like to commend the
Security Council's holding of private consultations to
present the criteria for the listing in annex II of the
reports of the Secretary-General of groups responsible
for grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. Those consultations are very much in
line with the implementation of resolution 1998 (2011),
which included attacks on schools, hospitals and their
personnel as criteria for listing perpetrators on the list
contained in the Secretary-General's report - whereas
previously the criteria included only sexual violence,
murder, mutilation and the recruitment of child soldiers.

It is also important that we commend the results of
the Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, which include providing guidance to
the Council with respect to its conclusions, resolutions
and presidential statements, with the aim of helping
countries experiencing armed conflict to safeguard
children.

As party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
as well as other relevant international legal instruments,
Togo strives to make the protection of children's rights a
reality by adopting legislative and regulatory measures,
including making school mandatory and providing
free primary schooling. Moreover, in July 2007, Togo
adopted a law on children that mandates a prohibition
on recruiting children under the age of 18 for service
in our national armed forces. For some time now, my
country has carried out awareness-raising campaigns
on this issue among the population, in particular aimed
at parents.

Every State Member of the Organization should
engage with determination in establishing the
conditions in which children can grow up free from
all violence and any violation of their rights. One of
the ways to reach that goal is to include respect for the
Convention on the Rights of the Child among the rules
governing the conduct of officials and all actors in
national society, as well as to stipulate penalties when
there is a failure to implement those rules. That is why
my country fully endorses the proposals contained
in the report of the Secretary-General, especially the
request made of the Security Council to encourage
States that have not yet done so to become party to
all the international legal instruments concerning
the rights of the child, as well as to work to integrate
them into their national legislation so as to ensure
their effective implementation. Similarly, we support
the recommendation that the Council ensure that the
specific provisions with respect to the protection of
children continue to be in all of the relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. In that
regard, I would again like to commend the work being
done by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in
that area.

Togo continues to believe that the ongoing
perpetration of violations of children's rights in armed
conflicts is due to the impunity of the perpetrators.
The latter, whoever they are, must be tracked down
and arrested, so that they can be held accountable
for their acts. We also commend the decision of the
International Criminal Court in the Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo case, which clearly illustrates the efforts of the
international community to put an end to the impunity
of perpetrators of abuses against children. Identified
perpetrators need to be brought to justice, which would
presuppose, inter alia, strengthening the national
legislation of the countries involved and establishing
close cooperation between States in order to restrict the
freedom ofmovement ofviolators who are being sought.
When there is no more impunity or safe haven for the
perpetrators and masterminds of serious violations of
the rights of the child, our world will be able to hope
to put an end to the violence against children in armed
conflict.

In conclusion, I would point out that, in voting
in favour of resolution 2068 (2012) this morning, my
country wished to reaffirm its firm commitment to
fighting against the serious violations against children,
particularly in situations of armed conflict. That is why
we regret that the Council failed to adopt the resolution
unanimously despite the efforts undertaken by various
parties to reach a consensus on certain key issues. We
firmly believe that when it is a matter of issues such
as the fate of children in armed conflict, the Security
Council should do its utmost to reach the necessary
unanimity, which will only lend greater credibility to
the text that it adopts.

