Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence in this Chamber and recognize the importance
of the report that he has just presented to us
(S/2008/354). We would also like to welcome the
President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadic', and the President
of Kosovo, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, and to thank them for
their respective statements.

Before getting into the subject at hand today,
related to the future of Kosovo, I would like to
highlight two subjects that are particularly important to
Panama. I would like to say first that Panama would
have preferred that the differences between Serbia and
Kosovo had been addressed in a different way.
However, Panama recognizes that it is the
responsibility and the capability of the Secretary-
General to implement the mandates given to him by the
Security Council and, accordingly, to adjust those
mandates as the circumstances on the ground continue
to change. Secondly, we would emphasize the
preponderant role to be played by regional
organizations in the resolution of issues being dealt
with by this Council.

Referring now to the substance of this issue, we
cannot deny that the reality on the ground in Kosovo
today is very different from the reality that existed
when the Security Council approved resolution 1244
(1999) without an end date. Not only have we now
witnessed Kosovo's declaration of independence and
its subsequent recognition by a significant number of
countries, including some members of this Council, but
also, less than a week ago, with the support of the
broad majority of the Kosovars, a constitution came
into force which bestowed the State powers upon
Kosovo and which, in addition, invites the European
Union to assume a supervisory role in the
establishment of the rule of law in the country.

Moreover, the European Union, as the major
regional organization with respect to this issue, has
played an important role in Kosovo since resolution
1244 (1999) came into force and has acted in
accordance with the operative part of that document.
Moreover, and due to the changing situation on the
ground, the European Union has made public its
intention to play a greater role in Kosovo and to
progressively assume, through the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX Kosovo),
part of the mandate that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) has seen
fit to give to it. Furthermore, the role of NATO as a
guarantor of the security of Kosovo and trainer of the
multi-ethnic Kosovo security force is also to be borne
in mind here.

In these circumstances, we support the proposals
of the Secretary-General to adapt the UNMIK format
to the current reality as well as the intention of the
European Union to assume, as has been deemed
appropriate by the Secretary-General, part of the
responsibilities of the United Nations in Kosovo.

This approach is particularly appropriate and
necessary in light of the inability of the Council to
reach agreement on this matter and given the open-
ended nature of resolution 1244 (1999). If we do not
take this step and deal with the reality of this proposal,
we would be ignoring our primary mandate to ensure
international peace and security. Instead, we would be
prioritizing political questions of a national character.

Finally, we would like to make it clear that all
executive action, be it on the part of UNMIK, EULEX
or the Kosovar authorities, must guarantee the security
of the whole Kosovo community, including minority
communities.

