Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for the initiative that you have taken to
hold this public debate on children and armed conflict.
The importance of what is at stake and the seriousness
of the situation deserve the continuing attention of the
Security Council in this regard.
Ten years ago, the Machel Report contributed to
putting the theme of child soldiers and, more generally,
children in armed conflict on the international
community's agenda. Today, how can one help but be
shocked by the facts that are contained in the
Secretary-General's report before us (S/2006/826), by
elements that he personally has just shared with us and
also by the cruel realities just recalled by his Special
Representative, Ms. Coomaraswamy, by the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, and by the
representative of Save the Children, Mr. Oling Olang.

Many parties, specifically armed rebel groups but
also in certain cases Government armed forces or
militias associated with them, continue to recruit or use
children in armed conflict. In Ituri, in Darfur or in
northern Uganda, young girls continue to be the
victims of the most serious forms of sexual violence in
a systematic manner. The kidnapping of children, to
recruit them as combatants, to reduce them to slavery
for armed groups, to make them disappear within the
framework of a policy of ethnic cleansing, or even with
the aim of obtaining ransom, continues to be
widespread. When it is not schools that are attacked, it
is often the children themselves who are killed,
wounded or even denied access to care by the
belligerents.

The conclusion, therefore, is a stark one, but does
that mean that we have done nothing? Despite the
sense of disgust that we may feel at times, given the
ongoing violations in the field, we do need to
acknowledge the work done by the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities. Since 1999, no other
thematic issue on the Council's agenda has been the
subject of such sustained and operational attention. As
a result, and due to the adoption of Council resolutions
1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005), today we have many
tools necessary to fight the scourge.

First, specific standards exist, including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its second
Optional Protocol, as well as the Rome Statute. The
international community has also identified the best
practices for the demobilization of children and their
reintegration into their communities through the
so-called Cap principles, which will be revised and
enhanced during a conference to be held by France and
UNICEF next 5 and 6 February in Paris.
Secondly, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF are working together
to fight abuse and protect children, each party doing so
with respect for the mandate of the other and in close
cooperation with other actors in the United Nations
system. My delegation wishes to take the opportunity
to pay tribute to the actions of Ms. Coomaraswamy and
of UNICEF.

Thirdly, a monitoring and reporting network has
been set up in several countries in conflict, allowing
for the gathering, verifying and summarizing of
information. That is the monitoring and reporting
mechanism launched by resolution 1612 (2005) of July
2005. I wish to pay tribute to the devotion and courage
of the players in the field, in particular the child
protection advisers working with the peacekeeping
operations, the workers of UNICEF and humanitarian
workers of the non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) who support the mechanism, sometimes at the
cost of very serious risk, even imperilling their lives.
Without them nothing would be possible.

As a last point but not the least, the Security
Council is now specifically and regularly following the
issue in the Working Group established by resolution
1612 (2005), which France has the honour to chair.
UNICEF and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General are closely associated with its
activities.

Initially, the Working Group adopted all
necessary decisions to ensure its proper operation, in
particular its terms of reference, a detailed programme
of work and a list of tools for action and reaction -
the toolbox. In June 2006, it also began to consider in
detail the situation of children in specific armed
conflicts and adopted operational conclusions with
respect to the situation of children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the Sudan. It is preparing
to adopt decisions with respect to Burundi and Cote
d'Ivoire and will shortly receive reports from the
Secretary-General on Sri Lanka, Somalia and Nepal.

I also note that the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/826) refers to a number of
encouraging developments with respect to our actions.
For example, there is the release of child soldiers by
the armed forces of the Forces nouvelles in Cote
d'Ivoire, within the framework of a plan of action that
was negotiated following the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005). There is also the current trial of Thomas
Lubanga in the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Those initial encouraging signs should motivate us to

redouble our efforts to narrow the gap between our
actions here and the concrete results of those actions in
conflict situations.

How are we to narrow that gap and further
strengthen the effectiveness of our actions? First, we
must make better known what the Security Council is
doing. That is one of the goals of today's discussion.
Then, we must signal our desire to encourage and
specifically support, again and always, cooperation
between the United Nations and those parties who use
children, in order to put an end to those practices. The
field visits of Ms. Coomaraswamy or her
representatives can be constructive in that regard and
must be continued. We encourage all States affected by
the scourge of child soldiers to receive the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. From our
delegation's point of view, cooperation is the priority
avenue. It is probably the key that will enable us to
better and more effectively address all the situations set
out in the annexes of the report of the Secretary-
General.

N 0 one can doubt our vigilance with respect to all
of those who fuel the vicious circle of violence. The
non-governmental organizations that took part in the
Arria formula debate yesterday reminded us that of the
38 parties listed in the annexes of the latest report of
the Secretary-General, 16 have been listed each year
since 2002, and not all of them have necessarily
followed up with regard to the dialogues proposed to
them. Therefore, the Security Council must be
prepared, as specifically set forth in its resolutions, to
use the entire arsenal of measures available to punish
those who defy its authority by refusing to comply with
its resolutions.

Lastly, we must work further on the link between
security and development. The lack of a future for
children undermines all prevention and demobilization
efforts. The establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the start of its work provide
possibilities in that area, in order to specifically assure
that the trend cited in the report of the Secretary-
General - the migration of child soldiers with no
future to neighbouring conflicts - is better dealt with
through the weapon of reintegration.
The fight against the use of child soldiers, against
violations of the rights of the child and against
impunity for the perpetrators of atrocities is a long-
term struggle that demands tireless efforts. The report

of the Secretary-General and its recommendations must
continue to guide our actions in this area in order to
achieve what I believe is a shared and ultimate goal -
that no violation in any conflict should escape the
attention of the international community, and that no
child should continue to feel abandoned and thus
denied any future other than that of war.

