Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.

We thank the Luxembourg presidency for holding
this important debate and welcome the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today. We also reaffirm
our strong support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Leila Zerrougui, and to the important work of her
office; to UNICEF; and to other United Nations actors
in the field. We would like to express our gratitude to
today's briefers for their contributions - not the least
to Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his moving personal
testimony and advice. We further acknowledge and
support the crucial role of civil society in advancing
the children and armed conflict agenda.

The implementation of action plans by Governments
and the United Nations is imperative in order to advance
the agenda. We therefore fully endorse the Special
Representative's "Children, not soldiers" campaign,
launched yesterday, to end the recruitment and use of
children by Government security forces by 2016. We
further call for enhanced engagement with non-State
armed groups for the purposes of ending violations. We
call on them to conclude action plans and urge relevant
Member States to allow unconditional access of the
United Nations to those groups.

The next true test of the Council's work in halting
violations against conflict-affected children will be
how the Council acts with regard to the category of
parties listed by the Secretary-General as persistent
perpetrators. Those parties to conflict, who have
chronically violated children's rights and have been
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General's reports
for more than five years, make up more than half of the
parties.

Six parties have already signed action plans with
concrete time-bound steps to prevent the recruitment
and use of children in Government forces. It is important
that the Council help ensure that the plans are translated
into measurable action and that the United Nations
continue to provide resources, advice and technical
assistance to the Governments concerned. We call on
all other concerned parties to sign such action plans.

The Nordic countries are deeply concerned about
the ongoing violations against children in Syria. We
urge all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attacks and to hold perpetrators
accountable. We condemn attacks on schools and the
military use of schools, and urge Member States to
take steps both within their own legislation, military
policies and doctrine, as well as internationally,
to end such use of school facilities and to protect
children's right to education. We welcome the drafting
of the Lucens guidelines for protecting schools and
universities from military use during armed conflict,
and we are committed to supporting its finalization and
endorsement by States.

Conflicts often have a regional impact. Many
regional organizations therefore have a role to play
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacekeeping.
We support the Special Representative's focus on
engaging and strengthening partnerships with regional
organizations for the sake of mainstreaming child
protection. The partnership of Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF with the
Peace and Security Department of the African Union
Commission is a good example of how to deal with
the issue. We urge regional organizations to share
experiences, cooperate and learn from each other.

This year, Sweden intends to host a training of
trainers child-protection course. It will be organized
with the support of the Secretariat, in partnership with
the Swedish Armed Forces International Centre, which
has extensive experience and expertise in delivering
similar training programmes.

Ensuring access to health care and education
for children in armed conflict may often be a very
challenging task, but it is of great importance. Education
is a powerful instrument for preventing young people
from involvement with non-State armed groups, and
an educated population is an important resource for
post-conflict reconstruction, economic development
and the building of a just and equal society. Special
attention should be given to children, who are typically
discriminated against or are at particularly high risk of
being subject to violence, especially girls and children
with disabilities.

We must fight against impunity for perpetrators
of grave violations against children in armed conflict,
including sexual violence, and underscore the
importance of national and international accountability
mechanisms, in particular the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The Security Council should, for example,
urgently address the situation in Syria in all its aspects,
including on a possible referral to the ICC. We welcome
the Special Representative's request for progress in
prosecuting crimes of sexual violence at both the
national and the international levels.

