Mr. Mansour (Palestine): It has been a little over
a week since we last met in the Council to adopt a
reasonable and balanced draft resolution intended to
bring a halt to Israel's military aggression against the
Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, calm
the situation on the ground and ensure respect for
international law by all parties.

It is important to note that the elements contained
in the draft resolution supported by the great majority
of Council members were relevant then and remain
relevant today. Regrettably, the inaction of the Security
Council in that regard has only further bolstered
Israel's perception that it is immune from the law and
that it will not be held accountable for its illegal
actions.

The result has been the continuation of Israel's
military onslaught, as well as its expansion, leading to
even greater destruction and more human losses among
the besieged and devastated Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied Palestinian territories,
particularly in the Gaza Strip, as well as in Lebanon.

As the international community stands idly by,
with the Security Council nearly paralysed, Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to kill, wound and maim
defenceless Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, in grave breach of international law,
including international humanitarian law and human
rights law. In that regard, there is no question that war
crimes and State terror are being committed by the
occupying Power on a daily basis in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

Over the past three weeks, Israel, the occupying
Power, has relentlessly carried out a series of lethal
military assaults using all sorts of heavy weaponry to
forge ahead with its maniacal, excessive and
indiscriminate use of force, extrajudicial executions
and State terror against the Palestinian civilian
population, held captive under its brutal occupation. In
the span of just three weeks, the Palestinian death toll
has tragically risen to over 100 people, including many
women and children. As the Secretary-General rightly

stated in his briefing to the Council yesterday, the
majority of those killed have been civilians. In fact,
according to the most recent report by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), published on 18 July 2006, 16 of the
more than 100 persons killed were children. In
addition, the number of Palestinians injured has
climbed to 300. According to the same OCHA report,
Israeli occupying forces have fired over 1,000 artillery
shells and have carried out 168 aerial bombardments
against the Gaza Strip and its defenceless population
during the same span of time.

There are far too many examples of the brutality
being unleashed against the Palestinian people by the
occupying forces. I therefore wish only to recall but
one horrific incident in that regard to illustrate the
current plight of the Palestinian people during these
ongoing military assaults.

On 12 July 2006, during the pre-dawn hours in
the Gaza Strip, an F-16 warplane dropped a 550-pound
bomb on a home in the heavily populated Sheikh
Radwan neighbourhood in Gaza City. That deliberate
attack, which was declared by the occupying Power to
have been launched for the purpose of assassinating
high-ranking Hamas officials, resulted in the massacre
of nine Palestinian civilians, all members of the same
family - the father, mother and their seven children -
in their own home. That is but one example of State
terrorism and war crimes being committed by Israel,
the occupying Power, against the Palestinian civilian
population, for whom there is clearly nowhere to be
safe from Israel's military rampage and blatant
disregard for human life.

In the most recent example of Israel's aggression
against the Palestinian people, which took place over
the past 48 hours, a total of 23 Palestinians, including
five children, were killed by Israeli occupying forces.
During the same period over 140 Palestinian civilians
were injured, many of whom remain in critical
condition.

An undercover unit of the Israeli occupying
forces, backed by heavy armoured vehicles, bulldozers,
helicopters and unmanned drones, attacked the
Palestinian refugee population of Al-Maghazi refugee
camp, in central Gaza, resulting in the deaths of at least
16 Palestinians, including two children.
In another military assault, Israeli occupying
forces entered the West Bank town of Nablus from
three directions and destroyed the Palestinian security
compound - Al-Muqata - and killed seven more

Palestinians and injured scores of Palestinian civilians.
During the same military attack on Nablus and its
inhabitants Israeli bulldozers tore down the offices of
the Ministry of the Interior, as well as offices used by
the Palestinian security services. Israeli occupying
forces also stormed the office of the Palestine News
Agency (WAFA) in the West Bank city of Ramallah, as
well as the headquarters of the local Ramallah
governorate, ransacking the property and arresting five
civilians, including two police guards, taking them to
an unknown location. Such destruction demonstrates
yet again the intention of the Israeli occupying forces
to destroy Palestinian National Authority institutions
and vital infrastructure.

Today, Israeli occupying forces bombed a house
in the Al-Shuja'ieh neighbourhood, east of Gaza City,
killing four Palestinian civilians of the same Harara
family.

The international community must condemn such
unlawful acts and compel the occupying Power to
cease such grave breaches and abide by its obligations
under international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Moreover, the protection of civilians must
be a priority for the international community. They
cannot be left at the mercy of their occupier when there
are clear provisions in international law intended to
provide them with protection and security.

Furthermore, it is imperative that measures
ultimately be taken to hold the perpetrators of those
crimes accountable and to bring them to justice, for
without such measures the culture of impunity that we
are now witnessing will only continue, with even more
disastrous consequences. It is unacceptable to say
"sorry" for killing civilians. Those who continue to
repeat such heinous acts should be brought to justice
very soon.

In addition to the death and injury inflicted on the
Palestinian civilian population, the occupying Power
has persisted with its wanton destruction of Palestinian
property and vital infrastructure. Those unlawful acts
are part and parcel of the occupying Power's cruel
measures of collective punishment against the
Palestinian people. Over the past three weeks, the
devastation wrought on Palestinian infrastructure by
the occupying forces has been immense.

Along with the bombing of power stations, water
pipelines, bridges and roads, Israeli war planes have
fired missiles at Palestinian National Authority
institutions, causing extensive damage to many and
completely destroying others, including the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Gaza City. Israeli tanks and
bulldozers have also continued to raze crops and
destroy Palestinian agricultural land. All of that
destruction, in addition to the closure of border
crossings into and out of the area, continues to have a
severe impact upon the already deplorable
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, where the
Palestinian civilian population is suffering from serious
shortages of food, medicine and clean water supplies.
Israel must be held accountable for the destruction it
has deliberately caused, and must rebuild everything it
has destroyed, much of which had been funded by the
international donor community itself over the years.

There is no doubt that the recent failure of the
Security Council to respond appropriately to the Israeli
onslaught against the Palestinian civilian population,
due to the veto cast by one of the Council's permanent
members, has allowed the Israeli Government to
continue carrying out such illegal actions with sheer
impunity. Without concern for reproach and
punishment or for the consequences of its actions,
Israel continues to behave as a State that is above the
law and continues to refuse to implement dozens of
Security Council resolutions related to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

Unwilling to uphold its duties for the
maintenance of international peace and security when
it comes to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, the Security
Council has allowed Israel to continue to act beyond
the parameters of international law, permitting it to use
the most oppressive measures and practices to impose
more death, destruction and loss on the Palestinian
people under its occupation.

I need not today remind the members of the
Council of the fact that all of the atrocities being
committed by Israel, the occupying Power, have been
committed against an unarmed and defenceless civilian
population, who, according to the provisions of
international humanitarian law governing military
occupation, should be considered protected persons.
The occupying Power is obligated to ensure the safety
and well-being of these persons. Failing that, those
persons are entitled to and should be accorded

international protection. Yet, time and again, the
Security Council has been unable to take the necessary
measures to ensure the protection of the Palestinian
civilian population in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, leaving it at the
mercy of the brute force and illegal policies and
practices of the occupying Power.

In this regard, we reiterate that it remains the
duty of the Security Council, in accordance with its
authority and responsibilities under the United Nations
Charter, to act immediately in order to address the
continuing crisis in the occupied Palestinian territory
and bring a halt to this perilous deterioration of the
situation. The Council cannot continue to remain
passive in the face of such a military aggression
against a defenceless civilian population and the grave
breaches of international humanitarian law that are
being committed by Israel, the occupying Power.

In this connection, we continue to reiterate our
position that the Council must begin by condemning
this most recent Israeli aggression and calling for the
immediate cessation of hostilities and compliance with
the rules and provisions of international law, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and calling also for the
immediate withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces
to their original positions before the aggression against
the Gaza Strip began. Moreover, the Security Council
must call on Israel to immediately release all
democratically elected Palestinian officials detained
since 28 June 2006.

If the Council does not act, we will not soon see
an end to the vicious circle of violence that we are now
witnessing. Rather, this dangerous conflict will only be
prolonged and compounded. It is therefore our strong
hope that the Council will uphold its duties and take
the necessary action to address this growing crisis in
order to allow for peace to be realized, not only for
Israelis and Palestinians, but for the region as a whole,
which is clearly standing at a crucial juncture - on the
precipice of a plunge into an all-out military
conflagration.

In this connection, we would like to extend our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for dispatching
an urgent mission to the region and for the report he
submitted to the Council at yesterday's meeting. The
Palestinian leadership will continue to work with the
Secretary-General on the issues he raised in the report
related to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
deepest concern and to extend our condolences to our
sisters and brothers in Lebanon, who are suffering
immensely from the Israeli aggression, which has
resulted in the death of hundreds of Lebanese civilians
and has caused the widespread destruction of
Lebanon's vital infrastructure and institutions. We
express our solidarity with the Lebanese people and
call for a comprehensive end of hostilities and an end
to the deliberate targeting of the lives of the Lebanese
people, their property and infrastructure. The Security
Council must take action to bring an immediate halt to
Israel's military aggression against Lebanon, establish
a comprehensive ceasefire and lift the Israeli blockade
imposed on Lebanon. Diplomacy is the only way to
resolve this escalating crisis.

