Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's open debate, and the briefers for their interesting
views.

Ten years after the Organization's establishment of
its peacebuilding architecture, we continue to face the
challenge of finding the best way to achieve sustainable
peace that can help to heal the scars caused by armed
conflict, rebuild the countries and regions concerned,
along with their institutions responsible for protecting
fundamental rights, and provide basic humanitarian
services, security and justice.

The lessons learned over the past decade have
shown us that, if peacebuilding is to succeed, it requires
a comprehensive strategy for addressing conflicts that
can establish a consistent, solid and direct link between
peace and security and human rights and development.
Those elements, together with prevention, formed the
preliminary framework for peacekeeping in 2005,
and today they continue to be crucial to its long-
term viability and effectiveness. In that context, the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) should play a key role in
focusing the United Nations system's efforts.

Mexico would like to acknowledge the work of
the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture, led by Ambassador
Rosenthal, as well as the efforts of the Permanent
Representatives of Angola and Australia to follow up
on and bring coherence to our discussions on the issue
in both the General Assembly and the Council. If we are
to make progress towards our goal, it is essential that,
as recommended by the Advisory Group, we change the
epicentre of our peacebuilding efforts from the current
reactive perspective to a preventive one. The emphasis
on that aspect is consistent with the recommendations
and definition of critical pathways that are being
discussed in the other review processes currently under
way, and our shared goal should therefore be to translate
the recommendations into action.

To reverse 10 years of inertia and obstacles placed
in the way of the peacebuilding architecture, we will
need coherent, systematic, collective efforts aimed at
ending the disjunctions in the main intergovernmental
bodies of the United Nations whose responsibility
it is to change the paradigm in favour of sustainable
peace - the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. The United
Nations presence must be constant or else, as with any
other vacuum, it runs the risk of being occupied by
others.

Given the challenges and complexity of today's
conflicts, the role and added value of the Peacebuilding
Commission should be exploited, enhanced and
strengthened. The Security Council should make
frequent use of the Commission's advisory capacity
in reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, as well as in designing
transition strategies with the timeliness and long-term
vision essential to peacekeeping. The Commission
should be a platform for bringing to the Council's
attention the views of all of the relevant actors at the
national, regional and international levels, including
donors, agendas and the agencies of the United Nations
system.

Peacebuilding requires the political, technical and
financial support of the international community. It
also requires nonvengeful justice, and for that we need
the mechanisms that can provide it. The absence of that
kind of support for peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
particularly when it comes to the root causes ofa crisis,

can result in significant challenges when it comes to
preventing the outbreak or resurgence of a conflict.

Mexico appreciates the Advisory Group's
recommendation that our peacebuilding instruments
should always work together with regional and
subregional organizations in their prevention efforts,
whenever their constitutive bodies allow it. We also
believe that key stakeholders, such as civil society
and international financial institutions, should back
the Organization's efforts and contribute positively
to supporting national priority areas, encouraging
economic development and lessening the risks of
investing in countries that are rebuilding. Requests
and mandates to do more should be backed up with
appropriate resources and strategic planning aimed
at improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the
work. We believe that it is vital to ensure that those
intergovernmental processes result in a thorough
analysis of the financial arrangements for the entire
peacebuilding architecture and in concrete action
aimed at strengthening those arrangements, including
accountability mechanisms.

This period of review of various bodies and
commissions is an ideal opportunity for revisiting
and revitalizing the Organization's conceptual and
operational approach to peacebuilding. We should take
advantage of this five-year opportunity to review in
depth the areas of our peacebuilding architecture that
need more attention and reinforcement, taking into
account proposals that favour political and inclusive
solutions over military ones. In that regard, I would
like to take this opportunity to welcome, and express
Mexico's full support for, the establishment and
deployment of the new United Nations special political
mission to Colombia, authorized on 25 January. We
hope that the mission, which will contribute not just to
the peace process in Colombia but also to the security
and stability of the entire region, will develop along the
lines I have mentioned and will serve as an example for
future special political missions.

