Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
the Senegalese delegation for having convened today's
debate. I also wish to thank Messrs. Wane, Antonio,
Menkerios and Kaberuka for their briefings.

Bearing in mind that the Security Council
continues to focus most of its attention on responding
to issues that threaten peace and security in the African
continent, there is clearly a need to consolidate and
strengthen the operational and strategic links between
the two multilateral forums, that is, the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), so as to enable the United
Nations-AU partnership to flourish and bear fruit on
the basis of mutual respect.

My country recognizes the key role played by the
African Union in the peaceful settlement of disputes
in Africa as part of the AU 2063 Agenda and the
African Peace and Security Architecture 2016-2020
Roadmap. Against that backdrop, it is essential that
the Security Council grant a larger role to the African
Union in measures involving the African continent.
Unfortunately, we have noted with concern a tendency
within the Council to apply measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, rather than
giving priority to Chapters VI and VIII.

We therefore call upon the Council to address
conflict situations in Africa in a balanced manner,
based on peaceful measures for settling disputes, and
to include the African Union's participation in such
efforts. Ongoing interference in the domestic affairs of
African countries is a key factor in the destabilization
and conflict that we see in the continent. It is unfortunate
that the national interests of some Council members in
situations involving some countries and conflicts in
Africa have transformed the Council into a body for
meddling and exerting pressure. As an example, I would
note the precipitate action taken in 2011 in the form of
coercive measures in Libya under Chapter VII of the
Charter. That was carried out despite mediation efforts
already undertaken by the African Union to address
the situation. However, those efforts were ignored by
the Council.

Five years later, we are still witnessing the
serious consequences that resulted from the Council's
misguided decision and from errors on the part of the
international community in Libya. Foreign intervention
led to the destruction of that State's institutions, as well
as to the current instability in North Africa. Together
with other factors, that intervention contributed to
the growing presence of violent groups, as well as
terrorism, illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons, and human trafficking, and has transformed
the Mediterranean Sea into an enormous, bloody burial
ground for thousands of migrants.

It is therefore paradoxical that, while the African
Union is a key partner ofthe United Nations in peace and
security matters, we are not taking its assessments and
views into account on relevant items that are discussed
in the Council, such as the issues ofWestern Sahara and
the migrant crisis. We recall that Venezuela abstained
in the Council's adoption of resolution 2240 (2015) (see S/PV.7531), concerning the migrant crisis, because the

resolution did not take into account the concerns of
the African countries that are the most affected by the
issue. The Observer of the African Union was not even
allowed to participate in the debate, and Chapter VII of
the Charter was invoked to address a multidimensional
problem that continues to affect the African population.

In the case of Western Sahara we have seen refusals
on the part of some Council members to allow the
Permanent Representative of the African Union for
Western Sahara to address the Council. I believe that it is
worth recalling that resolution 690 (1991) confers upon
the African Union a key role to play in supporting the
United Nations as a facilitator in Western Sahara and in
supervising the referendum for the self-determination
of Western Sahara, the last remaining colony in Africa.

In the light of all that, the relationship between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council needs to be improved and
strengthened. That is one of the key points made as part
of the 2015 broad analysis of peace operations and of
the peacekeeping architecture. Moreover, we highly
value the progress made in peacekeeping operations,
the exceptional role of the United Nations Office to the
African Union, and United Nations support to regional
organizations in policy development and guidance
and training in areas such as security-sector reform,
post-conflict reconstruction, women and peace and
security, the protection of civilians, including children,
and preventing and combatting sexual and gender-
based violence. It is our hope that those key aspects
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union will be strengthened in the future.

We need to make greater headway in strengthening
the link between our two organizations and in
developing the holistic and common strategies needed
to respond to the emerging challenges in Africa, based
on mutual responsibilities and comparative advantages,
with a view to achieving bettercoordination and synergy
between the two bodies. We also look forward to the
speedy adoption of a United Nations-African Union
framework for an enhanced partnership for peace and
security. We have also taken note of the African Union
commitment to contributing 25 per cent of the financing
of peace support operations in the region, which is
an important step towards ensuring the predictable,
sustainable and flexible support and funding that peace
operations require.
In conclusion, it is important to support the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
finding peaceful and political solutions to conflicts,
as well as preventing them and coordinating efforts
to maintain and consolidate peace. In any case, it
is clear that outside interference is pernicious and
unacceptable, that the Security Council alone cannot
address challenges to peace and security in Africa,
and that the African Union must be recognized as
a legitimate political authority in the region. The
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union must therefore focus on strengthening
the strategic alliance between both entities in order to
address conflicts and uphold peace in Africa.

