Mr. Mugoya (Uganda): I wish to start by
thanking Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), for his
briefing.

Members may recall that the Security Council
visited Haiti from 11 to 14 March, following the
Secretary-General's visit to that country. The visit of
the Security Council to Haiti was useful in enabling the
Council to have an on-the-spot assessment of the
situation on the ground and to appreciate the
challenges being faced in that country. More so, the
visit reassured the people of Haiti that the international
community supports their efforts and further cemented
the good working relationship between the United
Nations and the people of Haiti.

On that note, we commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and his staff
for the work done in delivering on MINUSTAH's
mandates. We also commend the Government and the
people of Haiti for their efforts to achieve sustainable
and durable development.

We note the progress that has been made so far
with regard to the security situation in Haiti. It is
encouraging that that has been achieved not only by
strengthening the Haitian National Police but also by
improving the close working relationship between it
and MINUSTAH. We therefore commend MINUSTAH,
together with the Haitian National Police, for its
contribution to dismantling the armed gangs
responsible for much of the violence, in particular in
Cite Soleil. That has significantly reduced criminal
activity, such as kidnappings, and has helped to restore
a degree of public confidence.

Notwithstanding that progress, my delegation is
concerned about the continued threat to the overall
stability of Haiti posed by organized crime and drug
trafficking, which have had an adverse impact on
stability, governance and development. In that regard,
we urge development partners, the Group of Friends of
Haiti and the international community as a whole to
intensify efforts geared towards strengthening the
capacity of the Government of Haiti to control its
borders.

Uganda appreciates the assistance provided by
the United Nations for Haiti's senatorial elections
scheduled for 19 April. The printing of ballot papers
and training of electoral workers, as well as the
ongoing dispatch of 12,000 electoral kits to voting
centres by the United Nations, are commendable.
However, we are concerned about the apparent political
tensions between contending parties, specifically the
banning by the Provisional Electoral Council of
candidates from the rebel faction Fanmi Lavalas. We
call upon the authorities in Haiti to go the extra mile in
order to ensure that free, fair and all-inclusive elections
are held - and on time. Such elections would be a
cornerstone for reconciliation and democracy. Every
effort should therefore be made to take advantage of
the apparent readiness of the executive branch,
parliament, political parties and civil society to engage
in constructive dialogue in order to lay the foundations
for Haiti's long-term stability and development.

We welcome the efforts being made by the
Government of Haiti, with the support of the
international community, in the areas of recovery and
development and to strengthen key institutions of
Government, such as strengthening the customs
department in order to increase revenue collections.
That improvement is increasingly generating revenue
that will enable the Government of Haiti to sustain
institutions and provide essential services to its people.

However, the challenges remain immense. We
call upon development partners and the entire
international community to support the immediate
development needs of Haiti, but especially to support
the longer-term development needs of the country in
order to facilitate sustainable peace and development.
We urge all to participate in the donor conference
scheduled to be held in Washington on 13 and 14 April
of this year.

The hurricanes that hit Haiti in September
devastated the country and had a heavy impact on the
populations. We commend MINUSTAH and the
humanitarian agencies that came to the assistance of
Haiti. We also commend the people and the
Government of Haiti for their resilience under very
difficult circumstances.

