The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Qatar.

I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for his
briefing on the Great Lakes region. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Mulamula, first Executive Secretary of the
Secretariat of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region. Our thanks go also to the Secretary-
General for his continuing efforts.

Allow me to congratulate the States and
Governments of the Great Lakes region, on the success
of the Second Summit, held in Nairobi on
15 December 2006 and on the conclusion of the Pact
on Security, Stability and Development in the Great
Lakes Region. That success was undoubtedly achieved
thanks to the genuine political will of the leaders of the
countries of the region and to the excellent efforts to
prepare for and support the Conference. We salute the
efforts made by the joint Secretariat of the African
Union and the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region.

For the second time this year, the Council has
convened an important meeting to consider the
situation in the Great Lakes region. We wish to recall
the success of the Dar es Salaam Conference in
November 2004, a subject that was taken up in an open
debate by the Security Council at the ministerial level
(see S/PV.5359), followed by the adoption of
resolution 1653 (2006). Following these positive steps,
the peoples of the region can surely look forward to the
implementation of cooperation arrangements, as
reflected in the convening of the Second Summit, as
well as in the adoption and signing of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region. We look forward to the ratification of the Pact
and to its implementation.

The aspirations and hopes expressed in the Pact

and in the Declaration must be fulfilled, in particular

through dynamism and political will on the part of the

leaders of the Great Lakes region, as reflected in the

declaration adopted following the Summit. That will

enable the region to restore stability, peace and
prosperity.

Positive and concrete steps emerged from the
Second Summit of Heads of State and Government,
including a regional follow-up mechanism for the Pact
through the Conference Secretariat. We congratulate
Burundi on having agreed to host the Secretariat, as
well as Tanzania on the appointment of one of its
nationals as its Executive Secretary.

Mandatory contributions to the secretariat's
activities will be necessary and vital for the
implementation of the Pact and to mobilize influential
sectors of civil society. Issues relating to women,
youth, media and the private sector must be taken up,
and, in that regard, priorities must be set.

We appreciate the role of the Group of Friends of
the Great Lakes region in support of the Second
Summit and of the Conference in general since its
inception in 2003. We encourage the Group to continue
its support throughout the implementation of the Pact.
We urge all international partners to continue to
provide such valuable support, particularly given the
decision by the States of the region to establish a fund,
in keeping with article 6 of the Pact. This will be an
appropriate mechanism for providing support.

We must also recognize that previous Council
resolutions must be implemented. It is of the utmost
importance to the countries of the Great Lakes region,
particularly in terms of putting an end to conflict, to
the activities of armed groups and the myriad human
rights violations. That applies also to the issue of peace
and security in the subregion and to the problem of
refugees and internally displaced persons in the
conflict areas of the Great Lakes region.

In that context, we attach great importance to
resolutions 1625 (2005), 1631 (2005), 1649 (2005) and
1653 (2006). We believe that their implementation will
be crucial to the success of the mechanism that has
been set up among the States of the Great Lakes
region. That will serve as a vital link between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and facilitate the activities of
regional, subregional and other organizations aimed at
finding ways and means of addressing the problems of
the region. It will also allow the Peacebuilding
Commission to act positively and directly in the region
so as to benefit the continent as a whole.

In terms of the challenges to implementation, we
believe that sustainable development cannot be
achieved without institutions based on good
governance or the necessary resources, which will be
available only if security and stability prevail. To that
end, there must be clear and genuine participation by
the peoples and the Governments of the region. There
must be encouragement by all organizations of the
international community so as to ensure the
transparency of economic agreements reached among
the countries of the region as well as between regional
and international financial institutions. Such
agreements must address the social and economic
conditions of the region and the problem of foreign
debt or, at the very least, mitigate the effects of such
debt.

Addressing the causes of economic failure
requires permanent projects based on sound trade and
economic principles, particularly given the region's
distinctive strategic location on the African continent
and the fact that it has tremendous natural resources.
The States of the region must therefore have local
ownership of all activities and programmes on their
territories.

In conclusion, we wish to express our
appreciation to the Permanent Mission of the United
Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations for its
positive contributions to the activities of the Security
Council in support of the outcome and Declaration of
the Second Summit of the Conference, as reflected in
the positive results achieved. We thank them for their
draft presidential statement, which we endorse and will
utilize in addressing regional issues and in supporting
the efforts of current and future generations of the
peoples of the region to achieve peace, security and
stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Finland.
