Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation of President
Tomislav Nikolie in this Council meeting. At the
outset, we would like to express our condolences for
the natural disaster that has struck Serbia. The Russian
Federation has been providing assistance in overcoming
the consequences of the disaster. We agree with the
comments and share the assessments of President
Nikolic'. We also listened closely to the statement by
Ms. Atifete Jahjaga. We would like to thank Mr. Zarif
for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2014/305) on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

The United Nations Mission is the main
international presence in the province. We call upon it
to fully and actively implement its mandate. To do so, it
needs to have all the necessary resources. We condemn
attempts to undermine the role of UNMIK and we call
on the Kosovo Albanian side to provide full-fledged
cooperation with the United Nations presence.

We note the steps that have been taken towards
normalizing relations between Belgrade and Pristina
in the framework of dialogue at the highest political
level. It is important for that work to lead to progress
on ensuring the rights of the Serb population of the
province. We share the assessment in the report of the
Secretary-General on the need to establish as quickly as
possible a community of Serb municipalities of Kosovo
as an instrument to protect collective Serb interests
and, consequently, stability in the region as a whole.

The situation of Serbs in Kosovo continues to
be rather dispiriting. There has been practically no
progress in the return of Serbian refugees and the
re-establishment of their property rights. People are
afraid to return to Kosovo, given the threat of ethnically
motivated violence, the lack of security guarantees and
the failure of local authorities to protect their rights. It
is important to recall that the creation of conditions to
achieve that is one of the main demands of resolution
1244 (1999). We continue to witness ongoing looting
and usurpation of Serb property and the desecration of
Serb cemeteries. Exiled Serbs often cannot even visit
the tombs of their ancestors, even during orthodox
holidays. On the walls of Serbs monasteries and homes,
insulting slogans and threats have appeared. Recently,
a similar incident occurred in the monastery of Visoki
Deeani, which is under the protection ofNATO's Kosovo
Force. Routine public condemnations by the Kosovo
Albanian authorities is insufficient. There is a need for
a true combatting of all forms of ethnic and religious
intolerance. However, the results of investigations into
a number of high-profile ethnic crimes have yet to be
seen.

We believe that the initiative of creating the so-
called Kosovo armed forces is counterproductive.
Unfortunately, the report of the Secretary-General gives
very vague assessments of such moves by Pristina.

We note the decision to extend the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) until June
2016. We call upon it to be guided by its mandate and to
act in an entirely neutral manner. At the same time, as
the report of the European Court of Auditors states, the
effectiveness of EU assistance to Pristina in the area of
the rule of law is insignificant. It is important to note
that, of course, the authority of the Security Council
cannot be delegated to a third party, in particular
Pristina's structures.

We also welcome the Special Investigative Task
Force's continued efforts to look into the crimes
uncovered by the Council ofEurope Special Rapporteur,
Mr. Marty, including trafficking in human organs. All
those who are guilty need to be brought to justice,
and we hope that the unusual format of the Task Force
will make it possible to ensure objective and impartial

justice that will not be subject to any kind of political
expediency.

The reports of participation by Kosovo Albanians
in the Syrian conflict is very worrisome, in particular
regarding their affiliation with Al-Qaida-affiliated
terrorist groups such as Jabhat al-Nusra and the Islamic
State in Iraq in the Levant. We very strongly support
putting an end to that kind of activity.

We would like to confirm that Russia's position
on the issue of Kosovo remains unchanged. We are in
favour of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Serbia. We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully relevant and lays out the obligations for all
involved, as the international legal framework for the
resolution of the Kosovo conflict.

