Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): The
inclusion of the question of Kosovo on the Council's
agenda during the first month of the year reflects, in
the opinion of my delegation, our constant concern and
determination to deepen our consideration and pursue
actions undertaken in the context of the implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

In this context, my delegation appreciates the
quality of the Secretary-General's report on the
evolution of the situation in Kosovo over the past three
months. We would also like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for the valuable information he has
provided on recent events in Kosovo.

It goes without saying that the year 2001 was
marked by major events that have had a positive effect
on the province as a whole. The declaration of the
Constitutional Framework for provisional Government,
and the signing on 5 November of a Common
Document between the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), as well
as the success of the legislative election on 17
November 2001, are some of these achievements.

This is an opportunity for my delegation to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, and the other members of UNMIK for their
work. We also welcome the Secretary-General's
decision to appoint a successor to Mr. Haekkerup, and
we encourage him to pursue the work begun by his
predecessor.

The calm atmosphere that characterized the
legislative elections is a sure harbinger of the
democratic development of Kosovo. It also sent a
strong signal to the entire region that in the peaceful
settlement of conflict elections are more important than
weapons. My delegation welcomes the inauguration, on
10 December 2001, of the Kosovo Assembly and the
election of its President, Mr. Nexhet Daci. We are also
gratified that 35 of the 120 seats in the Assembly were
won by minority parties, which, under the Constitution,
will assume a responsibility in the future management
of the province. The various measures taken for a
progressive transfer of power to the provincial
authorities are also to be commended. These actions
must be supported fully by the international
community.

The difficulties related to the election of the
President of Kosovo and the formation of the
Government arise from the need to form a coalition
among the various parties. My delegation encourages
the initiatives for negotiations undertaken by UNMIK
and other actors and calls upon the various pillars to
cooperate more for the sake of the future of the
province. The question of security and freedom of
movement for minorities remains a great concern, and
that is why the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR should be
strengthened.

Efforts to create a climate of security are
contingent on the effective implementation of a
programme for reconciliation based on tolerance and
mutual respect. We urge all the parties to persevere in
finding solutions to the humanitarian issues in the
province. The signing of the Common Document,
which sets out in detail a number of concerns and
common interests, is very encouraging in this regard.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms its support
for the implementation of the provisions of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999). The Republic of
Guinea will spare no effort in making its modest
contribution to the accomplishment of the duty that
every one of us is called on to fulfil.

