Mrs. Haley (United States ofAmerica): Ithank you,
Foreign Minister Blok, for presiding over this meeting,
and I thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for once
again laying out the facts about what is happening in
Syria. I also want to personally welcome Karen Pierce
to the Council as the new Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom. I know all of us in the Chamber
look forward to working with her.

Today we have a very difficult subject to address:
siege, starvation and surrender. That is the awful,
unceasing rhythm of the Syrian war. As we meet today,
the third step, surrender, is taking place in eastern
Ghouta. After years of enduring siege and starvation,
residents are surrendering eastern Ghouta. The terrible
irony of this moment must be stated and acknowledged.
In the 30 days since the Security Council demanded
a ceasefire, the bombardment of the people of eastern
Ghouta has only increased and now, at the end of the
so-called ceasefire, eastern Ghouta has nearly fallen.

History will not be kind when it judges the
effectiveness of the Council in relieving the suffering of
the Syrian people. Seventeen hundred Syrian civilians
have been killed in the past month alone. Hospitals and
ambulances are being deliberately targeted with bombs
and artillery. Schools are being hit, like the one in
eastern Ghouta that was bombed just last week, killing
15 children. Siege, starvation and surrender.

I would like to ask my Security Council colleagues
to consider whether we are wrong when we point to
the Russian and Iranian forces working alongside
Al-Assad as being responsible for the slaughter. Russia
voted for the so-called ceasefire in Syria last month
(see S/PV.8188). More than that, Russia took its time
painstakingly negotiating resolution 2401 (2018), which
demanded the ceasefire. If we watched closely during
the negotiations, we could see our Russian friends
constantly leaving the room to confer with their Syrian
counterparts. The possibilities for what was going on
are only two. Either Russia was informing its Syrian
colleagues about the content of the negotiations, or
Russia was taking directions from its Syrian colleagues
about the content of the negotiations. Either way, Russia
cynically negotiated a ceasefire that it instantly defied.

Russia even had the audacity to claim that it is the
only Council member implementing resolution 2401
(2018). How can that possibly be true when in the first
four days after the so-called ceasefire, Russian military
aircraft conducted at least 20 daily bombing missions
on Damascus and eastern Ghouta, while the people of
Syria remained under siege? The so-called ceasefire
was intended to allow humanitarian access to sick and
starving civilians. Russia even doubled down on its
cynicism by proposing five-hour pauses in the fighting.
It said that they were necessary to allow humanitarian
convoys to get through, but Russian and Syrian bombs
continue to prevent the delivery of humanitarian
aid. Only after territory falls into the hands of the
Al-Assad Government and its allies do they allow
food and medicine to be delivered. Russia and Syria's
rationalization is that they have to continue to bomb
in eastern Ghouta in order to combat what they call
terrorists. That is a transparent excuse for the Russians
and Al-Assad to maintain their assault.

Meanwhile, from the very beginning, the opposition
groups in eastern Ghouta expressed their readiness to
implement the ceasefire. They told the Council that
they welcomed the resolution. Russia's response was
to call those groups terrorists and keep pummelling
civilians into submission, while the people of Syria
continue to starve.

Last week, after Syrian civilians had spent years
barely surviving, an agreement was reached to allow
them to leave eastern Ghouta. Who brokered it? Russia.
So we see the cycle being completed. The people of
eastern Ghouta are surrendering. That is the ugly reality
on the ground in Syria today. Cynical accusations of
bad faith from Russia will not stop us from speaking
out, and their blatantly false narratives will not keep
us from telling the world about Russia's central role in
bombing the Syrian people into submission.

Fifteen days ago, when it was apparent that the
Russian, Syrian and Iranian regimes were utterly
ignoring the ceasefire, the United States developed
a plan for a tougher and more targeted ceasefire
focused on Damascus city and eastern Ghouta. Despite
overwhelming evidence that the ceasefire was being
ignored, some of our colleagues urged us to give
resolution 2401 (2018) a chance to work. Reluctantly,
we agreed and put off introducing the resolution. Now,
more than 80 per cent of eastern Ghouta is controlled by
Al-Assad and his allies. Their deception, hypocrisy and
brutality have overtaken the chance of a ceasefire in
eastern Ghouta, and for that we should all be ashamed.

If we were upholding our responsibility as a
Security Council, we would adopt a resolution today
recognizing the reality of what happened in eastern
Ghouta. A responsible Security Council would
condemn the Syrian authorities, along with Russia and
Iran, for launching a military offensive to seize eastern
Ghouta the same day that we called for a ceasefire.
A responsible Security Council would condemn the
Al-Assad regime for deliberately blocking convoys
of humanitarian aid during its military campaign and
removing medical items from convoys that attempted to
reach eastern Ghouta. A responsible Security Council
would recognize that the provision of humanitarian
aid was never safe, unimpeded or sustained, and that
there was no lifting of sieges. A responsible Security
Council would express its outrage that at least 1,700
civilians were killed during a military campaign that
it demanded to come to a halt - 1,700 civilians who
should have been spared in the ceasefire we demanded,
but who died on our watch.

But we cannot. We cannot take those actions
because Russia will stop at nothing to use its permanent
seat on the Council to shield its ally Bashar Al-Assad
from even the faintest criticism. And we cannot take
those actions because instead of calling out the ways
in which Al-Assad, Russia and Iran made a mockery
of our calls for a ceasefire, too many members of the
Council wanted to wait. That is a travesty. This should
be a day of shame for every member of the Council and
it should be a lesson about what happens when we focus
on fleeting displays ofunity instead of on what is right.
For those who think otherwise, the people of eastern
Ghouta deserve an explanation.

