Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to
commend the convening of this meeting and extend our
gratitude to Mr. Inzko for having presented his report
(S/2019/364, annex) today. We take this opportunity to
express that we greatly appreciate his personal efforts,
as well as those of his Office, to fulfil his mandate as
the highest authority in the civilian implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement for the well-being of the
citizens in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Today we would like to add our voice to the sorrow
of the international community over the passing last
December of Lord Paddy Ashdown. We commend his
timely contributions as High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina from 2002 to 2006.

The Dominican Republic acknowledges the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, we look forward to
full compliance with the objectives and conditions
for the definitive closure of the Office of the High
Representative, known as the 5+2 agenda.

With regard to the elections, we look forward to the
completion of the process to form the new authorities
to lead the country. In that regard, we urge the political
representatives to ease their positions, for there is
no time to lose. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs its
authorities to be focused on carrying out the necessary
reforms, strengthening the rule of law and building a
future of shared opportunities for which the country
yearns, while consolidating unity in diversity, peace

and sustainable socioeconomic development.

We note with interest the efforts of the authorities
to comply with the judgments of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitutional Court as they move steadily
towards integration with the European Union - this
time delivering the 655 official answers to the European
Commission follow-up questions - which shows that
when wills are unified, adversities take second place.

The Dominican Republic supports the mandate and
management of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. In that regard, it regrets that
certain sectors in Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to
issue revisionist statements and positions on the conflict
in Srebrenica and try to ignore the cases of genocide
that have already been confirmed by the sentences
of the international tribunals. We believe that, after
an exhaustive judicial process in both national and
international courts, such acts undermine the process
of national reconciliation and promote impunity, ethnic
confrontation and hostility.

We note with concern the conflict generated by an
announcement last January by an important political
party in Bosnia that disputed the name of Republika
Srpska before the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Although legal action has not materialized,
the announcement brought the political negotiations to
a standstill and warnings of secession were intensified.
In that context, all should promote unity and not lose
sight of the fact that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a single
sovereign State that is constitutionally composed of the
two entities of Republika Srpska and the Federation.
We therefore invite all parties to refrain from any
unilateral exercise that could stall or prejudice the
process of reconciliation and consolidation of peace in
the country.

We would like to especially highlight the initiative
of the Srebrenica Municipal Assembly, which adopted,
by a large majority of representatives of Bosnia and
Serbia, a decision to build a monument to peace in
Srebrenica. That is a very positive and exemplary
development, designed to act as a symbol of unity for
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We call for continued efforts to ensure a system
for the independent administration of justice; for
transparency in Government institutions; and for
continued advocacy to ensure respect for the crucial role
played by the press in a free and democratic society. We
also call for action to be taken to implement Federation
legislation adopted in 2014 to combat corruption and
organized crime.

Finally, the Dominican Republic would like to take
this opportunity to call on all those involved to j oin forces
in support of the Office of the High Representative and
the European Union-led Operation Althea in order to
create a strengthened Bosnia and Herzegovina that will
enable an atmosphere of inclusion; the reconciliation
of ethnic and religious diversity; guaranteed access
to justice; accountability; the security of civilians and
effective policies to combat violence; the struggle to
reduce poverty; and the safe return of refugees and
displaced persons to their homes.

