Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Khan for his second briefing
to the Security Council on the report of the Special
Adviser (see S/2019/407).

The work of the Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is an important
element of the counter-terrorism strategy in the Middle
East. The Middle East region remains a stronghold
for the leadership of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), and the group continues to pose a serious
threat to international peace and security.

The question of holding accountable those who
fought for and assisted ISIL must be addressed as
effectively as possible. We understand from the report
and following the recent meeting between Mr. Khan
and members of the Security Council in Baghdad that
the mission of the Special Adviser enjoys the support
of the Iraqi authorities and the country's multireligious
society, which is extremely important.

The collection, analysis and transfer of evidence to
the courts must be carried out in strict accordance with
international law and in full respect for sovereignty of
the States where ISIL committed its crimes. We believe
that the main role in bringing terrorists to justice
remains the responsibility of the Governments of the
States that were affected by the atrocities committed.
That is precisely the principle that underpins resolution
2379 (2017), which established the Investigative Team.

We note with satisfaction that the Team has begun
its practical work on the ground and has been closely
documenting evidence in Iraq. We expect that the Iraqi
judicial system will soon start to use that data, inter
alia, to instigate terrorist-specific proceedings. At the
same time, it would likely be wrong to foist all the
issues regarding conducting judicial proceedings solely
on Iraq or other countries of the region.

In that regard, we are concerned about the unresolved
problems related to the repatriation of foreign terrorist
fighters to their countries of origin and holding them
to account. Various alternative ideas for the relevant
courts have been discussed, although sometimes they
are quite utopian in nature. We are sure that Mr. Khan
may prove to be a very helpful at a certain point in
time in many discussion platforms. We urge him to not
succumb to political or legal temptations and strictly
follow his core mandate, as established in resolution
2379 (2017), which is to support national efforts to
prosecute ISIL members for the most serious crimes
under international law that were committed in Iraq.

The Russian delegation supported the establishment
of the Team in 2017. Its first steps were encouraging.
We call on the Team to continue its hard work on the
basis of the principles of impartiality and transparency.
We are convinced that only in that way will the Team's
work make a worthy contribution to the efforts to bring
ISIL terrorists to justice.
