Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea joins other delegations in strongly
condemning the terrorist attacks on the United Nations
compound in Mogadishu. I would like to express our
deep condolences to the victims, their families and the
Government of Somalia.

I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency for organizing this meeting. Considering
the security implications that natural resources entail,
I believe that today's topic is highly relevant to the
work of the Council. I would also like to extend my
appreciation to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson,
Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan for their insightful briefings.

Natural resources play an irreplaceable role in
many national economies, as they provide a potential
basis for sustainable economic growth and political
stability. However, we can observe a strong correlation
between a country's dependence on extractive
industries and its susceptibility to conflict, especially
when governance is weak and State institutions are
fragile. To tackle that problem, it is essential that the
gains from extractive industries are shared in a society
through a fair, transparent and well-managed process.
Good governance, rule of law and anti-corruption
efforts are indispensable.

The Republic of Korea welcomes international
initiatives aimed at increasing transparency in
extractive industries, such as the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative and the Kimberley Process.
We echo the Council's determination expressed in
resolution 1625 (2005) to take action against illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources and
high-value commodities in areas where such activities
contribute to the outbreak, escalation or continuation of
armed conflict. My delegation would like to make some
suggestions that the Security Council could consider to
further contribute to achieving that end.

First, the Security Council could consider providing
appropriate mandates to peacekeeping and special
political missions to help the Governments concerned
address the economic dimensions of conflict. United
Nations missions can advise and assist Governments
with steps to prevent the illegal exploitation of natural
resources.

Secondly, it is imperative that the Council follow
through on the implementation of its sanctions in the
context of natural resources management. The role of
United Nations expert groups should be improved and
enhanced in order to have a proper assessment and
response. Clear mandates and professional perspectives
on natural resources could be reflected in the work of
the United Nations expert groups as necessary. The
Secretariat should also be given an adequate supporting
role, with emphasis placed on improving its function as
a centre for coordination among groups of experts.

Thirdly, with regard to post-conflict situations,
the Security Council needs to further strengthen
its cooperation with other organs within the United
Nations system, such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the World Bank, in order to establish and conduct
an integrated development and reconstruction
strategy. The natural resources perspective should be
incorporated in the development of peacebuilding and
State-building strategies for countries where extractive
industries are a major source of revenue.

As a related topic, I would like to take the
opportunity today to briefly highlight the security
implications of water resource issues. Factors such
as climate change and economic development have
worsened scarcity and driven up demand for water
resources. Conflicts over transboundary water have
become an emerging security issue. In the light of that,
preventive diplomacy and mediation to address water-
related conflicts require our renewed attention.

To conclude, we believe that today's debate is
providing constructive insights that could help to better
address the issue of natural resources and conflict.
While expressing our disappointment at not being able
to agree on the draft presidential statement today, we
hope that the Security Council can work together to
develop useful instruments through further discussion
on the issue.

