Mr. Ramdin: First of all, I thank you and the
Security Council, Mr. President, for the opportunity
provided to the Organization of American States (OAS)
to speak at this important meeting on developments in
Haiti. Mexico's commitment is a long-standing one,
and we thank you very much, as well as other Member
States and Permanent Observers of the Organization,
for the assistance provided to the OAS over the past
year to facilitate our work in Haiti.

This invitation from the Security Council also
reaffirms the ongoing strong collaboration between the
United Nations and the secretariat of the Organization
of American States on the ground in Haiti. Allow me at
this point to congratulate Mr. Hedi Annabi on the
leadership he has demonstrated in support of Haiti and
of the many missions the OAS leadership and the
Permanent Council of the Organization of American
States have undertaken in the country.

The Republic of Haiti, as we have heard this
morning, is at a unique and important juncture in its
history. We believe that, since the presidential elections
in 2006, Haiti, through the inclusive approach adopted
by President Rene Garcia Preval, has created a
relatively stable political environment, and through the
efforts of the Haitian National Police and the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
has achieved an improved security environment and
has been able to develop a social and economic
programme for reconstruction, among other positive
developments. At the same time, having said this, we
must recognize that challenges remain, as ably outlined
by the Special Representative this morning.

These important developments, combined with
the historic high degree of international and
hemispheric solidarity and support, provide, in our
View, an appropriate foundation for starting a process
of job creation, production, investment and income
generation. Whereas in the past the focus has been on
the strengthening and maintenance of democracy, the
electoral process and stable governance, we believe
that the time has come to redirect our collective efforts,
with the assistance of the domestic and international
private sectors, to create economic opportunities
through short-term initiatives and, at the same time, lay
the foundations for a structural path of growth and
development through investments in education, health,
the agricultural sector and natural disaster risk
mitigation and risk reduction.

The Organization of American States, based on
the priorities established by the Government of Haiti,
will continue to work in the area of civil registry,
especially the strengthening of the electoral process
through the provision of national voter identity cards to
more than 95 per cent of the adult population. Through
this process, we will lay the foundation for the first-
ever modern civil registry in Haiti. We will also
continue to support the Provisional Electoral Council
during the upcoming partial senatorial elections and in
its transformation into a permanent electoral council.
We will continue the trade capacity-building that we
have started, support recent development and take
initiatives in the area of human rights, especially in
favour of disabled persons. We will also support the
Haitian authorities in terms of the request made by
President Preval for constitutional reform, and possibly
in specific areas of the reform and strengthening of the
judiciary.

In whatever we undertake, the OAS believes that
it must include a cross-cutting objective - the
strengthening of State institutions and capacity-
building in order to execute Haiti's priority
reconstruction programme. It is also, in our view, of
critical importance the focus on the sustainability of
progress, which will enhance confidence among
Haitians and the international community, and no doubt
lead to more support.

Next week's international donor conference on
Haiti in Washington, D.C., with a most encouraging
central objective to develop a new cooperation
paradigm for growth and opportunity, will be, in our
view, an opportune moment to bring all of these

commitments together through the adoption of a
framework for cooperation and international
partnership for the effective coordination of
governance mechanisms. We also believe that we
should continue to foster partnership with the private
sector in and outside of Haiti, as well as with civil
society at large and the Haitian diaspora.

In closing, while the political, social and
economic development of Haiti is, in the first place, a
Haitian responsibility, we believe that it is also the
obligation of the international community to politically
and financial accompany the process of dialogue and
reconstruction in Haiti.

I therefore take this opportunity, on behalf of
Secretary General Jose Miguel Insulza, to reaffirm the
strong commitment and support of the Organization of
American States to the Government and the people of
the Republic of Haiti in their efforts to continue to
strengthen the democratic process and to enhance
social and economic development and security for the
benefit of the Haitian people.

