The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.

Lithuania welcomes the unanimous adoption of this
resolution on humanitarian issues in Syria (resolution 2139 (2014)). The unanimous vote today is a message
of vital importance for those Syrians who have been
for long months desperately waiting for humanitarian
assistance: that the Council is ready to step up its efforts
in addressing one of the most horrendous humanitarian
situations of this century.

For too many Syrians, this moment of Council
unity has come too late. What has transpired during the
three years of mounting atrocities defies description.
Yet today we have a moment of hope - hope for those
under siege, hope for those watching their loved ones
succumb to starvation and hope for those living under
the constant threat of aerial bombardments, mortar
attacks and barrel bombs.

We strongly hope that today's unanimous vote
by the Council will make a tangible difference in
addressing the humanitarian needs of the Syrian people
and ensuring rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access and the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel.
It is now up to the parties to the conflict to act
immediately and decisively to implement the resolution
in full and to put an end to the horrific abuses of
international humanitarian and human rights law.

Compliance by all parties to the conflict, especially
the Syrian Government, which bears the primary and
ultimate responsibility to protect its population, is
paramount. My delegation underlines that the Council
should and must be ready to take the necessary further
steps in the event that the parties to the conflict fail to
heed the call ofthe resolution. The Council's credibility
is at stake.

Let me also underline the importance of
accountability for all the war crimes, crimes against
humanity and gross violations of human rights that have
taken place during these three long years. Impunity
breeds violence and perpetuates conflict. Impunity
cannot be allowed to continue. The Council must use
the all tools at its disposal, including referrals to the
International Criminal Court, to address the issue
and render justice to the nearly 140,000 dead and the
millions made refugees and displaced by this conflict.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

