Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
welcomes this open debate initiated by the Chinese
presidency of the Security Council, and aligns itself
with the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Singapore on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

Our discussion is timely, considering the growing
trend towards unilateralism and increasing efforts to
discredit multilateralism, mainly, and ironically, by the
chief architect of the United Nations. The Philippines
supports the Secretary-General's call for a renewed
commitment to a rules-based order and a vigorous
return to multilateralism, which gives voice to the
voiceless, counsels patience until the relevant facts are
in, weighs the options for practicality and sustainability
and imparts to actions when they are finally taken a
credibility often rightly denied to unilateral and, more
often than not, impulsive decisions. The ongoing
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development manifests one of the main and lasting
achievements of collective action. Member States have
painstakingly developed national agendas aligned with
the Sustainable Development Goals. However, the
environment conducive to peace, stability and progress
that we endeavour to nurture can be lost with a single
impulsive, unilateral act. Multilateralism is sometimes
too slow to act and just as slow to achieve consensus on
the most urgent issues. There have been tragic instances
when what cried out to be done was not.

As a founding member of the United Nations,
the Philippines actively promotes the multilateral
process. With regard to economic and social issues,
we are coordinating and facilitating issues that
really matter to our constituents 4 migration and
development, trafficking, persons with disabilities
and biological diversity, as well as human rights.
We have been advocating for the global compact on
migration, which is anchored in human rights and
just plain decency. Concerning peace and security,
the Philippines has championed the universal ban on
nuclear weapons. We cooperate closely with the United
Nations on counter-terrorism. Since 2004 we have also
been partnering with Pakistan on an annual General
Assembly resolution under the agenda item on a culture
of peace.

In the area of maritime cooperation at the regional
level, while recognizing differences among States and
never compromising our respective core interests, the
Philippines has the coordinating role for the next three
years on the adoption of a common code of conduct in
the South China Sea.
The success that the Philippines has had in
countering terrorism has revealed this scourge's
transnational nature and confirmed that it is the most
pressing threat to peace and security in the world today.
The fight against terrorism should therefore unite us
all. It demands our total and sincere cooperation.

We firmly believe that reform of the Security
Council is integral to strengthening multilateralism,
and that developing international norms further and
in a balanced manner is critical. However, while the
Philippines is strongly supportive of multilateralism,
we emphasize that the United Nations and its agencies
are a collection of sovereignties. It is not itself a
sovereign collective. It is therefore always imperative
to ensure first and foremost that the sovereignty of
States is respected and upheld. States are always by far
the best positioned to solve any problem, and there is
no agency or group that can act with anything close
to a State's own effectiveness. If a State itself is the
problem, that State itselfis in the best position to solve
it. So let us work with it.

