Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Like
others before me, I would like to warmly thank Special
Representative Chambas for making a difference in
West Africa. His good offices, whether in the Gambia,
Liberia or Togo, have helped to ease tensions and
stabilize countries and the region. Today he noted several
positive developments, but considerable challenges
remain. Sustained international support in promoting
stability is needed, and we see the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) as an
essential enabler of such support. Today I would like to
to focus on three important aspects of the added value
that UNOWAS brings to security and stability in the
region - the three Cs of conflict prevention, cross-
border cooperation and coordination.

The first C is that of conflict prevention. The
Security Council has set it as a priority for UNOWAS,
and rightly. A year after a turbulent change of power,
the Gambia is on the right track. In Togo, the Special
Representative has collaborated with the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
to encourage national stakeholders to engage in a much-
needed dialogue on constitutional reform. In Liberia,
UNOWAS played an important role in ensuring that the
elections were peaceful. Sierra Leone will be the next
test case for West Africa's encouraging track record
on democracy.

The multi-pronged approach of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) constitutes the ultimate
prevention tool. In the Lake Chad region, for example,
the effects of water scarcity and climate change are some
of the root causes of conflict. Achieving the SDGs, and
particularly SDG 6, would secure access to safe water
and sanitation. Providing creative solutions to assist the
farmers on the Niger border with the water they need to
farm and provide for their livelihood will go a long way
in addressing the fragility of the region. But as long
as we are not there yet, early warning, rapid reaction,
the use of good offices and peacebuilding - such as
what is offered by UNOWAS - will remain of critical
importance in these and other country situations. We
therefore encourage the Special Representative to
continue his important early warning activities and
would support, for instance, the organization of joint
early warning missions with the Economic Community
of West African States.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize the importance
of the C of cross-border security cooperation, whether
it is about countering terrorism, organized crime or
trafficking and illegal migration flows. Also there,
the Lake Chad region is a case in point. The countries
of the region have established the Multinational Joint
Task Force to tackle the challenges of Boko Haram.
However, the threat continues to loom large and the
resource challenge is difficult to overcome. I commend
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
efforts to support diplomatic, security and humanitarian
responses to the violence perpetrated against civilians
by Boko Haram. The affected countries must be in the
driving seat, however.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
reaffirmation by the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union of the need for a comprehensive
approach and calls for a regionally coordinated strategy
for the promotion of peace, security and development.
Initiatives by the region that promote such a holistic
approach deserve the Council's support. We would
welcome special attention and separate reporting,
including early warning analyses, on the situation
of the Lake Chad basin in the next report of the
Secretary-General.

That brings me to the third C of coordination. In
West Africa and the Sahel, we will not achieve much if
we do not effectively coordinate, both with our partners
and within the United Nations system. UNOWAS
embodies this very idea. I would note, for example,
its role in advancing the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. It reduces
duplications, it links the field with Headquarters and
it brings stakeholders together. That is exactly what
needs to be done as actors and initiatives multiply.

Another example is the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). It can be a success
only if the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali provides indispensable
operational and logistical support; if key financial
contributions are provided through a well-coordinated
international mechanism; if the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights can properly support
the human rights compliance framework of the Force;
and if the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
enables strengthened cooperation between the Force,
police and the criminal justice sector. Those are just a
few of the necessary conditions.

In conclusion, conflict prevention, regional
cooperation and enhanced coordination are critical
conditions to addressing the root causes of instability
and bringing about peaceful and inclusive development.
Through its scope and its mission, UNOWAS is a key
enabler in West Africa and one that can early on direct
the Council's attention to emerging challenges for the
region's stability. Let us make the best possible use of it
and make sure it has the financial means to do so.

Let me reiterate our gratitude to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Chambas,
personally, and UNOWAS, generally, for their sustained
efforts and leadership.

