Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to Ms. Honore
for her briefing on the situation in Haiti and the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We welcome the Permanent
Representative of Haiti to this meeting and through
him, the Republic of Angola conveys its heartfelt
condolences to the families of the Haitians killed by
Hurricane Matthew, and to the Government of Haiti,
which is confronted with a humanitarian crisis of
catastrophic proportions at a time when Haiti is still
struggling to recover from the 2010 earthquake. The
images of disruption and overall destruction are indeed
heartbreaking.

We deeply regret the consequences of this disaster,
whichhasledtothepostponementofthemuch-anticipated
presidential, senatorial and legislative elections. We
hope that new dates will be announced soon. The
political gains that took place in the reporting period
and that were subsequently washed away by Hurricane
Matthew were possible thanks to the outstanding
work of the country's Government, MINUSTAH the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, which led a
security and political assessment mission to Haiti and
urged Haitian interlocutors to find solutions to the
protracted crisis of Governance and to ensure the swift
completion of the electoral process.

In spite of the reported situation of relative calm
prior to the hurricane, the country's fragility, caused by
prevailing political uncertainty, is a cause for concern.
The increase in politically motivated violence has
generated anxiety, prompting public protests that have
resulted in the destruction of property and clashes with
the police, worsening Haiti's fragile security situation.
Robust joint security patrols and operations led by the
Haitian National Police and MINUSTAH have resulted
in a drop in criminal activities and stronger management
of public protests by the National Police. We praise the
ongoing partnership between MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police and other institutions tasked
with ensuring the rule of law. Those are encouraging
developments that we hope will secure an environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections.

We were encouraged by the fact that the Government
of Haiti has fulfilled its commitment to providing the
necessary funding for the elections and by the signing
of the integrated security plan for the elections by
the Director General of the Haitian National Police
and MINUSTAH's Police Commissioner and Force
Commander, in order to deploy a robust police and
military force throughout the country to ensure security
during the electoral period. The cooperation established
between the Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Office for Project Services and other
international partners in support of the electoral process
and in providing technical and logistical support,
training electoral staff in vote tabulation, outreach
campaigns and civic education will certainly positively
impact the electoral process once it resumes.

We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to extend the mandate of MINUSTAH
for a further six months with the current authorized
personnel. The catastrophe that has struck Haiti will
certainly change the Mission's future plans. We
await the strategic assessment on the future work of
MINUSTAH, hoping it will take into account that,
if Haitians are to take full control of the destiny of
their country, proper conditions must be effectively in
place. Therefore, we urge all national actors to pursue
the political and electoral process, engage decisively
and with rigour in the country's reconstruction, and
continue strengthening the rule of law by ensuring
justice and respect for the human rights of all Haitians.

Finally, we commend the prompt response
by MINUSTAH and the United Nations Disaster
Assessment and Coordination Team in evacuating a
great number of vulnerable communities affected by
Hurricane Matthew and in providing humanitarian
assistance to those in need. It is our hope that once
the current humanitarian crisis is overcome, Haiti will
swiftly resume its electoral process, which was on
track before Hurricane Matthew struck, that life starts
normalizing for Haitian people and that sustainable
peace is restored.

