Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to welcome the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine,
Mr. Leonid Kozhara, to the Security Council and thank
him for his briefing and for setting out his priorities
across the three dimensions of security.

Azerbaijan commends the Ukrainian chairmanship
for its focus on the resolution ofthe protracted conflicts
in the OSCE area. It is important to reinvigorate ongoing
conflict settlement efforts and encourage participating
States to comply with their obligations under the
Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki Final
Act of 1975 and to implement the resolutions adopted
by the main organs of the United Nations. We hope that
the decision on the "Helsinki+40" process adopted last
year in Dublin will contribute to the achievement of
tangible outcomes to that end.

The OSCE provides an ongoing forum for
discussions on settling the conflict between Armenia
and Azerbaijan. We take positive note of the support of
the Chairperson-in-Office for mediation efforts in that
regard, and would like to offer some thoughts on issues
of concern and areas of action that we deem particularly
important.

Twenty years ago, in 1993, the Security Council
adopted four resolutions condemning the use of force
against Azerbaijan and the occupation of its territories;
reaffirming respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country and the inviolability of
international borders; confirming that the Nagorno
Karabakh region was part ofAzerbaijan; and demanding
the immediate, full and unconditional withdrawal of
the occupying forces from all the occupied territories.
The resolutions also made specific reference to
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the displacement of a large number of civilians in
Azerbaijan, attacks on civilians and bombardments of
my country's territory. A series of Security Council
presidential statements made between 1992 and 1995
are phrased along the same lines. In other words, the
resolutions, which are clearly the most authoritative
and binding rulings on the problem, acknowledge
that acts of military force were committed against
Azerbaijan, and that such acts constituted a violation of
international law.

Unfortunately, key Security Council demands have
still not been implemented, and the mediation efforts
conducted for more than 20 years within the framework
of the OSCE have yet to yield results. Against that
background, attempts to downplay the relevance of the
Security Council resolutions and to misinterpret the
norms and principles of international law, as well as the
Armenian side's insistence on unrealistic annexationist
claims, represent an open challenge to the conflict-
settlement process and a serious threat to international
and regional peace and security. Moreover, consistent
measures are being undertaken in the occupiedterritories
of Azerbaijan with a view to further consolidating the
current status quo of the occupation and preventing
the return of more than 700,000 internally displaced
Azerbaijanis to their homes.

On our initiative in the United Nations in 2005
and 2010, OSCE-led fact-finding and fact-assessment
missions visited the occupied territories. Both missions
documented the facts of illegal activities in those areas
involving, inter alia, implanting settlers, extensive
redrawing of boundaries, changing place names,
and discriminatory treatment regarding cultural
property and sacred sites. However, the missions'
recommendations remained on paper. Moreover, the
latest reports on the transfer ofSyrian Armenians into the
Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied territories
of Azerbaijan, along with other illegal activities,
including efforts to operate flights into and out of those
territories, provide yet more evidence of Armenia's
deliberate policy of colonization of Azerbaijani lands.
We hope that the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office will
insist on the need for an immediate and unconditional
halt to all actions seriously obstructing the prospects
for a negotiated settlement of the conflict, based on
international law.

The achievement of peace, security and stability
is possible first and foremost only if the consequences
of Armenia's unlawful use of force are removed, thus
ensuring that the occupation of Azerbaijan's territories
is ended and that the right of internally displaced
Azerbaijanis to return to their homes, property and
possessions is guaranteed and implemented. That
is what international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions require, and that is what can in no
way be introduced as a bargaining chip in the conflict-
settlement process. Above all, Azerbaijan will never
compromise its territorial integrity or the rights and
freedoms of its citizens.

The establishment of the truth about the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during the conflict, the provision
of adequate and effective reparations to victims and the
need for institutional action to prevent the repetition
of such violations are all prerequisites for true conflict
resolution. It is obvious that the impunity still enjoyed
by the perpetrators of the crimes, including the political
and military leadership of Armenia and the members
of the puppet separatist regime in the occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, continues to impede progress
in achieving the long-awaited peace and reconciliation
between the two countries.

Azerbaijan is confident that the consistent
measures being taken at the national level, as well as
the existing international legal framework, will serve
to bring to justice those responsible for the grave
offences committed against the civilian population of
Azerbaijan during the conflict. Generally speaking,
we believe that the conflict-resolution initiatives must
ensure that peace and justice work together effectively.
Peace efforts cannot be conducted in a manner that
contradicts the established norms of international
law. It is therefore imperative that such efforts and
peace agreements never encourage the acceptance of
situations achieved by the unlawful use of force or
other egregious violations of international law, such
as war crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and
ethnic cleansing.

We commend the OSCE chairmanship for its
commitment to remaining actively engaged with
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations towards
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution. There is an obvious need for reviewing
and assessing the OSCE mandates and performance
in conflict-cycle-related issues, in particular conflict
resolution and post-conflict rehabilitation. Based on
existing commitments, more concerted efforts should
be put into exploring the OSCE's role in multinational
peacekeeping operations, with a particular focus on
civilian and police components. The OSCE's interaction
with various military and security arrangements must
be considered in the context of the indivisibility of the
OSCE area, by addressing, inter alia, the legitimate
concerns of those States participating in the OSCE
that are not members of any military alliances, and by
providing them with political and security guarantees.

One of the OSCE's major contributions to peace
and security in the political-military dimension is
made chiefly through arms control and confidence-
and security-building measures. The implementation
of such measures should be done in a way that ensures
the right of every State to an equal level of security
and that guarantees that no individual State or group of
States enjoys an advantage over others. Efforts in that
particular area should not be taken out of the overall
political and security context. They should take into
account the legitimate security needs and concerns
of participating States, especially those that are not
members of military alliances with conflict-affected
territories; they should also take into account the
consequences of conflict, such as military intervention
and illegal deployment.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine once again for addressing
the Security Council, and to wish our Ukrainian
colleagues a successful chairmanship.

