Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to welcome
the Foreign Minister of Belgium and to thank him for
having made the effort to come to New York to brief us
today on the comprehensive programme of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) for 2006. It is a particular pleasure for me to
welcome him here, and not just because our countries
have close relations: it happens also that I studied in
Belgium.

It is true that he will have to confront a great
many challenges in the coming 12 months. It sounds
from what we have heard today that the OSCE is ready
to tackle all of the problems and challenges facing it
with renewed effort, fresh ideas and sincere
commitment. We wish Mr. De Gucht success and hope
that his efforts will be rewarded. The OSCE, given its
important role and unique cross-dimensional mandate,
certainly deserves that. He will certainly have the full
support of Greece.

Thirty years after the Helsinki Final Act and the
creation of what is now the OSCE, Europe is a new
continent, broadly at peace and fully engaged in the
development of new cooperative structures. The
contribution of the OSCE as the largest regional
organization on security, encompassing and joining
countries from Vancouver to Vladivostok, has been
central in the construction of the new European
security architecture, as well as in ensuring the
protection of human rights and addressing many other
issues to which other speakers have referred in detail.

Over the past few years, the OSCE has been
trying to redefine itself in order to better adapt to a
fast-changing and ever more complex environment,
and that accounts for the recent difficulties that the
organization has had to face. Despite those
difficulties - or perhaps because of them - one thing
has become clear, especially in the past year: the OSCE
has not outlived its usefulness, and ongoing concerns
about questions of stability and security in the whole of
Europe make clear that there is still a need for a strong,
efficient regional organization that has successfully
reinvented and reoriented itself. A pertinent example of
that is the extensive experience and important input of
the OSCE in the Balkans. Its activities cover the fields
of institution-building, good governance, the rule of
law and election monitoring.

It goes without saying that the cooperation of the
OSCE with the United Nations in various crisis areas
contributes not only to peace and stability, but also to a
better division of labour, which can have only positive
results.
In closing, I would like to ask the Belgian
Chairman-in-Office a number of questions. He
mentioned that the three main dimensions of the OSCE
have so far received unequal treatment, and that during
his chairmanship he intends to deal more substantively
with the economic and environmental dimensions. I
would like to ask him what that would encompass. Are
there more detailed plans for achieving such a
rebalancing? How would the targets be better defined?
By what practical means would the goal be achieved? I
would be grateful for more details.

