Mr. Ruiicka (Slovakia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on peacebuilding in
Africa.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. In addition, I wish to make several
remarks in my national capacity.

Where violent conflict breaks out, development
is arrested, and the impact, especially on the poor,
can be devastating. The recently adopted Sustainable
Development Goals have reinforced the consensus
within the international community that security, peace
and the rule of law are indispensable to sustainable
development. Key to the transition from conflict to
peace and sustainable development is an effective and
accountable system of security based on the rule of
law. The notion that security, development and the rule
of law are inextricably linked has resonated in United
Nations policies and debates for more than a decade. The
link between a responsive, effective and accountable
security sector, including through its reform, and
peace and stability is widely accepted among Member
States and experts alike, and has been acknowledged
repeatedly by the Security Council, including in its
resolution 2151 (2014).

On 21 June, the co-Chairs of the United Nations
Group of Friends of Security-Sector Reform, Slovakia
and South Africa, in cooperation with the United
Nations Security Sector Reform Task Force, along with
its secretariat and the Security Sector Reform Unit at
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, facilitated
a high-level dialogue on building support for key
security-sector reform priorities in the Central African
Republic. That event provided a unique platform for
a discussion among high-ranking representatives of
the Government of the Central African Republic, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, as well as representatives of key partners,
including the United Nations, the European Union, the
World Bank and bilateral donors.
The dialogue focused on two priorities. First,
speakers reflected on the elements of the national
security-sector reform process that are needed to
secure lasting peace and prevent a relapse into conflict.
Secondly, there was a focus on immediate and long-term
reform needs pertaining to security-sector institutions,
including the police, gendarmerie, military, and
relevant civilian control and oversight bodies. The role
of local communities and their capacity to meaningfully
participate in the provision of security and fulfil their
democratic oversight role were noted, as well.

In order to be an effective tool in peacebuilding,
security sector reform needs to be truly representative
of a State's people. Particular emphasis was therefore
placed on the key elements of national ownership and
the importance of national responsibility and political
consensus in that regard. Throughout the high-level
dialogue, security sector reform was highlighted as
a key tool for preventing relapse into conflict and, as
such, the need for a strategic approach to security-sector
reform in the Central African Republic was stressed
by many speakers. In the coming days, the co-Chairs
will present the outcome of those deliberations to the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the wider membership.

With the adoption of the two resolutions on the
review of the peacebuilding architecture (resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/268),
the Organization has taken a decisive step forward
and has generated promising momentum. Together,
we must now champion those changes and create a
peacebuilding architecture that will deliver on the
critical, ever-evolving peacebuilding tasks.

