Our fight against the pandemic should not hinder our fight against terrorism. We should not let the pandemic create conditions conducive for terrorism to regain power, regroup and grow. Resolution 2532 (2020), on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), adopted last month, accurately anticipated the calling for an immediate cessation of hostilities during the pandemic, except for the fight against terrorism. During the pandemic, the impact of terrorism has become more severe, as we witness terror and cyberattacks on vital public infrastructure, including hospitals. The situation will become even worse when terrorism intertwines with organized crime. That link may take many forms and may vary across regions. We have seen terrorist groups directly involved in organized crime. Some use kidnapping as a means to fund their terrorist operations. Others are resorting to smuggling drugs and weapons. There are also instances where terrorists collaborate with members of organized crime by facilitating border-crossings, arms and human trafficking, and money transfers and laundering. One thing is certain - a stronger terror-crime nexus, in any form, can lead to devastating global impacts and make it more challenging for us to address COVID-19 and existing security challenges. We must therefore step up efforts to address the terror-crime nexus, as mandated by resolution 2482 (2019). With that in mind, allow me to share three key points. First, we must adjust our policies to address the nexus of terrorism and organized crime, as these are generally considered separately. We cannot continue doing so; there must be greater synergy between the relevant authorities. During the pandemic, with limited resources, greater synergy becomes even more important. Budget constraints should not diminish our efforts to tackle the terror-crime nexus. Necessary adjustments are also required to thwart the terror-crime connection in prisons, which often become breeding grounds where terrorists interact with other criminals. To that end, it is Indonesia's policy to separate convicted terrorists from other prisoners. Secondly, we must strengthen our legal and institutional infrastructure. Our domestic legislation must have the capacity to address the terror-crime nexus. In that connection, it is pertinent to ensure that international legal instruments to combat terrorism and organized crime are translated into domestic legislation. As mandated by the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, Indonesia's stand-alone terrorist financing legislation, enables us to punish financiers separately from terrorists, thus broadening the scope of our enforcement to address the nexus. Equally important is enhancing capacity-building for law enforcement to increase its ability to address this new phenomenon. The Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation has been actively promoting the capacity of law- enforcement officials from more than 100 countries in the field of terrorism and transnational organized crime. We will ensure that the terror-crime nexus is addressed as part of the programme. Finally, regional mechanisms must also be able to respond to this nexus. The Ministerial Meeting on Transnational Crimes of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations is an avenue where counter-terrorism and organized crime are deliberated under one platform. This joint platform can serve as an example for other regional mechanisms to address the nexus. As the terror-crime link varies in each region, synergizing efforts among regional organizations is key. That entails efforts to intensify the timely exchange of information and best practices and enhancing our understanding of the linkages between the two, including regional differences. Greater synergy and unity among United Nations bodies and agencies is equally important. As the terror-crime nexus is a fairly new phenomenon, Indonesia underscores the urgent need for the United Nations to undertake more detailed reports and analysis on the matter. In conclusion, our ability to adapt and strengthen synergies will determine how effectively we can respond to this emerging threat.
