I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing today and for his commitment to a political solution in Libya. Belgium condemns the logic of war which the Libyan parties seem to be locked into, with the increasing support of external actors. No valid reason exists for not responding positively and immediately to the multiple calls for a ceasefire, including last week in the Council. Military action needs to stop immediately, regardless of the location of the front lines. Dialogue remains the only sustainable solution to the crisis and the parameters are well known: the Libyan Political Agreement, the principles agreed in Berlin, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya's three-track approach and resolution 2510 (2020). We welcome the timid steps taken in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission and urge the Government and General Haftar to engage more forcefully and in good faith with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in that forum. I would like to take advantage of the wider participation in today's meeting to directly address directly the States supporting the Libyan actors. I urge them to stop their current actions, which are having a negative impact on the crisis, and instead, to use their influence in a positive way by finally encouraging the path of dialogue. Most importantly, their words should be followed by concrete actions that demonstrate their commitment to the political solution. In that connection, let me thank those States around the table that have taken genuine initiatives for dialogue. I would also like to tell some of the States participating today that there is no excuse for not respecting the arms embargo. By violating it, they are contributing to the ongoing spiral of violence, exacerbating tensions among Libyans and severely undermining a durable exit from the crisis. More importantly, they are contributing to the loss of life of innocent civilians, Libyans and migrants. I want to reiterate that it is the responsibility of all parties to protect civilians, including the most vulnerable. I renew my country's commitment to ensuring that the most serious crimes in Libya do not go unpunished, whether tried in the national courts or the International Criminal Court. I welcome the establishment by the Human Rights Council of a fact-finding mission to investigate violations and abuses of international human rights law and international humanitarian law by all parties to the conflict. The fact-finding mission is also mandated to preserve evidence with a view to ensuring that perpetrators are held accountable. In doing so, we will have taken an important step towards ending impunity for terrible crimes that took place in Libya, such as those we recently discovered in Tarhouna and have witnessed elsewhere. We are deeply concerned about the continuous blockade of oil production, which has had disastrous consequences for the country's economy and its population as a whole. Libya's natural resources belong to all Libyans and their use is vital to the country's economy, particularly given the need to address the coronavirus disease pandemic. I urge all to respect the civilian nature of the oil infrastructure and encourage further dialogue on how to better share the revenue it generates. In conclusion, allow me to once again commend the courage and determination of the entire staff of UNSMIL and the whole country team. In that context, I would like to emphasize the urgent need for the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya.
