Mr. Shinyo (Japan): At the outset, since we have
not had an opportunity for quite some time in this
Chamber to have a discussion focused solely on
resolution 1540 (2004), I highly commend your
initiative, Mr. President, to hold an open debate on this
important subject, as you currently chair the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I would also like to take this opportunity
to thank Mr. Nobuaki Tanaka, Under-Secretary-General
for Disarmament Affairs, and the representatives of the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the World
Customs Organization for their statements.

Last week, a workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) was held in San Francisco, for
the first time within the framework of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations Regional Forum (ARF),
and an expert from my delegation took part. I received
a report that the workshop was quite fruitful. In that
regard, I wish to thank the Governments of the United
States, Canada and Singapore, which were its sponsors.
At the workshop, the Regional Forum participants

explained their national efforts to implement resolution
1540 (2004), and it is impressive that a number of
Asian countries have made strides in its
implementation. That fact, in my View, is attributable
to the outreach activities undertaken by you,
Mr. President, in particular. I believe that it also
demonstrates that the activities related to resolution
1540 (2004) have apparently shifted from the stage of
reporting to the next phase. At the same time, on the
basis of the discussions at the workshop and my
mission's experience while serving on the 1540
Committee for the past two years, it appears that the
challenges surrounding the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) have become clearer. Today, I
would like to share some thoughts on those challenges.

First, as regards cooperation with international
organizations, the 1540 Committee itself does not have
the capacity at this point to provide assistance to
Member States. Therefore, international organizations
that have assistance agendas should play active roles. I
was encouraged by the statements made by the
representatives of the competent international
organizations. It is necessary for those countries that
need assistance to communicate with those
organizations in order to receive adequate assistance.

At the same time, since assistance needs may
vary, depending on the situation in each State, donors
should provide tailor-made assistance in order to
address the specific needs of the recipients. In that
connection, I welcome the initiative by Norway,
Germany and Chile to hold a workshop here in New
York in March, aimed at, among other things, closer
coordination among donor countries and relevant
international and regional organizations.

Japan, for its part, is providing a wide variety of
programmes and seminars for capacity-building and
training in such areas as aviation security, maritime
and port security and customs and export control.
Moreover, Japan recently organized the Asian Senior-
level Talks on Non-Proliferation for the third time
since 2004, to discuss ways to accelerate efforts aimed
at the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
in Asia. Japan looks forward to coordinating closely
with international organizations and other potential
donors for the further enhancement of global
cooperation in this area.
Secondly, the existence of gaps in various aspects
of implementation on the part of many countries

remains a problem. It is often pointed out that, in a
number of States, high priority is not necessarily given
to this area, as opposed to development assistance, and
that in inter-agency processes the relevant agencies do
not provide enough support for the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). Those issues should, in
principle, be tackled by each individual country, but, if
other countries could share their experience in
overcoming them, it would be very helpful. When we
discuss the necessity of sharing experience, we tend to
talk only about good experience. The fact is that the
sharing of bad experience, and prescriptions for
addressing such difficulties, would be the most useful
information for States confronting similar problems.

Thirdly, there is a need for the extensive
utilization of expert knowledge. In recent months, the
interest of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and think tanks in resolution 1540 (2004) has grown.
We welcome opinions expressed by research
institutions, regardless of their political positions,
because they not only help increase awareness
regarding the resolution but also provide new
perspectives for Member States to consider. The
seminar recently organized by think tanks succinctly
summarized the challenges for the resolution, including
those that I have just enumerated. Such
recommendations and observations should not simply
be presented without being properly followed up; it is
important that such points be further elaborated and
reflected in the discussions in the 1540 Committee and,
moreover, in the Security Council.

As is often pointed out, the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term process, and
there is no magic formula. Member States should bring
their expertise together, with the help of international
organizations and NGOs, and thoroughly discuss ways
to further effectively implement the resolution. To that
end, I look forward to having further opportunities to
discuss this issue on a regular basis.

