Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I wish first of all, Mr. President, to thank you and your
delegation for the initiative to include the question of
international terrorism on the December agenda of the
Security Council. I wish also to thank Mr. Hans Corell
for his comprehensive briefing on the roles of United
Nations organs in the fight against that scourge.

We are witnessing today the emergence of new
transborder threats in the face of which the
international community remains relatively powerless.
With its dangerous and constantly evolving methods
and its growing links to drug and arms trafficking and
money-laundering, terrorism has become one of the
major scourges of our day, as it obstructs the economic
and social development of countries and destabilizes
international peace and security.

Because no country in the world has any
guarantee that it will be spared this scourge, the
international community's response must be joint,
coordinated and comprehensive. Because of its
universality, the United Nations is an ideal framework
in this respect. The Security Council, given its
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, must be able to identify those
situations involving acts of terrorism which represent
threats to international peace and security and react
firmly, as has been the case on a number of occasions.

The Council, which took a stand on this question
as early as 1970, has since then adopted several
resolutions that have addressed fields as varied as the
hijacking of aircraft, the taking of hostages, illicit acts
against the safety of civil aviation, and kidnappings.

For its part, the General Assembly has a pivotal
role in the elaboration of appropriate and effective
legal instruments in the fight against terrorism. Thus in
1994 it adopted the Declaration on Measures to
Eliminate International Terrorism, supplemented by a
second Declaration condemning all acts and practices
of terrorism, regardless of political, philosophical,
ideological, ethnic or religious considerations.

These Declarations were subsequently
consolidated through a whole arsenal of sectoral or
special conventions addressing specific areas. Out of
three recent drafts, two were successful. Thus the

S/PVAZAZ

 

Convention on the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
and the Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism were adopted in 1997 and
1999, respectively. Tunisia, which is gratified at these
important achievements, hopes that the draft on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism will meet with
the same success, on the basis of a consensus.

My delegation believes, however, that in order to
achieve that objective, it will be necessary to take into
consideration the concerns of all the parties, inter alia,
those expressed by the Non-Aligned Movement.

The elaboration of a comprehensive draft
convention on terrorism as well as the convening,
under the auspices of the United Nations, of a high-
level conference will represent a good opportunity to
further strengthen the dialogue in the fight against
international terrorism and will send a strong signal of
our collective determination to combat all acts of
terrorism in all its forms.

In this framework, Tunisia fully supports the
position adopted in the Durban Declaration by the
Non-Aligned Movement, and we emphasize the need
for international cooperation to combat terrorism, in
accordance with the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the relevant
international conventions. It is therefore vital that these
international norms be respectful of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States.

The role of the United Nations Secretariat is of
equal importance. We are awaiting with great interest
the publication of documents that will provide a
compilation of national laws and regulations
concerning the prevention of, and the fight against,
international terrorism, as well as a compilation of
related regional conventions.

The elaboration of international instruments is
not the only area ofjoint effort. States and international
organizations must also cooperate in implementing
these texts in the broadest possible way. Tunisia
believes that the fact that it has signed a large number
of international legal instruments in the fight against
terrorism and its accession to various Arab, Islamic,
African and Mediterranean regional initiatives reflect
its firm resolve to make a significant contribution to
the efforts of the international community to confront
this scourge.

Aware that individual action cannot suffice in this
field, Tunisia has developed a close and fruitful
cooperation with other States at the regional and
bilateral levels, based on a continuing exchange of
expertise and information with our partners.

While Tunisia categorically and unreservedly
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
my delegation wishes to take this opportunity to recall
the Declaration published on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations and to
emphasize our deep commitment to the need to
distinguish between terrorism and the legitimate
struggle of peoples subjected to occupation, whose
goal it is to achieve their inalienable right to self-
determination.

