Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I welcome Lord Ashdown
and thank him for his uplifting briefing. We also thank
Judge Meron, President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, for his
presentation to the Council today.

In the early part of the past decade, Bosnia and
Herzegovina became a victim of a brutal war which
was synonymous with "ethnic cleansing", religious
hatred and untold brutality against innocent
civilians- men, women and children. It took the
concerted efforts of the international community, over
several years, to bring that unfortunate war to an end.
Pakistan played a role as an active member of the
Security Council at the time - and as one of the
largest contributors to the United Nations Protection
Force in Bosnia later - in the restoration of peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Today, almost a decade after that tragic war,
Bosnia has become a more peaceful and stable
country - a far cry from the killing fields of the past
decade. That is in considerable measure, a testament to
the sustained commitment of the international
community in implementing the Dayton Accords,
despite the difficulties that have been encountered. But,
largely, the credit for the progress made goes to the
resilient and resourceful people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, who have demonstrated a determination
to rebuild a nation which was torn apart by hate, power
politics and international intrigue.

We appreciate the efforts of Lord Ashdown and
his staff in promoting the rule of law, in facilitating the
return of refugees, in supporting efforts for
reconstruction and recovery, and in restructuring the
administrative structures of the country and building its
capacity for production and employment. All that has
contributed significantly to moving Bosnia and
Herzegovina further along the path towards peace and
national integration.

We also support the ongoing reform processes,
including the domestic prosecution of war crimes, the
legal reforms, the defence reforms aimed at Bosnia's
participation in wider international security structures,
and the economic reforms necessary to turn around the
country's once-vibrant economy.

While we support the establishment of a domestic
Chamber to try war crimes cases, that should not imply
that the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is no longer responsible for prosecuting
high-profile criminals like Radovan Karadzic, who
remains at large. The Tribunal must continue its task of
trying the major war criminals, leaving the Bosnian
special Chamber to deal with the lesser cases.

I believe Lord Ashdown would agree that as yet
all is not completely well in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He would also agree that the restoration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's pre-war tapestry of coexistence remains
an aspiration. Without genuine reconciliation among
the country's various communities, durable peace
cannot be fully assured. The success achieved much
earlier in Brcko unfortunately could not be replicated at
Mostar. There are also other political problems at the
national and entity levels, some of which are referred
to in Lord Ashdown's report. Moreover, the peace
process remains under threat from extreme nationalists,
war criminals and organized crime networks. Above
all, we have not reached a point where the security of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be guaranteed without the
presence of foreign forces.

Pakistan recognizes that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is in Europe, and that the European Union
must have a lead role in its political and socio-
economic recovery. But it must not be forgotten that
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not only European; it has a
unique identity and history - an old history and a
more tragic recent history. The United Nations,
therefore, must also continue to have a role in assisting
in the process of restoring peace and prosperity in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We should thus promote
possibilities for the United Nations - and indeed for
other organizations, like the Organization of the
Islamic Conference - to work in concert with the
European Union and with other European entities to
realize their common objectives in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

During the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Pakistan extended unequivocal moral, political and
financial support to the suffering people of that bold
nation. When they were oppressed under unfair
sanctions, we acted in the defence of international
morality and the principles of the United Nations
Charter. Our support was and continues to be
manifested in our conviction that no nation must be
victimized because it is weak and vulnerable. No
people should be brutalized for their ethno-religious
origins, and no people should be denied their inherent
right to self-determination and the right to wage a
legitimate struggle for freedom.

