Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Sir,
on your presidency of the Security Council. I am also
grateful to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for his introduction of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/277).
In a few months, we will mark a decade since the
subject of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
was first considered by the Security Council. My
country considers it important to reiterate at this time a
few basic points on that topic. First, the protection of
civilians in armed conflict must be carried out within

the framework of strict compliance with the principles
contained in the United Nations Charter, with full
respect for the national sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the countries involved in a conflict.
Although the principle of the protection of civilian
populations is among the most commendable, we shall
not allow it to be manipulated so that some interfere in
the strictly internal affairs of sovereign States.
Unfortunately, there is a plethora of examples of that
type of manipulation in the history of Nicaragua, Latin
America and the Caribbean in general.

The Secretary-General, in the report before us for
consideration (S/2009/277), describes a way to
strengthen compliance with the relevant international
norms, but it is obvious that the Council has been
selective in its approach and decisions in that regard.
In fact, in its resolution 1674 (2006), the Security
Council reaffirmed that it was essential to end
impunity so that a society in conflict or recovering
from conflict could come to terms with past abuses and
prevent future such abuses.

Where then is the Council's resolve when it
comes to the humiliated and tormented Palestinian
population? Unfortunately, the day when the long-
awaited justice for which the Palestinian people have
been calling becomes a reality seems very uncertain
and distant. Applying a double standard with regard to
the protection of civilian populations inevitably
undermines the credibility of this Council. It is that
double standard that fuels, inter alia, the despair of a
people who see no future other than that of the missiles
launched against them by a Power with crushing
military technology.

We also hope that where there are so-called
coalitions or multinational forces, mechanisms for
accountability and international justice will be
developed, so that the words "collateral damage", used
euphemistically by the military hierarchies of certain
countries, will disappear from the international news
and so that the relatives of the victims of the
devastation of war by some will be compensated and
justice applied.
With regard to the protection of civilians in
imminent danger of physical violence, as the Security
Council has provided for in the context of
peacekeeping operations, it is important to reiterate
that such a task must be accomplished in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and with the guiding principles of
peacekeeping operations, which, I recall, include the
consent of the host State. In peacekeeping operations,
the protection of civilian populations cannot be
consistently ensured without a broad peace process in
which all interested parties participate and that is
supported by the national authorities. It is therefore of
primary importance that peacekeeping missions not
only cooperate closely with the national authorities but
also support them in carrying out their task of
protecting civilians.

Similarly, the difficult and painstaking session of
the Fifth Committee, that just concluded yesterday
should serve as a lesson to the members of the Council.
May it be understood once and for all that, in order to
be able to implement the mandates voted on here in
this Council, peacekeeping missions must be provided
with all necessary resources. Those resources are vital
to the provision of consolidated and specific training
activities for each mission with a mandate to protect
civilians, and to increase the operational capacity of
the Blue Helmets and the national forces of the host
country. In that regard, the General Assembly awaits
the report of the Secretary-General requested by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations on
bringing approved resources in line with operation
mandates.

Political crises that degenerate into armed
conflicts are, in the overwhelming majority of cases,
the symptom of social and economic crises that cannot
be lastingly resolved without genuinely tackling the
root of the problems. There will be no peace and
security in the world without economic and social
development for all. Only in that way will civilian
populations be truly and effectively protected.

