Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): At
this time, as Costa Rica is about to conclude its term as
an elected member of the Security Council, and thus as
I conclude my work as Chair of the 1540 Committee, I
take special satisfaction in addressing the Council to
share some ideas and opinions arise from my
management of that Committee.

I am aware that my main responsibility today as
outgoing Chair of the Committee is not to review the
achievements, which will be reflected in pending
reports, but instead to share with the Council the
conclusions I have reached after these two years and
thus to contribute to the decisions that should be
adopted in the future in order to attain the objectives of
the resolution.

The most important and urgent recommendation
that I can make, as obvious as it may seem, is that if
the Security Council really wants to achieve the
objective of preventing the possibility that weapons of
mass destruction could fall into the hands of non-State
actors and be used by them, it is absolutely necessary
to devote greater energy and greater resources to
guaranteeing the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

The international community should no longer be
satisfied to hear again and again that the implementation
of the resolution is a process that will take many years.
I believe it is necessary to summon the will in the
Council, and in the Organization as a whole, to
invigorate the instruments that contribute to the
implementation of the resolution.

In my opinion, the five years that have passed
since the adoption of the resolution have not allowed
the progress we had hoped for as a direct consequence
of the resolution. Certainly, better results could have
been achieved. But what is important now is not what
we have not achieved, but what we have been able to
learn in order to improve the work of the Committee
and to increase its efficacy.

The Committee's mandate was amended twice in
five years, through resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810
(2008), changes that significantly increased the
workload but did not provide the new tools or
resources to carry it out. Moreover, all the components
of that mandate involve a large number of specific
tasks that overburden the Committee and exhaust the
availability and capacities of the team of experts that
supports its work.

The Committee, which began as an instrument to
inform the Council about the implementation of the
resolution by Member States in its first two years, was
later entrusted with working on outreach and dialogue
with Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations, and with acting as a catalyst
for the process of sharing experiences and lessons
learned. The Committee was also asked to establish
relevant technical assistance capacities and to match
the needs for and availability of such capacities. The
Council also invited the Committee to pause its work
and consider undertaking a comprehensive review on
the status of the implementation of the resolution.

I cannot conclude this review without mentioning
that representing the Committee in meetings around the
world takes up the time of the Committee's members
and experts, as well as a large part of its resources,
which could be better spent.

The Committee has attempted to deal with the
workload by creating three subcommittees and four
working groups. However, the members, consultant
experts and the Committee as a whole are not able to
carry out all the tasks for which they are responsible. It
is essential that the Security Council pay particular
attention to the 1540 Committee and give it sufficient
means to carry out the tasks entrusted to it.

The comprehensive review of the status of
implementation produced several ideas that could
strengthen the capacity of the Committee to better
fulfil its mandate.

In my opinion, the Committee should not build a
much more extensive structure, nor should it become a
direct provider of technical assistance. Rather, the
Committee should have the means to become the centre
of a network that shares the general purpose of the
resolution. I have worked in this direction through
working visits to the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the World Customs Organization and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
I have also met with regional organizations and many
non-governmental organizations which have resources
and expertise at their disposal to collaborate in the
strengthening of global security.

This network is possible, but the Council would
have to give the Committee the means to make it a
reality. In my opinion, the building of such a network,
the design of the relevant shared tools that would
enable joint work and the negotiation and
implementation of agreements to foster cooperation all
justify expanding the number of experts supporting the
Committee to ten. That increase should also take into
account the other recommendations I will make later.

In my view, the expert capacity of the Committee,
once it has been expanded, should focus primarily on
dialogue with States, specialized bodies and regional
and subregional organizations in order to build a
network responsible for designing and implementing
differentiated strategies for accelerating the process of
implementation. An indispensable component of any
strategy to strengthen the Committee is mechanisms to
facilitate the voluntary financing of activities to speed
up its implementation.

I should now like to set out some observations
and recommendations on the expertise that supports the
Committee and how it might be reinforced. I believe
that such reinforcement must take into account the
quantitative aspect that I have already mentioned: the
number of experts must be increased in order to fulfil
the mandated tasks. But I believe that the legitimacy of
the Committee must also be reinforced through the
assurance that such expertise be delivered by United
Nations staff members, observing the Organization's
regular procedures. The consultants of the 1540
Committee are the only experts supporting a subsidiary
body of the Council that are not selected by the
Secretariat. During the process of appointing three of
the experts, that led to situations that I, as a
representative of a Member State of this Organization,
consider extremely irregular.

I am pleased to recognize the work,
professionalism and dedication of the Group of Experts,
but I believe the interests of the Committee would be
better served if the Office for Disarmament Affairs were
to be in charge of providing the substantive support
that is currently provided by this group of consultants.
I am also pleased to confirm that the questions that
were initially posed regarding the legitimacy of the
resolution seem to have disappeared, as have the initial
doubts on the need for the Committee. This represents
a concrete achievement by the Committee and the
Group of Experts that supports it.

It is now up to the Security Council to contribute
to consolidating the perception of the Committee as a
body that promotes global security by adopting
decisions that further favour ownership of the process
of implementing the resolution and the exercise of
responsibility by every Member State.

I conclude by offering a few considerations on
the general implementation strategy. I regret that the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) did not provide all the
answers it was supposed to. Identifying the evolving
risks and threats is still a pending issue. Perhaps the
need for compromise on the scope of the exercise
prevented the Committee from having the instruments
necessary to obtain the desired information.

However, the comprehensive review did offer
alternative approaches to facilitating the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). For example, it affirmed the
enormous potential of regional and subregional
organizations to support the purpose of the resolution
and the work of the Committee. In my opinion, it is
imperative to break with the approach according to
which one single strategy can guarantee results in all
situations. The nature of resolution 1540 (2004),
unprecedented for the Security Council, justifies very
close cooperation with the aforementioned international
organizations.

It is thus a question of promoting the adoption of
new legislation in all countries, the implementation of
new measures, the establishment of new controls, and
their guaranteed effective enforcement. Such an
ambitious undertaking cannot be achieved without a
broad process of international cooperation that
necessarily includes regional and subregional
organizations.

There are already a few examples of successful
regional cooperation that with time will prove to be
efficient instruments in achieving specific goals, such
as the inclusion of implementation as a national
priority, the widespread creation of local focal points,
the broader use of national implementation plans,
requests for assistance and, generally, the establishment
of higher-quality dialogue between the Committee and
Member States.

Finally, as I leave the chairmanship of the 1540
Committee, I respectfully urge the Council to discuss
the following suggestions.

First, the Security Council should instruct the
1540 Committee to focus its efforts on building and
making operational a worldwide cooperation network
involving specialized, regional, subregional and civil
society organizations, as well as the private sector and
academia.

Secondly, the Security Council should increase to
10 the number of experts supporting the work of the
Committee.

Thirdly, the Council should take the necessary
steps to ensure that the expertise supporting the
Committee's work is delivered through established
United Nations procedure through the Office for
Disarmament Affairs.

Fourthly, the Council should instruct the
Committee to design and implement additional
mechanisms for the voluntary financing of its
activities.

Fifthly, the Council should assess and monitor the
evolving risks and threats concerning the possibility of
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands of
non-State actors.

Sixthly, the Council should instruct the Committee
to strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional bodies in the joint design and application
of differentiated implementation strategies.

Personally, and on behalf of my country, I am
grateful for the opportunity to have served on the 1540
Committee and urge Council members to promptly
review those suggestions whose only intention is to
transform our ongoing movement into genuine action.

