Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this meeting on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and congratulates Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNMIK, on his comprehensive briefing.

cote d'Ivoire welcomes the encouraging political,
economic and security trends seen in Kosovo in
recent years. That progress is also due to the backing
of the international community through UNMIK,
whose support of the Government's efforts has allowed
significant advances in the process of reconciliation
among the various communities, as well as the
restoration of peace and stability.

On the security front, the efforts made since 1999
by the Kosovo Force have contributed substantially
to maintaining a safe and secure environment and to
ensuring the free movement of people and goods.
Despite those encouraging signs, my country remains
concerned about the growing tensions and the persistent
challenges to the normalization of relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. That situation could undermine the
efforts of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, which is to be commended for its contribution to
Kosovo's return to normalcy and institutional stability.

Cote d'Ivoire calls on the Kosovo and Serb
communities to redouble their efforts to prevent the
re-escalation of tensions through constructive dialogue
and reciprocal confidence-building measures. It also
believes that the revision of the customs duties, set
at 100 per cent, on products imported from Serbia
and Bosnia, would contribute to the resumption
of negotiations between Kosovo and Serbia with a
view to reaching a free trade agreement with the
European Union.

My country also urges Kosovo authorities to take
the necessary measures to eliminate all obstacles to the
creation of an association/community of Serb-majority
municipalities, which would undoubtedly help to ease
and palliate the sociopolitical climate.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to promote the rule of law and to fight
impunity. In that regard, it welcomes the arrest of three
individuals implicated in the murder, on 16 January
2018, of Oliver Ivanovie, leader of the Civic Initiative
"Freedom, Democracy, Justice". In the same vein, my
country welcomes the creation of an inter-institutional
committee tasked with monitoring and reporting on
issues related to violent extremism, as well as the
indictment by the Office of the Specialist Prosecutor,
on 20 December, of an individual for links to a
terrorist group.

The precariousness of the current situation calls
for the immediate resumption of the negotiations led
by Ms. Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
That mediation would contribute to breathing new life
into the reconciliation process, promoting human rights
and permanently settling the Kosovo issue.

In conclusion, my country calls on the international
community to make a significant contribution to the
trust fund to support the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities in Kosovo.

