Mr. Akbaruddin (India): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate. We thank your delegation for
preparing the useful concept note (S/2016/969, annex),
and the briefers who have provided very interesting
perspectives on the subject.

While the topic of today's discussion is water,
peace and security, the importance that water has for
humans far exceeds this perspective. Water sustains
life on Earth. India's philosophical tradition, like many
others, is replete with references to the centrality of
water to human existence. The Rig Veda, an ancient
Indian scripture, has an invocation:

"Gracious be divine waters for our protection. Be
there for our drink, and stream on us bliss and
happiness. Sovereigns over precious things, and
rulers over men, ye waters. We seek healing balm
of you."

There are myriad ways in which societies have
successfully harnessed water resources throughout
human history. They have varied and evolved, and
continue to do so. Today water has multiple uses,
from drinking to sanitation, from growing food to
industrial applications. Rivers and oceans are also
pathways for navigation and trade within countries and
across continents.

Access to fresh water and its longer-term
availability have acquired importance in view of the
rapid population growth and unsustainable practices
of water use. Climate change and warming patterns
alter water availability, thereby highlighting the need
to better manage our water resources. The growing
realization of the close linkages among water, food and
energy is also focusing attention on the impact of those
interlinkages on sustainable development.

Across the planet, nearly 1 billion people do not
have access to adequate safe drinking water. Nearly
2.5 billion people lack access to basic sanitation.
Waterborne diseases remain a concern. The Millennium
Development Goals sought, and now the Sustainable
Development Goals seek, to prioritize ways to address
those concerns. Increasing attention is being paid to the
blue economy and its sustainable uses.

There are several issues of policy that we are
grappling with in the management of water as a
resource. They range from issues relating to private
versus community ownership of water, relative pricing
of water for personal use, agricultural versus industrial
use, allocation for survival versus luxury uses, treating
water as a commodity versus as a right, developing
mandatory standards for efficiency of water use and
so on.

Recognizing the multiple facets of water in our
lives and the need for wider cooperation, several United
Nations agencies have been active on various aspects of
issues relating to water. For instance, UNESCO initiated
its International Hydrological Programme in 1995. Since
2003, UN-Water has been the inter-agency coordination
mechanism for all fresh water and sanitation-related
matters. The decade from 2005 to 2015 was declared
the International Decade for Action, "Water for Life".
The transboundary aspects of significant water bodies
and the imperative for international cooperation in
that regard have also been well acknowledged for a
long time. Many multilateral environment agreements,
such as the 1971 Ramsar Convention on Wetlands, the
1992 Convention on Biological Diversity and the 1994
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification,
facilitate such international cooperation. The 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is of
relevance in the context of offshore freshwater aquifers.

While wider acceptance ofthe 1997 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses has so far made limited
progress, there have been a range ofbilateral and regional
treaties and arrangements promoting cooperation across
upper and lower riparian States. The concept note points
out that 200 treaties, on 60 international watercourses,
have been signed in the past seven decades. Experience
therefore shows that, while international cooperation
is essential in cases dealing with the transboundary
nature of bodies of water, each specific instance has its
own unique characteristics. The countries concerned
have found ways to cooperate in specific contexts in
their collective interest.

India is both an upper and lower riparian State for
a number of different rivers, and we are familiar with
the issues involved in the cooperative management of
transboundary river waters. The partition of India, in
1947, also partitioned rivers to the west and east. We
have engaged with our neighbours in managing those
shared waters. The landmark 1960 Indus Water Treaty
was finalized several years before the 1966 Helsinki
Rules on the Uses of the Waters of International Rivers
for transboundary water-sharing. We are also involved
in a series of other ongoing collaborative efforts with
our neighbours to do with sharing waters.

Water impinges on every aspect of human survival,
including human security. While the possibility
of water-related conflicts cannot be ruled out, it is
encouraging to note that the international community's
overall experience in evolving specific, innovative,
cooperative approaches to transboundary issues has
been positive. In today's world, and with our current
understanding of the interconnectivity and mutuality
of our environmental challenges, we should aim to
ensure that the key term in international discourse in
this area is water as a driver of cooperation, instead of
considering approaches that tend to turn water issues
into security problems. The first path will engender
genuine international collaboration; taking the second,
on an issue as complex and cardinal to life as water, will
only be doing an injustice to humankind as a whole.

