Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The United Nations operation in Haiti is one of
the great recent successes of the Organization. It has
allowed for a consolidation of that country's transition to
democracy by assisting the Government to form a public
force respectful of legality and capable of maintaining
public order and security.

The task undertaken by the United Nations was not
an easy one. Indeed, the restoration of a State of law in
a country that had little recent experience of democracy
required making a clean sweep of the former military and
police structures. This is why the effort to set up a
democratic institutional framework in Haiti would have
been inconceivable without the accompaniment and
support of the United Nations.

 

Since the adoption on 28 June 1996 of Security
Council resolution 1063 (1996) creating the United Nations
Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), real progress has been
made in strengthening the Haitian National Police. That
progress is highlighted in the report the Secretary-General
has submitted. In particular, we note the arrival of new
police personnel, a more rational geographical deployment,
improved logistical methods that will afford the police
greater visibility and mobility and, lastly, better-trained
police officers and a clear and better-applied code of
conduct.

Such progress in structure and method has begun to be
reflected in the field by an improvement in Haitian security.
The acts of Violence that marked the months of July,
August and September have abated. Successes have been
recorded in the fight against crime.

This progress is praiseworthy and is due to the efforts
of the Haitian authorities and the support of the United
Nations. But it is still fragile. The National Police continues
to suffer from a lack of personnel, professionalism,
equipment and management. The Haitian National Police
must cope with the double challenge of rising common
crime and the continuing activity of small political factions
that, unfortunately, remain determined to threaten
democracy.

That is why France immediately heeded the appeal of
President Preval to the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNSMIH beyond 30 November and supports
the recommendation of the Secretary-General, which is in
line with the request of President Preval. We participated
with the group of "Friends of the Secretary-General for
Haiti" in drawing up the draft resolution submitted to the
Council, which sets a timetable for the deployment, conduct
and the end of this Mission. France, therefore, will vote in
favour of this text.

We are pleased to hail the extra effort that Canada has
agreed to make to maintain the level of the troops
participating in the operation. We recognize, of course, that
the major responsibility falls to the Government and the
people of Haiti and we are pleased yet again to hail the
efforts made by the Haitian nation. Those efforts deserve
our continuous assistance to the Haitian authorities on the
courageous and democratic path they have chosen. France,
as I have just said, will therefore be pleased to vote in
favour of the draft resolution before us.

