Mr. Rosenthal: Mr. President, you have asked
me to share with the Security Council the views of the
Economic and Social Council on the latest
developments in Burundi's peace process. Of course, I
cannot speak for all members of the Economic and
Social Council, but there are three points that I can
safely make in the broader context of the deepening
cooperation between our respective Councils.

The first thing I should like to say is that Burundi
appears to have all the makings of what the framers of
the Economic and Social Council's ad hoc advisory
groups on African countries emerging from conflict
surely had in mind. There is no doubt that the peace
accords that are currently being implemented require
tough decisions on the part of Burundians themselves,
and that the steps already taken warrant - indeed,
demand - international assistance.

Part of the needed assistance clearly falls within
the purview of the Security Council, such as ensuring
that the African Union mission peacekeepers either
stay in place or are replaced by United Nations
peacekeepers, or a combination of both, as put forward
so eloquently by the Deputy President of South Africa.

Another part clearly falls within the purview of
the Economic and Social Council, such as supporting
the transition between rehabilitation and
reconstruction, on the one hand, and longer-term
development on the other. Among other aspects, I have
in mind advocating for debt relief, budgetary support
and the imperative of creating productive jobs.

A third part falls somewhere in between,
including support in the area of demobilization,
disarmament, reinsertion and reintegration of ex-
combatants, and of humanitarian assistance to help in
the resettlement of refugees and internally displaced
persons. There is also the potential for a direct role for
United Nations-based technical assistance - for
example, in supporting the electoral process.

In other words, it is clear that the United Nations
can play a wide-ranging role in supporting Burundi in
an integrated manner.

A second point to be made is that - as is usually
the case in countries emerging from conflict - peace
is a prerequisite for reconstruction and development,
while development is the principal ingredient in
making sure that peace is durable. The immediate
challenge in Burundi is to avoid slipping back into
conflict. The larger challenge is to offer Burundians the
possibility of a return to normalcy and an opportunity
for a decent standard of living.

Finally, it is abundantly clear that the United
Nations will not be the only - or even the principal -
source of assistance. But we can play a catalytic role in
working with bilateral and multilateral donors, non-
governmental organizations and even the business
sector in supporting the Burundians in their efforts to
undo the immense damage they inflicted upon
themselves and to strive towards a better future. We
can advocate for a solid partnership between the
international community and Burundians.

As I stated in this Chamber less than two weeks
ago - when we met with the President of Guinea-
Bissau - I believe that our mechanism of ad hoc
groups on African countries emerging from conflict
can make an important difference. Certainly Burundi
offers us the possibility of demonstrating this
proposition in a very decisive manner.

