I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu and the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias, for their briefings. Today the Security Council is addressing the subject of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, essentially for the last time during my country's term on the Council. This is an opportune moment to consider how the Syrian dossier has evolved over the past two years. First, all the member States of the Security Council have repeatedly stated that chemical weapons should never be used under any circumstances. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction is a testament to our collective aversion to the use of such weapons. Its full and unconditional implementation is the only way to guarantee a world without chemical weapons. The Convention is a moral declaration concerning the dignity of humankind as well as a legal instrument. Since Syria's accession to the Convention in 2013, the OPCW has systematically strengthened its engagement with that country. That has been done in full transparency and in consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, notably through the creation in 2014 of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission. The Declaration Assessment Team was created in the same year with a view to assisting Syria in resolving the gaps and inconsistencies identified in its initial declaration. Numerous meetings have taken place between the OPCW and the Syrian authorities. Unfortunately, during the period in which Belgium has been a member of the Security Council, no substantive progress has been made in resolving the gaps and inconsistencies in Syria's declaration. It is not a mere technicality that Syria's declaration remains incomplete. That leads us to the inevitable conclusion that, unlike the OPCW in its work, Syria has not undertaken serious efforts to comply with the demands that it voluntarily accepted when it joined the Convention in 2013. There is no excuse for that. Furthermore, the possibility that additional stockpiles of chemical weapons exist in Syria and might again be used against the Syrian population cannot be denied or ignored. Secondly, the Fact-Finding Mission concluded that chemical weapons had been used on numerous occasions, and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism attributed responsibility for a number of them to the Syrian regime. Faced with the Security Council's refusal to extend the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) was established as an instrument of the OPCW to continue to investigate the suspected use of chemical weapons. The IIT's April report confirms the use of chemical weapons in Ltamenah in 2017 and exposes a broader pattern of behaviour by the Syrian authorities of violence against their own population, including by using chemical weapons, as an integral part of Syria's military strategy. We fully support the IIT and urge Syria to guarantee access to its territory. Thirdly, the need for the Security Council to discuss this file on a monthly basis has been questioned as a distraction from more pressing issues. However, this meeting is not conducted simply out of habit. The Security Council adopted resolution 2118 (2013) in 2013. Syria is still not respecting that resolution and therefore remains a continuing threat to international peace and security. Belgium was elected to the Security Council under the maxim "Building consensus, acting for peace", and it is that approach that we are guided by on this dossier. We will always seek to build consensus and, where possible, to create the conditions for a better understanding among the member States of the OPCW. At the same time, we will always assume our responsibilities in defending our values. During our tenure on the Council, however, we have seen efforts to promote a false narrative through disinformation with a view to polarizing the Security Council's discussions. Time and time again, independent surveys have refuted every attempt to create an alternate reality. It is time to recognize that it is not in the Council's interest to espouse conspiracy theories, which serve only to weaken the role that the Council can play in the maintenance of international peace and security, undermining its authority and, ultimately, its legitimacy. Both permanent and elected members have an interest in preserving the Council's mandate, as envisioned by the Charter of the United Nations, including when that means opposing and speaking out against specific actors. Failure to do so is a violation of the Charter. Fourthly, accountability is an important tool in preventing the re-emergence of chemical weapons. The fight against impunity has been at the heart of Belgium's efforts for many years. We welcome the role played by mechanisms and bodies such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 and the International Criminal Court (ICC). The use of chemical weapons in international conflicts has been a war crime under the Rome Statute of the ICC since its inception. In 2010, Belgium also successfully proposed an amendment to the Statute to make the use of chemical weapons a war crime in non-international armed conflicts. We call on States that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and that amendment. Since our accession to the Security Council, some progress has been made in establishing accountability for the crimes committed in Syria. However, there is still a long way to go. Director-General Arias has a particularly difficult task. Let me assure him of my country's full commitment to his organization and its goals, and let me also congratulate him on his personal commitment.
