Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Since this is the last time you will be with us, Sir, I
want to say that we appreciate the effectiveness with
which you and your colleagues have led our work this
month. We wish you well with your new
responsibilities in Geneva.

I can be brief, I think, because I agree with much
of what has been said this morning and do not want to
repeat it. I want to focus only on a couple of points.

The first is that, as some colleagues have noted,
perhaps the most important factor as we look to the
future is that peace operations are becoming more
complex in a number of ways. We in the Security
Council and those who are conducting peace operations
are experimenting and learning as we go, and by and
large we are improving. One lesson to be drawn, I
think, is the importance in many cases of regional
political and military support for peace efforts and,
sometimes, indirect involvement in a peace operation.

The United States has encouraged other countries
to develop their capacities for peace operations and, in
some cases, is providing direct assistance. Our African
Contingency Operations Training and Assistance
programme - formerly known as the African Crisis
Reaction Initiative - has provided field and
command-staff training, as well as critical equipment,
to 12,000 soldiers in nine sub-Saharan African
countries since 1997. Since 1998, under the Enhanced
International Peacekeeping Capabilities Initiative, we
have also trained approximately 200 officers a year,
both at the Center for Civil-Military Relations in
Monterey, California, and through military training
programmes.

We are encouraging regional and subregional
organizations to assume greater responsibilities for
peace operations and believe also that there is real
value to exploring how the more demanding operations
can be undertaken by multinational coalitions under the
direction of a strong regional leader. As a particular
example, we have for some time now been supporting
the Economic Community of West African States
politically, financially and militarily in its efforts in
West Africa.

The second point I want to address is that every
conflict is unique. Not all threats to international peace
and security are amenable to United Nations peace
operations. As we have said before, each conflict is
unique and the same applies to the peacekeeping
operations that follow, including the structure of their
specific mandates and rules of engagement and
organization. We believe that there is a role for
different types of peacekeeping: United Nations
peacekeeping operations, regional peacekeeping
missions and multinational coalitions. All conflicts
should be evaluated by integrated planning teams
consisting of military, police, humanitarian and other
agencies.

There are no fixed formulas for peacekeeping,
nor are fixed formulas desirable, especially in such
matters as the national origins of peacekeeping
contingents or coalition leadership. Each case is unique
and driven by realities on the ground, as well as by the
other commitments of potential troop contributors.
Each case merits close examination based on the needs
and possibilities presented by the specific situation and
can be addressed through flexible mechanisms.

The third and last point I want to raise is that of
the overall security of United Nations missions and
their personnel. We have been reminded tragically of
the importance of this issue and of the difficult
circumstances in which this Council, the United
Nations and both military and civilian personnel
operate. We welcome the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1502 (2003), which moved beyond previous
measures by focusing the Security Council's attention
on prevention of attacks on humanitarian, United
Nations and associated personnel and on the
accountability of those who commit such acts. Clearly,
in the wake of last week's barbaric attack in Baghdad,
we all - Member States and the Secretariat - need to
review how security is provided for United Nations
personnel, both humanitarian and peacekeeping, to
counter the threat of additional terrorist acts. That
effort has already begun and richly deserves the
support and active participation of Council members.

