Ms. Mohammed: Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on taking over the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and
by thanking you and the Republic of South Africa for
having included this important item relating to peace
and security in Africa, with a focus on the centrality
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention, on
the agenda of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their
enlightening briefings, particularly on highlighting the
role of women in preventive diplomacy and how we
can leverage the relevant platforms and initiatives to
promote better engagement.

The contemporary threats to peace and security
on our continent and, indeed, globally are so complex
and interconnected, with broad consequences, that
no single organization alone can manage to provide
the appropriate solutions. Consequently, the scale
and complexity of the challenges we face today
require the harnessing of the collective efforts of all
our stakeholders. In this context, the centrality of
preventive diplomacy as a peacemaking tool becomes
indispensable in our peace efforts.

Today's debate is therefore all the more relevant
because preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention
remain a strategic priority for all of us. They perfectly
illustrate the raison d'etre of multilateralism and the
various organizations that emanate from it. At a time
when the credibility of our Organization is being
questioned, this debate could serve as a basis for
harnessing our collective commitment to devoting
greater attention to the prevention tool, which remains
by far the most profitable in the long term, but,
unfortunately, the least resourced.

With this in mind, permit me to make the following
three key points.

First, given its clear comparative advantage in
this area, the African Union (AU) has over the last
decades adopted several instruments, mechanisms and
policy documents to boost its prevention capacities. As
a result, Africa is well equipped, within the African
Peace and Security Architecture and the African
Governance Architecture as its twin blueprints, for
promoting peace, security and stability.

The African Peace and Security Architecture is
built on a continuum ranging from anticipation and
prevention, conflict management and resolution,
to post-conflict stabilization, reconstruction and
development. As the Council is aware, the African
Union Peace and Security Council is the nerve centre
of the African Peace and Security Architecture. Since
it became operational in 2004, the Peace and Security
Council has covered significant ground and made
considerable gains in addressing and resolving conflicts
on the continent.

Another pillar of the African Peace and Security
Architecture is the Panel of the Wise, which is the core
of African Union preventive diplomacy. The Panel
of the Wise, since its operationalization in 2007, has
significantly contributed to enhancing preventive
diplomacy in Africa. Stemming from this Panel,
there are a number of arrangements in supporting
subsidiary platforms, including PanWise, which is
the platform of the African Union, regional economic
communities and regional mechanism panels involved
in preventive diplomacy.

Within the framework of enhancing preventive
diplomacy, I would like to point out that the African
Union Commission now has a functioning Mediation
Support Unit to institutionalize and provide predictable
and sustainable support to all AU-led mediation efforts.
Furthermore, the African Union's peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy efforts are also championed
by special envoys, special representatives, high
representatives and 13 liaison offices and missions
across the continent.

While some progress has been made in close
collaboration with the subregional organizations and
with the strong support of the United Nations, we
must recognize that a number of challenges continue
to undermine our ability to effectively deliver on
our mandate, most notably the possibility of gaining
appropriate entry points into tense situations likely to
evolve into violent conflicts.
The second point I would like to make is on the
importance of strategic partnerships. Indeed, the
collaboration between the African Union and its
regional economic communities and mechanisms and
with the United Nations, as provided in the various
frameworks, is addressing and resolving conflicts and
has progressively gained momentum, as guided by the
provisions of the African Union Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture.

The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
signed in April 2017, is premised on the growing
recognition that a stronger partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations is a strategic
necessity in the process of responding early, coherently
and decisively to prevent and manage conflicts in
Africa. In addition, the progressively deepening
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, through
their annual consultative meeting, is a testament to the
tremendous progress that has been made in fostering
our collective efforts to address the complex peace and
security challenges in Africa.

Close consultations between the two Councils and
the implementation of the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security are improving our shared appreciation
of the challenges with which we are confronted and
is sharpening our response tools, including through
preventive diplomacy.

I would also like to highlight the fact that the
African Union's Agenda 2063 envisions a peaceful,
prosperous and integrated Africa, which is consistent
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
on the Sustainable Development Goals. In line with
the spirit of Agenda 2063, the AU is implementing its
flagship project on silencing the guns on the continent.

In this respect, I wish to commend the Council
for the contribution it made to this effort by adopting
resolution 2457 (2019) earlier this year, in which, inter
alia, it calls for the mobilization of the United Nations
and its agencies to support the African Union in the
implementation of the noble goal of Silencing the Guns
in Africa by 2020. The results thus far obtained from
this collaboration are quite appreciable, and the Council
will agree with me that only by pooling our collective
expertise and resources, leveraging our comparative
advantages and working collaboratively can our two
organizations realistically expect to have a positive
impact on the ground.
My third and last point is on the importance of
including women and young people in peace processes,
which cannot be overemphasized. It is only by ensuring
that they play decision-making roles not only in
conflict resolution but also in mediation, including in
the implementation of peace agreements, that we can
truly address the issues vital to securing sustainable
peace. The AU Commission, for its part, has created
platforms for the empowerment of women in peace and
security such as FemWise-Africa, which is a network
of women mediators. This network has attracted many
young women mediators, a good number of whom have
been trained and are being deployed to some conflict
and post-conflict areas to accompany the political
processes in several countries.

In addition, in our efforts to enhance women's
participation and leadership through the African Union
and the United Nations, we came together to help launch
the African women's movement called the African
Women Leaders Network in June 2017. The African
Union has also recently launched the initiative of Youth
for Peace, which aims at empowering young people and
engaging them in peace processes on the continent.

In that regard, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission has appointed a Special Envoy on
Youth, a young lady with the necessary experience
and commitment who addressed the Council recently
(see S/PV.8629). We are also undertaking regional
consultations with African youth in order to further
enlist their efforts towards building peace on
the continent.

In our endeavours we are always conscious of the
primary responsibility of our member States to prevent
and resolve conflicts as well as to protect civilians
and promote human rights, as provided for in the
relevant African instruments and international law.
This being so, I would like to highlight here the launch
of the grand national dialogue in Cameroon, which
is dedicated to finding an internal national solution
to the crisis affecting some parts of the country. We
welcome this initiative because we are convinced that
local initiatives driven by people stand a better chance
ofreaching a lasting solution, in a spirit of compromise,
for the preservation of peace, stability, harmony and
national unity. In that vein, our collective peacemaking
endeavours in the Sudan, South Sudan, Libya, the
Central African Republic, Somalia, Mali and the Sahel,
and the Great Lakes region, including the Lake Chad
basin and the Horn of Africa, are commendable and
should be consolidated to enhance partnership between
the African Union, the regional economic communities
and the United Nations.

In conclusion, mediation as part of preventive
diplomacy is indeed indispensable to the resolution
of crises and conflicts. Improving shared analysis
and appreciation of the challenges with which we
are confronted is an important first step to providing
coherent, effective and timely responses to conflict and
crisis situations in Africa. In that context, we need to
utilize all preventive diplomacy tools, among which are
good offices, Special Representatives, Special Envoys
and emissaries, to foster a collective approach.

Despite the gains made, more needs to be done
to further enhance the effectiveness of preventive
diplomacy. I would therefore like to stress the
importance of continued collective and concerted
efforts to respond to the existing and emerging threats,
the relevance of partnerships and collaboration among
Governments, civil society organizations and the
private sector, as well as the sustained engagement of
all stakeholders, including women and young people, in
the decision-making processes relating to the promotion
of peace and the advancement of socioeconomic
development. Only by pooling our collective efforts,
expertise and resources, together weighing our
comparative advantages and working collaboratively
can we realistically expect to have a positive impact and
find durable solutions so as to ensure sustainable peace.

The meeting rose at 1.10pm.
