Ms. Blum de Barberi (Colombia): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for all the remarks and support of the members of the Security Council. I thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and his Special Representative, Carlos Ruiz Massieu, for the report presented (S/2020/603) and for the commitment of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I also note the statement delivered by Ms. Clemencia Carabali Rodallega at this meeting. Minister for Foreign Affairs Like all other countries, Colombia is facing enormous challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My Government has implemented comprehensive measures to safeguard public health, provide support for the most vulnerable, preserve jobs and protect the welfare of our citizens. Even in the context of this pandemic, we continue to be firmly committed to implementing the terms of the 2016 Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. We have not held back any areas of work that make up the "Peace with legality" policy. Its implementation is a priority of President Duque's Government. The framework put in place by the agreement continues to function. The National Reintegration Council, as well as the various tripartite working groups, have met periodically. The Commission for the Follow- up, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation of the Final Agreement held six meetings during the reporting period. Measures for COVID-19 prevention and risk mitigation have been adopted by all agencies that are implementing the "Peace with legality" policy. The beneficiaries of these measures include former combatants, victims and farmers committed to the national programme for illicit crop substitution. In the former 24 territorial areas for training and reintegration, protocols are in place to prevent contagion and to ensure referrals to health centres when necessary, in close coordination with local authorities. We also continue to work hard on the approval and implementation of projects in the 170 municipalities most affected by poverty and violence where development programmes with a territorial focus are being carried out. Stabilization efforts are funded mainly by the national budget, complemented by other public and private funding, and _ international cooperation. Confident of results being achieved, international support remains committed, In the regions where those development programmes are being implemented, during President Duque's Administration 186 projects, worth $423 million, have been funded by royalties from oil and mining exploitation. Government agencies also continue to support 100,000 families that have expressed their willingness to abandon coca cultivation and transit to legality. In addition to the challenges posed by the implementation of the agreement and the response to the pandemic, Colombia continues to devote significant resources to assist 1.8 million Venezuelan citizens who have been forced to leave their country. The success and sustainability of the reintegration of former combatants is decisive in order to prevent new cycles of violence. We continue to work with determination to support productive projects. The number of beneficiaries of the projects put in place in the first half of this year increased by 71 per cent as compared with the same period in 2019. Former territorial areas for training and reintegration are operating normally at the administrative level, and the Government has guaranteed the provision of the necessary goods, services and supplies. The food supply has been expanded, despite the fact that the legal status of those areas long ago expired. Monthly allowances continue to be awarded to ex-combatants residing inside and outside the territorial areas for training and reintegration. Digital connectivity has been strengthened to give access to education and technical assistance for productive projects. The Agency for Reintegration and Normalization has adopted virtual mechanisms for attending to ex-combatants. In addition, the Agency for Territorial Renovation has held virtual meetings to reinforce the relationship between the central and regional authorities and to align the institutional offer with local planning instruments. The safety and protection of former combatants, human rights defenders, social leaders and communities remain our greatest challenge. The Government has articulated actions by 15 different agencies to strengthen prevention, individual and collective protection, and support for investigation and prosecution, all this with a comprehensive concept of security in the context of reintegration and a zero-tolerance policy against any irregular conduct by State agents. During the reporting period, we analysed in detail the security threats present in the municipalities of Ituango and Caldono. Our recommendations to establish safer locations for residents in those areas took time to be followed. Through close coordination between national and local authorities, with the support of the Mission, former combatants were relocated from Ituango to the municipality of Mutata. The protection measures requested by female ex-combatants were also approved. As of 8 July, the Office of the Attorney General had advanced in the investigation of 146 of the 294 crimes registered since the signing of the agreement against ex-combatants and their familites. That represents progress in 49.7 per cent of the cases. So far there have been 198 arrest warrants issued for homicide, attempted murder and forced disappearance, including 51 for the identified instigators, as well as 27 convictions against those responsible for those crimes. From the results of the investigation, it is quite clear that the attacks are related to the complexity of the environment and the threat posed by organized armed groups involved in drug trafficking and illegal mining. Those criminal actors include non-reintegratedmembers of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia, the Ejercito de Liberacien Nacional (ELN) terrorist group and other groups engaged in transnational organized crime. We must not forget that the exponential growth in illicit crops occurred between 2013 and 2017. We are now facing the toll for the silence kept during that period, in the face of a situation that created new threats to the most vulnerable communities, social leaders and human rights defenders. President Duque's Government is_ strongly committed to reducing illicit crops and promoting crop-substitution options for communities. According to the most recent report by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime monitoring system, in 2019 Colombia achieved a 9 per cent reduction in the area planted with coca. It was the second year with an area decline. Colombia will not achieve the desired peace if the illegal economy remains profitable. International cooperation and co-responsibility are essential to address this problem. The implementation of the agreement is a two- way process and requires the effective commitment of both the State and the FARC political party. My Government reiterates the need for UNVIC to demand FARC compliance with the provision of information regarding drug-trafficking groups, the location of missing persons, the delivery of assets that contribute to reparations for victims, the recruitment of children by dissident groups and the location of landmines, among other things. Our Government continues to provide support to the transitional justice system, including funding for all of its mechanisms. I must underline that there has not been, nor will there be, any reduction in the budget. The success of transitional justice depends on satisfying the rights of the victims, particularly in terms of justice, truth and reparation. Within the framework of the agreement, a variety of sanctions and restorative actions have been defined according to the degree of collaboration and acknowledgement by those subject to the jurisdiction. The agreement also foresaw that sanctions compliance should be verified in order to safeguard victims' rights. Our Government has initiated an inter-institutional coordination process in close cooperation with the Mission in order to design a system that will properly address this need once the Special Jurisdiction for Peace begins to deliver its sanctions. Lastly, I should like to refer to the active unilateral ceasefire announced by the ELN terrorist group on 29 March and its recent request for a bilateral ceasefire. The Government strongly reiterates that this alleged willingness for peace must result in concrete action by the ELN, such as the release of all persons kidnapped and the cessation of any criminal activity. Letus be clear: the ELN failed to deliver onits March announcement, and there is no sign that it will deliver on this new announcement. The Colombian authorities will not cease carrying out their constitutional mission to protect our citizens from the terrorist and criminal threat that the group poses. The Government of President Ivan Duque is firmly committed to building peace with legality. The support of the United Nations is vital in order to continue advancing in the stabilization and development of the territories most affected by violence and poverty. In the midst of the current global crisis, we will not slacken our efforts and will continue to devote all possible resources to convey the results that our citizens deserve.
