Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): For the last five years, the issue of protection
of civilians in armed conflict has been a regular fixture
of the United Nations and the Security Council. The
need for ongoing attention to this matter has been
referenced, as well, in the report of the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, which found
that the Security Council must fully implement
resolution 1265 (1999) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. This notion raises no doubts.

In spite of the existence of an entire arsenal of
international instruments on human rights and
international and humanitarian law during conflict, we
still see, first and foremost, the suffering of completely
innocent civilian populations, including women,
children and the elderly - people whom we usually
call vulnerable - as well as the humanitarian
personnel providing assistance to them.

Massive and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law must not go unpunished. Here, an
important role devolves upon the International
Criminal Court. The situation in ensuring the
protection of civilians in armed conflict requires
systematic coordinated measures at the international,
regional and national levels.

One of the important components of this work is
the humanitarian component, particularly as an element
of a comprehensive strategy for crisis prevention and
in the phases of post-conflict settlement processes.
Humanitarian work must, first and foremost, be built
on the norms of the United Nations and basic
humanitarian principles. Its success largely depends on
how it fits into the international community's efforts
for political settlement.

We are pleased to note that today's discussion
issue is under the direct oversight of the United
Nations Secretary-General. In reports submitted on this
issue, there is a comprehensive country-specific
analysis of the reasons for violations of the norms of
international humanitarian law in armed conflict, and
there are recommendations to strengthen the protection
of civilians. In addition, we believe it very important
that, in preparing the reports, the Secretariat must
strictly adhere to its mandate, particularly with respect
to the legal qualifications of different situations. We
hope that, in preparing the next report, countries'
concerns and statements on this issue will be fully
taken into account.

With good reason the Council is making greater
use of regional and country approaches in dealing with
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In that
context, it is particularly important to take into account
economic, social, historical, religious, cultural and
other elements specific to countries and regions and to
give attention to each conflict's unique character, root
causes and manner of settlement.

The fundamental elements of ensuring the
protection of civilians are early warning mechanisms,
the elimination of wars and conflict prevention. It is
important that efforts to those ends be appropriately
coordinated so that in protecting civilians - as in
other matters - we adhere to a strict division of labour
in accordance with the United Nations Charter and
other international legal instruments. We hope that a
constructive exchange of opinions on how to improve
the work of the Security Council and other bodies of
the Organization in protecting civilians in armed
conflict will provide additional impetus for progress on
this question.

