Mr. Zagainov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, allow me to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and presentation of her
fifth report on the investigations in Libya pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

We support the efforts of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to prosecute individuals who committed
heinous crimes during the events in Libya. However,
judging from the report, work continues to stall in
that regard. In spite of appeals for an objective legal
analysis of the activities of all parties to the conflict
and post-conflict violence, investigations continue to
concentrate only on suspects from the entourage of the
former Libyan leader. Even on that front, in spite of
ample legal proceedings and activities, we have yet to
see progress. After almost two years, there has been no
notable progress in prosecuting rebels, although there
are accounts of those individuals committing brutal
crimes in armed clashes. These facts are well known.

According to reports, violence in Libya
unfortunately continues in today's post-conflict
situation against a backdrop of problems with the
functioning of the State apparatus and the central
Government's control over the country as a whole. We
welcome the ICC's monitoring role in that regard.

Finally, there is the pending matter of the
investigation of cases of civilian causalities and
the destruction of civilian targets during NATO
operations. We suggest that the ICC step up its analysis
of information received from the United Nations fact-
finding mission, humanitarian non-governmental
organizations and other channels.

We support the legal foundation of ICC activities
pursuant to the Rome Statute, including the principle
of complementarity. Without a doubt, not all crimes
committed in Libya should be investigated by the
Court. The question is how effectively that principle
can be implemented with specific respect to the Libyan
situation. In that regard, it would be no exaggeration
to state that the moment of truth has come for the ICC
with regard to the Libyan investigations.

In our view, the impacts of the crisis in Libya are
a serious obstacle to justice being effectively served.
Reports from various sources, including civil society
bodies, give cause for concern that there are gaping holes
in the Libyan legal system. Some of those are a legacy
from the past, while others are the direct consequence
of recent events. We therefore highly doubt that, at
this time, conditions in Libya are eminently conducive
to conducting fair legal proceedings in line with
international standards with respect to Saif Al-Islam
Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.

The jurisdiction of the ICC over those cases is
contested, and the matter of admissibility will ultimately
be decided by the ICC. However, we understand that
the Libyan side has not yet provided the Court with
convincing information on national investigations. We
do not fully understand why Libya has not done so for
some time now. We suggest that the Prosecutor and
Judges of the ICC take a more careful look into this
situation.

We are also concerned by the lack of information
regarding the detention of a group of ICC staff in Zintan
in June 2012, which was a cause of great concern. That
episode endangered the work of the ICC in Libya,
undermined its credibility and the security of its staff,
and had an adverse impact on interaction between the
Court and States.

With respect to the Security Council interactive
dialogue with the Prosecutor of the ICC that took
place yesterday, we should like to know the following.
Concerning the proposal with respect to the possible
future steps of the Security Council to assist the ICC
in the framework of the investigation of the Libyan
situation, we feel that it would be appropriate to
consider it in the light of practical suitability, the
Council's mandate, the prerogatives of the ICC and the
basic international legal context. For our part, we still
do not understand the added value of the interactive
dialogue that took place yesterday. In any case, we
did not receive responses to our questions. When it
comes to holding such meetings in the future, we would
evaluate their suitability on a case-by-case basis and
in the light of additional information to be provided by
the Prosecutor. Moreover, we suggest that the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, given its
lack of mandate, is not the right format for discussions
on international criminal justice.

