Mr. Blok (Netherlands): Let me start by thanking
Cote d'Ivoire for its excellent partnership on resolution
2447 (2018), as well as on resolution 2417 (2018), on
conflict and hunger, which was adopted earlier this year,
and on the draft resolution on improving peacekeeping
mandates, which is still being negotiated. I would also
like to express my gratitude to all Council members for
bringing about this resolution, which is an important
text that underlines the Council's responsibility in the
area of police, justice and corrections.

I should like to cite our main reasons for pushing
for the resolution, which so perfectly reflects the
priorities of our Council membership this year, in
the course of which we have constantly stressed the
importance of the rule of law in preventing conflict and
sustaining peace and underlined the responsibility of
the Security Council in that regard. The resolution is a
major step forward.

First, it recognizes that there can be no lasting peace
withoutjustice. It gives the Security Council a practical
tool to focus on this issue in mandates of peacekeeping
operations - learning, of course, from good examples

from the past, such as the special Prosecution Support
Cells established by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Without their assistance, serious crimes,
including sexual violence, would have gone unpunished.
I would also point to the Justice and Corrections Section
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, which helped improve
conditions of detention in Mali, reducing human rights
violations and preventing further radicalization. With
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, we also
pushed for a stronger focus on accountability in the
mandate, increasing the chances for sustainable peace
and stability.

Secondly, the resolution very clearly assigns
responsibilities where they belong. It not only invites
the Security Council to adequately include tasks
related to the rule of law as part of the mandate, but
also urges host countries to combat impunity and
promote accountability.

Thirdly, the resolution stresses the importance of
sound cooperation and coordination among the broad
range of actors working on the rule of law in the
context of peacekeeping operations, making use of
joint analyses, programming and planning, as well as
data, benchmarks and other evaluation tools to improve
the United Nations performance and effectiveness in
consolidating peace.

Lastly, it underlines the importance of gender in
United Nations missions and of better prevention and
responses to gender-based violence. It cites the aim of
doubling the number ofwomen in the police contingents
of United Nations peacekeeping operations by 2020. It
will thus contribute to a goal shared by all of us around
this table, that of making peacekeeping operations
more effective by addressing elements across the
conflict spectrum.

We are proud that today, near the end of our term as
a Security Council member, resolution 2447 (2018) has
been adopted unanimously. It delivers perfectly on our
three main priorities - prevention, better peacekeeping
and accountability, and the rule of law. Indeed, it seems
to embody a slogan that my country has been heard to
use several times in the Council and that I will repeat
again today - there can be no peace without justice.

