Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is my pleasure to congratulate you, Sir, on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are confident that your efforts will be
crowned with success. I also wish to express my
sincere thanks to you for your swift response in
convening this emergency meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the crisis situation that resulted from
the savage Israeli aggression against the Palestinian
people in Al-Quds and the occupied Palestinian Arab
territories.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
my thanks to Mr. Moctar Ouane for his efforts last
month. I also extend my gratitude to all the
representatives of Member States who supported the
convening of this meeting, in particular, to my brother
the Ambassador of Tunisia, who sent a message on
behalf of the Arab Group, and my brother Ambassador
Hasmy Agam of Malaysia, the Chairman of the
Non-Aligned Movement caucus in the Security Council
and of the Islamic Group.

There were six days of bloodshed before this
meeting was convened - days that witnessed the
martyrdom and wounding of many of our Palestinian
brothers in Al-Quds and the occupied Palestinian
territories, including the Palestinians who were within
Israel in 1948. The number of those killed can now be
counted in scores, and more than 2,000 have been
wounded, according to today's information, many of
whom will join the list of martyrs as a result of their
serious wounds and because the hospitals can no longer
absorb the Victims of this Israeli massacre.

I listened with great attention to the statements of
those who spoke yesterday afternoon and this
afternoon. It is very clear that they all consider the
provocative visit by the leader of the Likud Party to
Al-Quds Al-Sharif to be directly responsible for
triggering the bloodshed and the tragic events in Al-
Quds and the Palestinian territories.

The visit by Mr. Sharon, leader of the extremist
Likud Party, and the support of the Israeli Labour
Government for his visit - he was accompanied by
military forces that receive their instructions not from
Mr. Sharon, but from the Israeli Government itself -
reflect the clear and unequivocal responsibility of the
Israeli Government for the visit and the bloodshed, and
confirm that there is coordination between Barak's
Labour Government and his former rival in Likud, Mr.
Sharon, in planning the events for internal Israeli
reasons. The lives of innocent Palestinian citizens have
been the fuel for this Israeli war, waged against the
Palestinian people.

Sharon's past is well known to everyone. This
was not the first time that he had committed such a
barbarous act leading to massacres. Nor was it the first
time that Israel perpetrated an act of aggression against
the holy Arab and Islamic sites in Al-Quds. We all
remember the attack on the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well
as the massacre at the Ibrahimi Mosque and the person
who perpetrated it, to whose memory a statue was
erected. We all know about the tunnel that was dug
under the Al-Aqsa Mosque at that time. Now, Israel has
added yet another massacre to the long list of
massacres perpetrated against the Arabs in the
occupied territories.

The visit to the Al-Aqsa Mosque by Sharon, who
was surrounded by military and police forces, was a
blatant provocation and an affront to the human dignity
of our people, and could not but inflame their religious
emotions. No sooner had the innocent worshippers
denounced such racist behaviour than they were
ruthlessly shot by the Israelis on the basis of prior
orders that they had received in an attempt to bring the
Palestinian people to their knees - a people who have
refused to kneel and to give up.

We have all seen on television the use of
aeroplanes, tanks, armour-piercing shells and anti-tank
missiles directed at the heads and bodies of children
who were killed in cold blood, not to mention the
unjustified destruction of their homes and property. We
have all seen and wept at the tragic events and the
deliberate killing of children, the killing of the child
mentioned by the Ambassador of Bahrain, the child
who was in his father's arms, who was pleading for the
Israeli snipers not to kill him. His father is being
treated at the moment for the wounds that he received
and is calling upon the world to avenge the killing of
his child. And yet another child was killed by Israeli
snipers as he was climbing on one of the buildings, as
was another child, a girl aged two. The Israeli forces
also killed the driver of the ambulance carrying the
child, Mohammed Al-Durra. They are attacking the
ambulances constantly not to mention the continuous
killing.

The visit of Sharon and its very serious
consequences raise a question. Why are the Israelis
challenging the religious and national feelings of the
Palestinians with the support of the Israeli
Government? What can we conclude from this openly
waged war - a war that is still claiming until this very
moment more martyrs from amongst the Palestinians
who are defending themselves with stones when faced
with live ammunition and missiles? Everything seems
to indicate that the Israeli Government most probably
planned this massacre, particularly if we bear in mind
the following facts.

First, in the course of the last two months the
Israeli Government has provided the settlers with state-
of-the-art lethal weapons so that they might contribute
to the current massacre. That is what we see on
television screens.

Secondly, the Israeli Government told its forces
that were deployed all over Al-Quds and all over the
West Bank to use live ammunition in addition to all
kinds of other weapons to face children, the children
we have been talking about, to face Palestinian youths
defending themselves with blood and stones. Is a stone
equal to a missile to live lethal ammunition?

Thirdly, the Israeli forces are committing
collective, deliberate murder in operations that are no
less horrible than "ethnic cleansing". They do so
against all Palestinians, including the Palestinians of
the interior who have been in Israel since 1948. All
those acts are aimed at terrorizing and humiliating the
Palestinians, at putting an end to Palestinian rights and
at facilitating Israel's takeover of Al-Quds.

Fourthly, this massacre all over the Arab
territories confirms once more that Israel is not
interested in peace even though the Arabs have
accepted peace. It shows once again that the peace
process is going through one of its most difficult and
complicated crises.

This raises another important question. Is Israel
really willing to achieve a comprehensive and just
peace? And where does the Security Council stand in
the face of Israel's refusal to implement its resolutions,
most important of which are resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973), apart from other resolutions which by now
form quite a volume.

Fifthly, the blood of the martyrs of Palestinian
children, youths, women and old people, and the anger
of the Palestinian streets, the anger in Damascus and
Baghdad, in Oman, in Cairo, in Lebanon -
everywhere- are all irrefutable proof that the Arab
Palestinian people will never give up their legitimate
national rights, nor their sacred and holy shrines. The
Palestinian people will safeguard their identity and
their nation. Israel's attempts to take over Al-Quds in
its entirety and to invent a new Al-Quds outside the
city will face Palestinian resistance defending its
legitimate rights and their holy sites with blood and
stones.

Sixthly, Israeli aggression and crimes,
particularly the visit of Sharon to Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
triggered religious feelings and anger all over the
world. It has been denounced and condemned by the
Arab States, the Islamic States and many other
countries, including States friendly to Israel.

The events seem to confirm the fact that Al-Quds
is indeed the basic issue, the symbol for all Arabs and
Muslims and Christians, and it would seem that the
destiny of the people of Al-Quds is to stand up to
Israeli plots that aim at Judaizing Jerusalem and
usurping its Arab identity.

The Syrian Arab Republic, which has always
supported the Palestinian struggle, denounces and
firmly condemns the Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people and the horrible massacres
perpetrated by Israel against our Palestinian brothers in
Al-Quds and in the occupied territories, and against the
Arabs of 1948 who hastened to support their brothers
and to defend Al-Quds and the holy shrines and their
Arab identity and dignity.

Syria expresses its heartfelt condolences to the
brotherly Palestinian people as a whole and to the
families of the martyrs who have died in defence of
their legitimate rights.

The aggression of the occupying Israeli forces -
aggression that continues even now - killing unarmed
Palestinians, using live ammunition aimed at their
heads and at their hearts, killing them in cold blood,
destroying their properties - demonstrates that Israel
is committing a blatant violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, which is applicable to all the Arab
Palestinian occupied territories, including Al-Quds.
Moreover, such acts are a blatant violation of the
Charter, the principles of international law and
international humanitarian law.

I reaffirm that Israel is proving day after day that
it is not interested in peace, contrary to what its leaders
say.

If Israel wants real peace, why is it prevaricating
in the peace negotiations? Why is it not implementing
the resolutions of international legitimacy, particularly
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973)? Why is it continuing to occupy Arab
territories? Why does it not accept the return of Al-
Quds to the Palestinian people? Why is it continuing its
expansionist policies and settlements at the expense of
the occupied Arab territories? And why is it attempting
to impose conditions on some Arab parties?

Peace is still absent. The peace process is going
through a very difficult phase because of the Israeli
Government's obdurate and intransigent attitude and its
non-recognition of the need to withdraw to the line of 4
June 1967, in accordance with Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973). We should all
be aware that peace has to be just and comprehensive
or else there is no need for it. Peace will not become a
reality unless Israel implements the resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Madrid principles and
references and resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
as well as the principle of land for peace. This will not
happen until Israel withdraws from the occupied Arab
territories, including the occupied Syrian Golan to the
line of 4 June 1967.

Syria has shown its sincerity and credibility in
calling for a comprehensive and just peace. Our
position has always been clear concerning our rights
and has been accepted by the entire world. Syria
believed in the true wish of the co-sponsor of the peace
process and in President Clinton's and Mrs. Albright's
efforts to achieve a just and comprehensive peace.
Unfortunately, the signs we see before our very eyes,
particularly what has taken place in the past few days,
give us an idea of what could happen in the occupied
Syrian Golan, particularly because Israeli policy since
1991 has been vague about the different tracks of the
peace process. There has been a deliberate distortion of
Syria's clear position concerning peace. In the light of
those facts, we call on the Security Council to take the
following steps.

First, the Council should put an immediate end to
the Israeli aggression, ensure the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces to their bases and put a stop to their
aggression against the unarmed Palestinian people.

Secondly, the Council should assume its
responsibilities for safeguarding international peace
and security, in accordance with the Charter, and not
apply different yardsticks or double standards. It
should condemn aggression and the horrible crimes
perpetrated by Israel, the occupying force in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the Arab occupied
territories. It should call for Israel to respect the
Charter, all United Nations resolutions, international
law and humanitarian international law. It should ask
Israel to fully the Geneva Conventions of 1949.

Thirdly, the Council should once again reaffirm
that Al-Quds is an integral part of the Palestinian
territories occupied in 1967. International law and
humanitarian international law are applicable to Al-
Quds, as well as to all the occupied Arab territories.

Fourthly, the international community should
clearly recognize that the visit by Sharon to Al-Quds
Al-Sharif was deliberate and was planned to provoke
the national and religious feelings of Palestinians,
Arabs, Muslims and Christians alike. The Security
Council is called upon to clearly condemn Sharon's
provocative visit and to condemn the Israeli
Government for protecting it, which indicates an
alliance between the Israeli Government and the Likud
Party against the Palestinian cause, Al-Quds and
Palestinian sovereignty over Al-Quds.

Fifthly, this horrible massacre, which has
involved the killing of children, puts the credibility of
the Security Council to the test. The Council cannot
remain silent, unable to adopt a resolution necessary to
put an end to Israeli aggression against the Arab
inhabitants in the occupied Arab territories. The time
has come to try the Israeli authorities responsible for
such crimes. All rights of the Palestinian people have
to be preserved and safeguarded, particularly their right
to self-determination and the establishment of their
independent State on their territory with Al-Quds as its
capital and the full exercise of inalienable Palestinian
sovereignty over Al-Quds.

Sixthly, the Council, and its permanent members
in particular, should bring pressure to bear on Israel to
pursue the peace process seriously, bearing in mind that
no security can be achieved without a just and
comprehensive peace ensuring respect for the dignity
of all. Peace cannot be achieved through words; peace
can be achieved only through sincere efforts aimed at
implementing United Nations resolutions.

In conclusion, allow me to point out that danger
and tension reside in Israel's continued defiance of the
international community and international legitimacy
and its rejection of the basis of a just and
comprehensive peace. International legitimacy cannot
continue to apply double standards, when it concerns
Israel.

