Mr. Eler (Turkey): Today's debate is timely, as
the severe effects of conflicts on children continue
to constitute a significant challenge. The attention
devoted to the issue by the Security Council,
exemplified by the adoption of important resolutions
and the increased momentum achieved by the tireless
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Zerrougui, has led to significant progress.
In fact, this month marked the first anniversary
of the groundbreaking "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign, which deserves our unyielding support. The
developments in the legal and normative framework on
children and armed conflict are positive, yet significant
shortcomings remain.

Unfortunately, with the changing nature of
conflicts, mass abductions, torture and sexual violence
against children, attacks on schools and hospitals,
limited access to even the most basic humanitarian
needs, and large-scale displacement have become
realities of war. Furthermore, the several conflicts
we face today, in diverse geographies, have revealed
the increasing involvement of non-State armed
groups in violating even the basic rights of children.
The appalling atrocities committed by terrorist
organizations, such as Daesh and Boko Haram, must be
underlined in this regard. Furthermore, many terrorist
organizations, including the Kurdish Workers Party/
Kongra-Gel, Al-Qaida and Daesh recruit children. It is
essential to redouble efforts to counter the spread of
extremist ideologies and prevent the recruitment tactics
of terrorist organizations such as Daesh, including in
source countries.

Last month's report of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry (A/HRC/28/69)
highlighted the deterioration of children's rights in
Syria. In fact, as the crisis enters its fifth year, the
generation of young Syrians is still in danger of being
lost to a cycle of violence. The basic rights of millions
of Syrian children, such as their rights to life, security,
health and education, are being undermined everyday
by various actors. Nearly four million Syrians have
fled their country. Despite all challenges, Turkey has
pursued an open door policy for these people without
any discrimination of religion or ethnic origin. More
than 250,000 Syrians are being accommodated in 25
temporary protection centres in Turkey. To date, more
than 47,000 babies have been born in these centres. In
addition, more than 1.5 million Syrians living outside
of these centres are also under our protection regime
and benefit from free medical services.

One cannot overemphasize the fact that children
are among the most vulnerable groups in this crisis
situation. I would like to underscore how urgent it is
that we meet the growing needs of Syrian children,
especially in the areas of education and health care.
There are almost 550,000 Syrian children of school age
in Turkey. Around 70,000 students are being educated
in 963 classrooms in the temporary shelter centres.
Outside the centres there are almost 480,000 children
in need of education. Education is thus a vital part of
our regional refugee and resilience plan, and emphasis
must be placed on creating more classrooms and
education opportunities for these children. We expect
the international community to provide technical
support and proper funding for implementing the "No
Lost Generation" initiative of the United Nations.

Demonstrating united, robust political determination
and concerted action is our most crucial tool for
addressing the issue of children and armed conflict.
We must support United Nations efforts to provide
children with essential assistance and the monitoring
and reporting functions that facilitate better planning,
protection and response. Furthermore, the growth in
the number and scope of conflicts around the world
renders cooperation and coordination between United
Nations, countries and regional organizations more
important than ever. We must also ensure that in areas
of conflict, children's full access to humanitarian care
and to justice is a priority.

As we try to identify the range of actions and
tools that we can use to stop non-State armed groups
recruiting and using children, we should also bear in
mind that signing agreements with non-State armed
groups can easily lead to exploitation of the issue
and encourage such groups to use the agreements as
propaganda for their claims to legitimacy. We therefore
believe strongly that international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should refrain from
drawing up any kind of document, including so-called
deeds of commitment, with terrorist organizations. In
fact, concrete steps aimed at strengthening the legal
framework for preventing terrorist organizations'
recruiting activities and punishing them for such
activities should be at the top of our agenda.

In conclusion, I would like to express our readiness
to give our full support to international and regional
efforts related to the protection of children.

