Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council
(S/2011/675) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 July to 15 October 2011. Since my
last briefing to the Council, on 30 August (see S/PV.6604), the Council has met twice, on
15 September (S/PV.6616 and S/PV.6617) and
28 September, and has been briefed on the situation in
the north of Kosovo, which remains precarious and
warrants the attention and leadership of the Council.

Since mid-October, the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
has consolidated perimeters at Gates 1 and 31 and has
attempted to remove some of the Kosovo Serb
roadblocks. Those attempts have resulted in occasional
2

clashes with the Serb protesters. The gates have
remained closed to traffic owing to the barricades
erected by Kosovo Serb residents in the north, who
have continued to object to the presence, albeit
symbolic at the moment, of customs and police
officials from the Pristina institutions. The European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX)
continues to transport Pristina officials to the gates by
helicopter. In response, the northern Kosovo Serbs
refuse EULEX the freedom of movement throughout
the north. Meanwhile, KFOR's ability to conduct
patrols and access its bases in the north is
unpredictable, as convoys are sporadically blocked at
the barricades when accompanied by EULEX or when
carrying heavy engineering equipment.

On the night of 23 to 24 November, KFOR
attempted to dismantle an unmanned barricade at
Dudin krs, close to the northern Mitrovica bypass. That
attempt sparked a violent clash with local Serb
residents, who attacked KFOR soldiers with rocks and
vehicles. According to KFOR, 21 of its soldiers,
personnel from Germany, Hungary and Portugal, were
injured in the incident.

In the morning of 28 November, KFOR soldiers
took over and removed the Kosovo Serb roadblock at a
village west of Zubin Potok. KFOR said that, during
the operation, it used water cannons, tear gas, pepper
spray and rubber bullets. KF OR also reported that two
of its soldiers were wounded by small arms fire. The
situation calmed down for a few hours, but the
violence resumed late in the afternoon, with Kosovo
Serb demonstrators throwing Molotov cocktails at
KFOR troops, injuring an additional 23 soldiers. Some
15 Serb demonstrators reportedly received treatment
for the injuries they sustained during the clashes. The
situation today has been peaceful, although local
Kosovo Serb protesters are still present at the site.

Those incidents marked a clear escalation in the
level of tension and violence in the north. UNMIK has
expressed serious concern at those acts of violence and
has condemned the shootings targeting KFOR soldiers.
President Jahjaga issued a statement condemning the
attacks on KFOR, while President Tadic' of Serbia this
morning called on KFOR to avoid the use of force and
asked the Kosovo Serbs to remove the barricades.

Regrettably, the situation in the north has become
intertwined with the politics of the Serbian elections to
11-60960
be held next spring and with the current political
dynamics in Pristina.

UNMIK and its international partners have taken
several initiatives to contain the current situation and
to help to bring into focus its underlying causes, which
deserve the attention and careful examination of this
Council. We are working hard to help to dispel tensions
and create an atmosphere in which durable solutions
will be possible. Accordingly, we have actively sought
out interlocutors from across the political spectrum -
in Pristina, northern Kosovo and Belgrade - to
promote efforts to find common ground and engage in
constructive dialogue. We have urged all sides to
explore ways and opportunities to communicate more
effectively with one another. Our core messages have
been to show patience, refrain from the use of force,
avoid violence and support the Security Council-
mandated international presences in the fulfilment of
their responsibilities by not impeding their freedom of
movement in the north.

One element of our strategy of engagement has
already borne some fruit. The various sides have toned
down their rhetoric, through which they tended to
speak to their respective constituencies with inadequate
regard for the misunderstandings that their remarks
could create. I am pleased to report to the Council that
that advice has been heeded and is being positively
implemented in Pristina and Belgrade.

It should be noted that, without progress at the
political level, EULEX and KFOR will continue to face
difficulties in fulfilling their mandates north of the Ibar
River, and that previous relative successes in building a
functional and multi-ethnic Kosovo police presence
there will be jeopardized. Recent attacks targeting
Kosovo police officers in Zubin Potok, notably the
attack on the residence of the Chief of the Investigation
Unit and a hand grenade attack directed at the police
station, which appear to be related to the local political
situation, seem to reflect the currently tense situation in
the north and may cause further impediments to
effective policing.

Despite KFOR's general posture to avoid forceful
action in the north, the situation continues to be
extremely volatile, and the combined factors of
frustration, fear and mistrust could easily and quickly
provide the spark that could ignite violence, as was
demonstrated by the recent clashes. At the same time,
other incidents, such as the killing of a Kosovo Serb
11-60960

and the wounding of three others in the Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood in northern Mitrovica
on 9 November only serve to exacerbate the ethnic
tensions. Consequently, the situation calls for strong,
united leadership from the international community.

In light of all this, the resumption of the
European Union (EU)-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade on 21 November, after a hiatus
that followed Pristina's attempt to take control of the
gates on 25 July, should be welcomed by all. The
dialogue provides an appropriate forum for the
discussion of a way forward that would represent a
European solution for the two crossing points. We
should encourage the sides to maintain their
engagement in good faith, and to work closely with the
EU facilitator, whose leadership is key to the process,
to reach agreement on such a solution.

At the same dialogue meeting, and following on
an earlier agreement in July, it was agreed that the
European University Association will be asked to
certify diplomas issued by universities of each party
for use by the other in connection with further
education and/or public employment. Regional
cooperation was also discussed, with the parties
agreeing that they would return to the issue at their
next meeting, scheduled for tomorrow, with a view to
reaching a final agreement. The parties also reviewed
the process of implementation of previously reached
agreements on cadastre, civil registry and freedom of
movement, and committed themselves to making rapid
progress in this process. It is important to ensure that
the momentum of this dialogue, in terms of both
reaching agreements and of their implementation, be
maintained.

This period has seen an increase of incidents
affecting minority communities elsewhere in Kosovo,
including the killing of a Kosovo Croat and the
wounding of another in southern Kosovo on 2 October,
and the killing of a Kosovo Serb and injuring of two
others in western Kosovo on 20 October. While it is
unclear whether these cases were ethnically motivated,
it is a fact that criminal incidents affecting members of
minority communities weaken these communities'
perception of their safety and security. It is important
to note that the number of criminal incidents affecting
minorities has also increased compared to the same
period one year ago, which, considering the present
situation, has a greater negative impact upon these
communities' perception of their safety and security.

UNMIK is carefully and closely following the
trend of such incidents and is engaging both with local
police and community leaders, as well as with EULEX,
to intensify efforts to resolve all inter-ethnic criminal
cases, which are particularly damaging to the prospects
for peace and reconciliation. More importantly,
UNMIK is adding its voice to that of others in the
international community calling for more active and
effective efforts on the part of political leaders to make
use of their leadership positions in order to help change
the atmosphere in which inter-ethnic crime is tacitly
tolerated.

Perceptions of safety and security are one of the
key elements affecting minority returns. We continue to
observe with concern the recent decline in the rate of
such returns to Kosovo. While vocal opposition to
returns has diminished, in early November a public
protest by some 200 members of the receiving Kosovo-
Albanian community in a formerly mixed village in
FerizajflJrosevac municipality prevented a visit by
Serb internally displaced persons, who were escorted
away by the Kosovo police after one of their minivans
was stoned outside the meeting venue. We are
concerned by the incident, but note that the municipal
leadership has publicly denounced the receiving
community's opposition, and has taken action to
reschedule the visit to the community.

There is better news regarding the preservation of
Serbian Orthodox heritage sites. I am pleased to report
that since spring 2009, when the Kosovo Police
gradually started to assume responsibility for security
arrangements at protected sites, there has been a
decrease of incidents at these sites. Currently,
ethnically mixed teams of Kosovo Police are in charge
of security arrangements at 21 sites, mostly churches
and monasteries. Although the Serbian Orthodox
Church assesses the situation around the church sites to
be fragile and has undertaken some physical protection
measures of its own, the best guarantee for the long-
term security of these sites is the development of
positive relations between the Church and local
representatives of the Kosovo-Albanian community, in
which some senior clerics are actively engaged. The
continued support of the Kosovo authorities for the
established mechanisms for the special protection and
reconstruction of Orthodox sites, including the
Reconstruction and Implementation Commission,
would contribute to this process.
There has been only modest progress in the
clarification of the fates and location of missing
persons. In this regard, I wish to reiterate the call on all
those who have information on the fates and locations
of the missing to come forward and pass that
information on to the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

Finally, I wish briefly to update the Council on
the steps taken by EULEX to investigate the
allegations contained in the Council of Europe
Parliamentary Assembly's resolution 1782 (2011),
"Investigation of allegations of inhuman treatment of
people and illicit trafficking in human organs in
Kosovo". A Special Investigative Task Force has been
set up and has taken over the preliminary investigation
launched by EULEX into the allegations. The lead
prosecutor announced that he had secured Albania's
commitment to cooperating in the investigation, and
declared his commitment to following the trail of
evidence wherever it may lead. He recently met with
the Presidents of Kosovo, Albania and Serbia, as well
as with war crimes prosecutors in the three capitals. As
noted in the Secretary-General's report,

"Belgrade remains of the view that an
independent body, with investigative powers in
Albania and beyond, should be established by the
Security Council to lead the investigation."
(S/2011/675, para. 29)

In closing, I would like to thank the members of
the Council for their support for UNMIK, and in
particular for continuing efforts to contribute to
solutions that not only accord with the values and
purposes of the United Nations, but contribute towards
the fulfilment of the aspirations of the people of the
region to a more peaceful and more prosperous future
as part of Europe. We count upon the Council's
continued support for our efforts to tackle the
immediate and delicate problems described in the
present report of the Secretary-General. Moreover, we
hope that the Council will assist us by putting the full
weight of its authority behind the messages we are
sending to the parties, in particular concerning their
respective leaderships.

While some speak of Kosovo as a frozen conflict,
I believe that the situation is fluid and dynamic. This
potentially entails greater dangers, but there also exist
genuine opportunities to pursue a viable, sustainable
resolution that could overcome the long-standing
tensions. It is my belief that this can best be achieved
through the stewardship of this Council. Above all, I
believe that what is needed at the moment is for sides
to master the goodwill, pragmatism, boldness, courage
and resolve necessary to achieve genuine progress. No
less than the taking of full statesman-like responsibility
is demanded, if the present opportunities for moving
forward towards peaceful, durable solutions are not to
be missed.

