The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Sierra Leone in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bangara (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the results of
the meeting of the National Consultative Conference
on 12 February 1996 that overwhelmingly supported
the decision to maintain 26 February 1996 as the date
of the elections. The Council also welcomes the
renewed promise of the Government of Sierra Leone,
through the Chairman of the National Provisional
Ruling Council, to abide by the will of the people
expressed through the Conference to hold the elections
as scheduled. The Council notes that the Chairman of
the Interim National Electoral Commission has
confirmed that all the necessary technical
arrangements are in place for elections to proceed.

"The Security Council reiterates its belief that the
holding of free and fair elections as scheduled is of
critical importance to Sierra Leone's transition to
democratic constitutional rule. Any delay in the
elections or interruption in this process is likely to
erode international donor support for Sierra Leone. It
is also likely to greatly increase the potential for
further instability and violence, with devastating
consequences for the people of Sierra Leone.
"The Security Council cautions all groups and
individuals in Sierra Leone not to attempt to disrupt
through violence or intimidation the electoral process
which the great majority of the people of Sierra
Leone support. The Council calls upon the
Government to fulfil its undertaking to ensure a safe
and free environment for the elections.

"The Security Council urges all parties to end
the violence in Sierra Leone. The Council welcomes
the initial contacts between the Government and the
Revolutionary United Front and calls upon the
Revolutionary United Front to renew its cease-fire
and to enter into a full dialogue for peace without
any conditions.

"The Security Council expresses its continued
concern about the humanitarian situation and
suffering of the people resulting from the conflict in
Sierra Leone. The Council calls on Member States
to continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
address this problem.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the Secretary-General to assist the conduct of the
elections, and in particular the establishment of the
Joint International Observer Group. It also
commends the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to support the democratic
transition and to facilitate peace negotiations
between the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front. The Council appreciates
the important role of the Organization of African
Unity and others, including States neighbouring
Sierra Leone, in attempting to bring peace to that
country.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the
situation in Sierra Leone and to keep the Council
informed of all significant developments."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.35 pm.

