Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending to you, Sir, my congratulations and those of
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency at
a time when the Council is considering an issue of
critical importance to all of us. Your proven diplomatic
skills assure us that our deliberations will result in a
positive outcome.

I should also like to extend to your predecessor,
His Excellency Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of
Norway, our deep appreciation for the exemplary
manner in which he guided the work of the Council last
month.

This meeting has been convened to address a
situation that has resulted in an intolerable state of war
in the occupied Palestinian territory. Such
developments cannot but have dire consequences for
the region in particular, as well as repercussions for the
world at large.

Yesterday, the Government of Indonesia issued a
statement strongly condemning Israel's military
aggression against Palestine and the person of
President Arafat. Indeed, these untenable policies pose
a grave threat to the personal safety and security of
President Arafat and to the very future of the entire
Middle East peace process. Furthermore, Indonesia
finds it unacceptable that the occupying Power justifies
its military action by using the issue of terrorism as a
pretext to subvert the legitimate Palestinian cause.

In responding to this situation, the Council
adopted resolution 1397 (2002), which rightly
addressed the very core of the problem, namely the
creation of peace and the recognition of the inalienable
right of the Palestinians to self-determination, through
a vision of a region where two States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders. That resolution has been
strengthened by the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1402 (2002). Regrettably, those resolutions
remain unimplemented. It is therefore my delegation's
firm View that the Security Council must take
necessary and immediate measures to establish a clear
mechanism to guarantee their full implementation.

Peace is a challenging and uphill task indeed,
given the course of recent tragic events and a military
option that can never lead to lasting peace. Therefore,
my Government reaffirms its support for all diplomatic
efforts towards resuming political dialogue and
reviving the peace process between the concerned
parties. In that regard, we extend our full support to the
message of peace emanating from the 14th Arab
League Summit, held in Beirut. It bears further
reiteration that a lasting peace requires the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and of the principle of land for
peace. That is the only Viable path to ending the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories.

Given the critical developments on the ground
and the ongoing deliberations in the Council, the whole
Middle East region is facing a serious test: either it will
move forward to end the violence and to begin the
process of peace, or it will fall further into an abyss of
violence. The most urgent option at this stage,
therefore, is for the Security Council to take all
possible steps, especially by mandating the urgent
deployment of an international security force to the
occupied Palestinian territories, to bring this conflict to
a speedy end.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm the imperative need
to address simultaneously the political and security
dimensions in order to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

