Mr. Ould Cheikh Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity
to brief the Security Council once again on the latest
developments in Yemen.

It has been two months since the parties met in
Switzerland for the first face-to-face talks in the peace
process. Those talks produced agreements on several
measures, which have provided much-needed practical
and moral support to the Yemeni people, including the
delivery of humanitarian aid to the city of Ta'izz and
the release of some prisoners.

The announcement of a cessation of hostilities
on the first day of the talks was accompanied by the
establishment of a ee-escalation and coordination
committee aimed at strengthening adherence to the
cessation of hostilities. There was also broad agreement
on the principles of a general framework based on the
provisions of resolution 2216 (2015). The talks served
as the beginning of a process towards agreements
on ending the war and Yemen's return to a peaceful
political transition.

The parties left the last round of talks in a positive
spirit, with practical proposals, recommendations and
hope for a better future for Yemen and the Yemeni
people. Tragically, the security situation in Yemen has
deteriorated since the end of the talks. The latest United
Nations reports indicate that more than 6,000 Yemenis
have lost their lives since March 2015, and more than
35,000 have been injured.

Yemen is living through the most heartbreaking
days in its history. Many parts of the country are again
witnessing air strikes and extensive ground fighting.
There has also been a significant increase in the number
of missiles fired indiscriminately into the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. The escalation of military activities,
along with the worsening of regional tensions, has
created additional obstacles that threaten to delay a new
round of talks.

There has been a notable upsurge in the number
and magnitude of attacks carried out by terrorist groups
in Aden, Lahej, Abyan, Shabwa and Sana'a. There
have been attacks on Yemeni army checkpoints and
residences of key security officials. The assassination
ofprominent political and security officials in the south
of the country has continued unabated. On 28 January,
an attack on the presidential palace in Aden resulted in
the death of eight people, including civilian bystanders.
Earlier today, a suicide bomber attacked a Yemeni army
camp in Aden, reportedly killing at least 10 people.

I have repeatedly underlined the increasing presence
of terrorist groups in Yemen. That creates a long-term
threat for both the country and the region. The absence
of the State in many parts of Yemen has facilitated
the expansion of those terrorist groups. Al-Qaida and
the Islamic State are present in many parts of Yemeni
territory. There are reports of their growing influence
in large areas of the governorate of Hadramout and their
control of its port, maritime traffic and illegal oil trade.
Reports of attacks on civilians, including stonings
and executions of captured civilians and Yemeni army
soldiers, are deeply worrying.

The basic freedoms of Yemenis, including the
freedom of expression, continue to be undermined.
There has been significant rise in the systematic
persecution of civil society activists in Yemen, including
reports of violent attacks and arbitrary detention of
many journalists. Acts of intimidation, harassment and
disappearances ofjournalists are a clear violation ofthe
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Yemenis continue to face grave violations of
international humanitarian law. Respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law is critical to
the ability of Yemenis to survive the current crisis with
dignity and safety. The agencies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations are doing their utmost to uphold
the rights of Yemenis and provide much-needed
assistance. It is important that all United Nations staff
be able to work in safety and without restriction. I call
on the Government of Yemen and all other stakeholders
to uphold those principles and to respect and support
the work of the United Nations and its agencies.

I have been engaged in intensive consultations with
Yemeni leaders and regional partners in recent weeks.
I discussed the challenges facing the peace process
with the Foreign Ministers of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the Sultanate of
Oman, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, France and
with the Secretary-General of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Japan and
the Deputy Foreign Minister of the Republic of Korea,
all of whom underlined their continued support for an
end to violence in Yemen and a political settlement. I
met with Yemeni Vice-President and Prime Minister
Khaled Bahah on 8 and 16 January, in addition to
holding repeated meetings with representatives of the
Yemeni Government, other Yemeni leaders and civil
society members. I also travelled to Sana'a, where I met
with senior officials from the Houthis and the General
People's Congress, as well as key political parties and
women's and youth groups.

During the latest round of consultations, I sought
to ensure that some of the positive commitments
that emerged from the talks in Switzerland were
implemented. While far from a comprehensive
settlement, those commitments yield tangible benefits
for the Yemeni people and bolster the peace process.

I worked for the release of two Saudi nationals
by the Houthis on 14 January, after almost 10 months
in captivity. That was welcomed by the Secretary-
General and the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. That
positive development was soon followed by the release
of the Yemeni Minister of Technical and Vocational
Education, Abdulrazzak Al-Ashwal, and four Yemeni
political and media activists. I shall continue to press
for, and work towards, the release of others detainees.

Building on the commitments made in
Switzerland, United Nations agencies and international
non-governmental organizations expanded the
delivery of assistance to Ta'izz, including to areas
that had been cut off for many months. The World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
Medecins Sans Frontieres have all been able to deliver
critically needed assistance to Ta'izz in recent weeks.
I hope that that city and other areas that have suffered
tremendously in recent months will continue to receive
assistance on a regular basis. I repeat my call to all
parties to ensure that humanitarian agencies have free
and unhindered access to all parts of Yemen.

I have also pursued agreements that seek to
preserve the functioning of key State institutions on
which the Yemeni people depend. Preserving their
functioning helps current service delivery and will also
facilitate a faster and more effective recovery following
an agreement. The Central Bank's Board of Directors
met recently in Amman, with the participation of the
Yemeni Minister of Finance and the Sana'a-based
Central Bank Governor. Together with the Resident
Coordinator, UNICEF and the World Bank, 1 am
working to relaunch Yemen's Social Welfare Fund,
which will provide critical financial support for the
poorest of Yemen's people.

Those are some positive measures that demonstrate
a willingness to cooperate in order to preserve the
viability and effectiveness of key State institutions in
advance of a settlement. The implementation of those
measures will require continued political support from
all parties, as well as generous support from donors
to replenish the various funds and mechanisms, so as
to contribute to the stability of the Yemeni economy.
The conflict is causing grave damage to the capacity
of Yemen's public and private sectors. Both are critical
for Yemen's future economic prospects and the ability
of people to survive under the present circumstances.
Humanitarian aid is critical, yet limited in its reach.
Many Yemenis continue to rely on private-sector
economic activity. For that reason, the extensive damage
to private-sector infrastructure is of great concern.

In spite ofthe collapse ofthe cessation ofhostilities,
the de-escalation and coordination committee has
continued to function, with constructive participation
by all sides. The parties have committed to strengthen
the capacity of the committee and to agree on a precise
location for its meetings. The work of the de-escalation
and coordination committee is essential in order to
ensure the success of the cessation of hostilities in the
future.

Despite those areas of limited progress, deep
divisions persist that prevent me from calling for the
next round of talks. The parties remain divided over
whether a new round of talks should be convened with
or without a new cessation of hostilities. Unfortunately,
I have not received sufficient assurances that a new
cessation of hostilities, should I call for one, would
be respected. As the Secretary-General has stated
repeatedly, there is no military solution to this conflict.
Recommitment to a cessation of hostilities leading to
a permanent ceasefire is the practical expression of
this truth. I urge the Security Council to support that
step and take action towards its implementation as soon
as possible.

Yemen has suffered greatly. Its people have
witnessed unspeakable tragedies. The country's
infrastructure has been destroyed. Families have been
dispersed. The social fabric is torn apart. This is a
critical and most difficult phase. With every passing
day, more and more Yemeni lives are lost. A new
cessation of hostilities will open the way for new talks
and an agreement on Yemen's return to a peaceful and
orderly transition. I shall continue to work with all sides
in Yemen, the region and the international community
to build consensus on the key elements of such future
agreements. The conflict in Yemen is political, so the
solution must also be political. Only an inclusive peace
process will ensure a future of reconciliation and peace
in the country.

The Yemeni people have shown a spirit of
compromise in the interest of preserving the unity of their
country many times in the past. We must collectively
help Yemen regain that spirit of compromise. That is
the only way Yemenis will be be able to overcome the
current violence and build a peace process that can
bring together all of Yemen's diverse communities and
allow them to jointly and peacefully look to their future
and the future of their country.

