Mr. De Serpa Soares: I would like to thank the
Security Council for inviting me to this meeting. I also
convey a special greeting to my colleagues and friends
from the International Committee of the Red Cross.

Just over 70 years ago, on 11 August 1949, a
Diplomatic Conference convened in Geneva adopted
the four Geneva Conventions, and on the following day
its Final Act was signed by the participating States.
The four Conventions entered into force around a year
later, on 21 October 1950, and have been at the core of
international humanitarian law ever since.

The four Geneva Conventions were by no means
completely novel at the time. The first three Conventions
found their origins in previous treaties and were revised
versions of them. These three Conventions are the First
Convention, which deals with the wounded and sick in
armed forces in the field; the Second Convention, which
covers the wounded, sick and shipwrecked members of
armed forces at sea; and the Third Convention, which
deals with prisoners of war. The Fourth Convention
was, however, the first treaty that was specifically
dedicated to the protection of civilian persons in time
of war.

Most of the provisions in these four Conventions
are applicable to international armed conflicts - in
other words, armed conflicts between States. However,
there is a provision in each of the four Conventions that
applies to non-international armed conflicts, which
is article 3 common to the Geneva Conventions. This
provision contains basic rules on the humane treatment
of persons taking no active part in hostilities, including
members of the armed forces who have laid down
their arms or who have been placed hors de combat by
sickness, wounds or detention, as well as civilians.

The inclusion of common article 3 in the Geneva
Conventions was a historic moment for humankind. It
was the first instance in which non-international armed
conflicts were regulated by a multilateral treaty. The
significance is augmented by the fact that the Geneva
Conventions are now universally adhered to. There is no
doubt that common article 3 has become one of the most
important provisions of the Geneva Conventions, not
only because of its nature, which I have just mentioned,
but also because it is perhaps the most frequently applied
provision in contemporary armed conflicts, which are
mostly non-international in character. Common article
3 was subsequently developed and supplemented by
Protocol II Additional to the Geneva Conventions and
a number of customary rules have been recognized as
being applicable to non-international armed conflicts,
but common article 3 still occupies a special place in
international humanitarian law.

The relevance of the Geneva Conventions to the
work of the United Nations might not have been so
obvious in the early years of the Organization, as the
Charter does not specifically refer to international
humanitarian law. However, the United Nations was
established in the aftermath of the Second World War,
which saw violations of international humanitarian
law on a massive scale. The Charter, in its Preamble,
contains a solemn declaration of a determination "to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
[and] to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in
the dignity and worth of the human person", and in its
Article 1 further provides that one of the purposes of
the United Nations is

"to achieve international co-operation in solving
international problems of [a] humanitarian
character, and in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights".

In this regard, it is not surprising that international
humanitarian law has become one of the most important
areas of international law that guide the work of the
Organization today, including the Security Council.

The role of the United Nations in situations of
serious violations of international humanitarian law
has also been specifically recognized in article 89
of Protocol 1 Additional to the Geneva Conventions,
which requires that the high contracting parties act,
jointly or individually, in cooperation with the United
Nations in situations of serious violations of the Geneva
Conventions and of the Protocol.

In practice, all competent principal organs of
the United Nations have dealt with issues related to
international humanitarian law in one way or another.
As far as the Security Council is concerned, it has on
several occasions recalled "its primary responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and in
this context, the need to promote respect for the rules
and principles of international humanitarian law", such
as in the second preambular paragraph of resolution
2474 (2019) of 11 June 2019.

With respect to the Geneva Conventions specifically,
it was only in 1967 that the Council invoked those
Conventions for the first time in one of its resolutions,
almost 20 years after their adoption. Since then, the
Security Council has made express references to the
Geneva Conventions or to specific provisions from them
in its resolutions, but in a large majority of instances
the Council has invoked international humanitarian law
generally or its customary rules rather than specific
treaties or provisions from them.

With respect to international humanitarian law
generally, the Council has played a crucial role
in ensuring respect for that law. Apart from the
Council's frequent condemnation of violations of
international humanitarian law and its call on the
parties to the conflict to respect the obligations that it
lays down, the Council has taken concrete measures,
such as establishing international criminal tribunals
to prosecute war crimes, as well as the crime of
genocide and crimes against humanity; authorizing the
establishment of commissions of inquiry to investigate
alleged violations of international humanitarian
law; mandating peacekeeping operations to protect
civilians, particularly in the context of ongoing armed
conflicts, including by the use of force; authorizing
humanitarian agencies to carry out cross-border
humanitarian assistance, pursuant to a binding decision
of the Council; requesting the Secretary-General, his
special representatives and envoys, peacekeeping
operations and special political missions to monitor
potential violations of international humanitarian
law in ongoing conflicts; requesting the Secretary-
General to report on certain thematic areas, such as
the protection of civilians in armed conflict, children
in armed conflict and the protection of medical and
humanitarian personnel exclusively engaged in medical
duties; and imposing sanctions on individuals and
entities involved in violations of applicable international
humanitarian law.

The breadth of actions taken by the Security
Council shows that the Council has great potential
and flexibility for ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law. While the United Nations has a
role in ensuring respect by others for international
humanitarian law, it is at the same time an entity to
which international humanitarian law applies. This
is relevant to all United Nations personnel in armed
conflict situations, but is particularly relevant to United
Nations peacekeeping operations deployed to armed
conflict situations, some of which have increasingly
been targeted by armed groups.

The Geneva Conventions and other instruments of
international humanitarian law do not contain specific
provisions concerning the protection of United Nations
peacekeepers. However, there is no doubt that they
are protected by international humanitarian law in
situations of armed conflict. That they are entitled to
the humane treatment set out in article 3 common to the
Geneva Conventions was specifically recognized most
recently by the International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia in the Prosecutor v. Radovan Karadzie
case. The Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court further criminalizes intentional attacks against
peacekeepers as a war crime, as long as they are
entitled to the protection given to civilians under the
international law of armed conflict.

The Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel ofl994 provides furtherprotection
to United Nations peacekeepers by prohibiting attacks
against United Nations and associated personnel and by
requiring States parties to submit relevant cases to the
competent authorities for the purpose of prosecution.
However, as many host countries are not yet parties
to the Convention, in practice the application of the
Convention in those countries has been made possible
only by ad hoc arrangements, namely, by including a
specific provision in the relevant status-of-forces and
status-of-mission agreements.

In View of the fact that United Nations peacekeepers
continue to be attacked, I appeal to the Council
and Member States to further reflect upon ways to
ensure that attacks against peacekeepers are properly
investigated and, where appropriate, prosecuted.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are not
only protected by international humanitarian law but
are also bound by it in certain circumstances. That this
is the case is recognized in the Organization's status-
of-forces agreements and in the Secretary-General's
bulletin on the observance by United Nations forces
of international humanitarian law. As far as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is concerned, the
Security Council has specifically mandated it to carry
out targeted offensive operations "in strict compliance
with international law, including international
humanitarian law".

A number of measures have to be taken in order
to ensure compliance with international humanitarian
law, including providing guidance to a mission so that
military operations are carried out in accordance with
the rules of international humanitarian law concerning
the conduct of hostilities; establishing procedures so
that any persons captured by a mission are handled
in accordance with international law and standards;
concluding an agreement with the host country to
ensure that persons transferred by a mission to the host
country are treated in accordance with its obligations
under international law; and providing guidance to
a mission so that any act by its personnel that might
be contrary to international humanitarian law is
properly addressed.

The Secretariat will continue to make every effort
to ensure that the relevant peacekeeping operations
comply with international humanitarian law, and
it counts on the support of the Security Council and
Member States in that regard.

