Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like, first of all, to commend you, Madam
President, for having organizing this debate. I also thank
Special Coordinator Serry for his detailed presentation.
I express my respect to the Permanent Representative
of Israel and my gratitude to the Permanent Observer
of the Observer State of Palestine for their important
contributions.

This open debate is taking place at a moment
of great uncertainty and upheaval, not only in the
Middle East but for the entire world. A series of events
has led to the interruption of the incipient and long-
awaited democratic process in Egypt, and I would like
to express my solidarity with the Egyptian people,
especially with women and young people, who dream
of a society built on freedom, solidarity and peace.
Meanwhile, the violence in Syria is rapidly spreading
to the whole region and political and religious leaders
are increasingly employing sectarian rhetoric, with the
potential and power to exacerbate existing tensions and
generate further violence and atrocities on a large scale.

We have heard that in this climate of uncertainty
and upheaval in the Middle East it is very difficult to
open doors. Argentina believes otherwise. This very
climate of increased tension and instability does not so
much offer an favourable environment as it ethically
and politically demands a viable solution. We believe
today more than ever that it is both necessary and
possible to restart the conversations while preserving
existing gains towards the institutional construction
of Palestine, ensuring the Palestinian people's right to
self-determination and contributing to the long-term
security of Israel. The solution to this conflict is, and
will be, an important factor in the peace and stability of
the region and the world.

We therefore commend the efforts of Secretary of
State Kerry and welcome the announcement that the
bases have been established for reopening dialogue
between the parties. That announcement reflects
not only the intense work of the past four months
but political commitment and deep knowledge of the
parties and their leaders, who should now respond
constructively and in good faith, proving that they
are capable of guiding their Governments and people
towards a peace agreement.

We also believe that this is not a matter of
individual proposals and efforts, although we certainly
value them as represented by Secretary of State Kerry.
The comprehensive efforts ofa single, well-intentioned
individual are not enough to advance a peace process.
There has to be a collective project, a project shared
by the international community as a whole, that will
remove the obstacles that stand in the way of the
steps needed to reopen dialogue between the parties.
The central elements of such an agreement already
enjoy wide acceptance on the part of the international
community, which makes it hard to understand why we
continue to set traps for ourselves: two States, based on
the borders of 4 June 1967, with an agreed exchange of
land, Jerusalem as the future capital of both States, the
necessary security arrangements and a just solution to
the refugee question.

We need to resolve the situation and not simply insist
that Israel should unconditionally and immediately
bring to a complete halt all settlement activities because
they constitute human rights violations and war crimes.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights said as
much earlier this year. In this case, time is not gold.
Time is lives, time is freedom, time is democracy, time
is peace. In reality, the truth - all truths - and law are
never counterproductive. Humankind has learned that
truth and respect for the law are the pathway to peace.

With regard to Syria, exactly one week ago (see S/PV.7000) the Council heard yet again tragic accounts
of those in charge of the huge efforts to address the
terrible consequences of the tragedy unfolding in
that country, and a heart-rending description of the
contempt of the different parties to the conflict for the
most elementary tenets of international law, of human
rights and of international humanitarian law.

The Human Rights Council has recently called for
the status of the settlements to be clarified under the
rule of law and international law, not only according
to the International Court of Justice but also under the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute on the
International Criminal Court.

Now, on the situation in Syria, I would like to
mention what a Latin American writer said a few days
ago, namely, that it is not a prisoner of necessity, but
a prisoner of fear. Some do not sleep because of their
anxiety that they do not have the things they do not
have, while others do not sleep because they dread
losing what they already have.

I would like to conclude by saying that there are
only five issues that Argentina continues to support on
the crisis in Syria.

First, the deliberate obstacles to access for
humanitarian assistance that are still in place are
violations of international law. They are unacceptable
on both sides.

Secondly, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and serious violations of human rights cannot go
unpunished. We therefore reiterate that the Security
Council must consider referring the situation to the
International Criminal Court.

Thirdly, we insist that supplying weapons to the
parties must stop. There is no doubt that weapons in
Syria are being used to commit human rights violations
and violations of international humanitarian law. That
shows that some speak of trust and commitment in
connection with the second Geneva conference on Syria
while, on the other hand, showing that they only believe
in a militarized solution to the conflict. Brahimi said a
few days ago:

(spoke in English):
"Arms do not make peace."
(spoke in Spanish):
That is not a revealed truth; it is a proven conviction.

Fourthly, the countries hosting Syrian refugees
cannot by themselves face the burden imposed on them
by the ongoing influx ofindividuals fleeing the conflict.
The entire international community, United Nations
agencies, must work for inclusion, for conditions for a
dignified life for refugees.

Fifthly, the Security Council has failed. It has failed
in its obligation to comply with the mandate entrusted
to us in the Charter. For that reason, it is urgent for us
to redouble our efforts to consolidate the understanding
between Russia and the United States to convene the
Geneva conference on Syria in order to find a way to

implement a political solution. We are what we do, but
we are also what we do not do.

