Mr. Lubbers: Mr. President, thank you for
inviting me to brief the Security Council.

Let me begin with 11 September. Resolution 1373
(2001) calls on States to work together to prevent and
suppress terrorist acts and to prevent terrorists from
gaining admission to countries by illegally abusing the
asylum system. This is entirely consistent with the
1951 Refugee Convention, which specifically excludes
persons who have committed serious crimes.

Therefore, perpetrators, organizers and sponsors
of terrorist crimes who might seek to abuse the asylum
channel have to be promptly identified and dealt with.
At the same time, let me add words of caution. In
taking measures, we must ensure that Governments
avoid making unwarranted linkages between refugees
and terrorism. Genuine refugees are themselves the
victims of persecution and terrorism, not its
perpetrators. Innocent people should not be deprived of
their basic rights.
Refugees and asylum seekers have for some years
been the object of considerable mistrust and hostility in
many countries, and they are now particularly
vulnerable. In the current climate, there is a risk that
refugees and asylum seekers may become convenient
scapegoats and may be unfairly victimized. We must
not allow this to happen. We must continue to fight
against xenophobia and intolerance in our societies.

We must not allow the global fight against
terrorism to weaken the international refugee
protection regime. Refugees and asylum seekers must
not be discriminated against; one must not assume too
easily that their religion, ethnicity, national origin or
political affiliation somehow link them to terrorism.
Governments must avoid resorting to the mandatory or
arbitrary detention of asylum seekers and to procedures
that do not comply with the standards of due process.
Detention of asylum seekers must remain the
exception, not the rule. Resettlement programmes and
solutions must be maintained and must not discriminate
against people of particular ethnic groups or
nationalities.

In November last year my Office issued a
document outlining these concerns and providing
practical suggestions on how to ensure that applicable
international standards relating to refugee protection
are met. Since then, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has been
called upon by Governments to provide its expertise in
helping to draft new regulations aimed at avoiding
abuse of the asylum channel by terrorists and other
criminals. UNHCR stands ready to continue
cooperating with States in this respect, to ensure that
standards of refugee protection are respected.

There are currently more than 21 million
refugees, internally displaced persons, stateless people
and others of concern to my Office. I am determined in
particular to make progress in finding durable solutions
for those people. In many countries, it can be done.
The first challenge is to ensure that the international
community remains fully committed to supporting
political processes aimed at ending conflict.

Let me turn to the Afghan situation. As the
Council is aware, even before 11 September, Afghans
constituted the largest refugee population in the world,
with some 3.5 million in Pakistan and Iran alone, and
many others spread out in countries across the world.
In the last few months, in spite of the insistence of
Pakistan, Iran and other neighbouring countries on
keeping their borders with Afghanistan officially
closed, UNHCR encouraged them to provide temporary
protection for the most vulnerable.

Some 300,000 Afghans have entered those two
countries since 11 September. We have succeeded in
ensuring that their basic needs are met. Beyond this, in
Pakistan, considerable progress has been made in
transferring refugees from makeshift camps to more
secure areas with better living conditions. It is
particularly gratifying to note that the notorious Jalozai
camp, where conditions have been particularly bad, is
about to close. This is indeed an incredible
improvement if one compares the situation to the one
that prevailed only a year ago.

Inside Afghanistan, the number of internally
displaced people was estimated to be around 1 million
in December, bringing the total number of displaced
Afghans to around 5 million - one fifth of the
population. Now, with the new Interim Administration
in place under Chairman Karzai, and with international
troops on the ground, we will address the massive
problem of human displacement.

My Office is fully committed to playing an active
role, within the United Nations operation and under the
leadership of Lakhdar Brahimi, to help build peace in
the country, enabling refugees and internally displaced
persons to return to their homes. The UNHCR initial
return plan describes our regional approach to the
Afghan situation, outlining the preparations that we are
making for the return and reintegration of refugees and
internally displaced persons.

It is difficult to estimate at this stage the
magnitude of the return movement and the speed at
which it will take place, but our initial plan is to assist
up to 1.2 million returnees in 2002: 400,000 from
Pakistan, 400,000 from Iran and approximately
400,000 internally displaced persons - all going
home. This is a substantial return operation. In fact, for
the Afghans I will now be the "High Commissioner for
Returnees", and that is a gratifying experience.

Security, as the Council is aware, is now the most
important condition for significant returns. The
majority of the 5 million refugees are from
countryside. It is therefore vital to have adequate
security throughout the country, not only in Kabul and
the main urban centres. I am therefore concerned about
the deteriorating security situation in various parts of
Afghanistan. The recent Violence in Paktia province
has been widely reported. In Balkh province tension
between rival factions has resulted in serious clashes in
at least two areas, with atrocities against civilians -
including killings and rape - reported in Sholgara. In
Mazar-e-Sharif, in spite of General Dostum's
disarmament campaign, armed men from rival factions
have flowed back into the city in the past few weeks,
and they are visible in the streets right now.

The issue of security is crucial. Events such as
those in Paktia and Balkh provinces, and ethnic tension
in general in the north of the country, including
Baghlan province, are a deterrent to the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. At the same
time, they also prevent our access for humanitarian
operations. If the security situation continues to
deteriorate, Afghanistan will slide back into a 1992-
Iike situation. I therefore strongly support the position
taken here by Lakhdar Brahimi yesterday to extend the
mandate of the international security assistance force
beyond Kabul.

Since the end of November, in Pakistan over
100,000 Afghan refugees are estimated to have already
been repatriated. While that repatriation continues, the
influx from Afghanistan into Pakistan has not come to
a halt. We are talking about thousands fleeing from
Afghanistan daily. While the lack of sufficient
assistance is being cited as the main reason for persons
continuing to flee Afghanistan, recent arrivals -
particularly from the north - have increasingly
referred to discrimination against Pashtuns. This is a
worrying development. I hereby make a strong plea for
tolerance, non-discrimination and reconciliation in the
new Afghanistan.

In Iran over 65,000 refugees are estimated to
have been repatriated voluntarily since the end of
November, and spontaneous returns are continuing at
the rate of about 700 per day. But, in addition, the
Government has been deporting substantial numbers of
Afghans. UNHCR continues to request access to those
deportees to establish whether or not there are any
refugees among them.

Although the international spotlight has been on
Afghanistan, Africa continues to demand the greatest
share of UNHCR's resources and attention. Out of 21
million people of concern to my Office, more than 5
million are in Africa. A considerable number of them
have been languishing for years in refugee camps.

In December of last year, UNHCR organized a
ministerial-level meeting in Geneva to discuss these
problems in Africa. It was made clear at that meeting
that opportunities are arising to put an end to some of
Africa's protracted refugee situations. Those
opportunities must be seized.
Turning now to Sierra Leone, a year ago,
following my first visit to the country, I briefed the
Security Council on humanitarian issues there. Since
then there has been much progress, and repatriation of
Sierra Leonean refugees has now begun in earnest. The
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone's successful
completion of the disarmament process has greatly
contributed to stability in the country. UNHCR did its
part, and the Government's declaration that the war has
officially ended is also a welcome development. Now
that the war is over, it is vital to build the peace. My
Office is actively engaged in facilitating the return of
refugees from Guinea, and we will soon start
facilitating similar returns from other countries of
asylum, particularly Liberia, the Gambia and Ghana.
The return of refugees is essential for successful and
legitimate elections. Meanwhile, the deteriorating
situation in Liberia is of great concern. New Liberian
refugees are already arriving in Sierra Leone, and it is
vital that every effort be made to contain the situation
in Liberia.

Eritrea is another example of where considerable
numbers of refugees are returning after many years of
exile. The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea plays a Vital role there. Over the last year, some
36,000 refugees have been repatriated voluntarily from
the Sudan, and recently the momentum has picked up
even more. While most of those persons are refugees
who fled Eritrea during the conflict with Ethiopia in
2000, some of them are refugees who had been living
in camps since the 19605 and 1970s. We intend to
complete the repatriation exercise by 2003. However,
we will then have to work on Eritrea's absorption
capacity, where there are some concerns.

Another successful repatriation operation is that
involving 50,000 refugees returning from Ethiopia to
north-west and north-east Somalia. Those numbers may
be modest in comparison with the total numbers of
refugees in Africa - we are talking about all the
examples now - but they are significant in
emphasizing the need to find solutions to very
protracted refugee situations. The challenge of course
is to make sure that those returns are sustainable. I
must therefore encourage development actors to invest
in areas of return so that returnees can rebuild their
lives and engage in productive activities.

As the Council knows, there are some hopeful
signs in the Great Lakes region. The situation in
Burundi was reviewed by the Security Council earlier
this week, with the personal participation of President
Buyoya. Nelson Mandela's previous efforts and the
efforts currently being made by Deputy President Zuma
of South Africa and President Omar Bongo of Gabon to
broker a ceasefire between the parties to the conflict
are positive developments. In the event of an effective
ceasefire, I anticipate that hundreds of thousands of
refugees in Tanzania and elsewhere will voluntarily
return. Currently, some 600,000 Burundians are living
as refugees in East, Central and southern Africa, while
a further 600,000 remain internally displaced in
Burundi. This is a massive operation. Last year saw a
modest beginning, with 30,000 refugees going back to
the northern provinces of Burundi. That is an
indication that refugees are ready and willing to return
as soon as it is safe to do so.

With regard to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) last year was a positive step
forward. Another concrete, positive element was the
separation of 1,400 ex-combatants who fled from the
Central African Republic to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo together with some 24,000 refugees. But,
in general, lack of access remains one of the main
challenges facing UNHCR in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I therefore hope that the further
deployment of MONUC in the country will lead to
improved access. Beyond that, of course, we are
looking forward to the too-long delayed inter-
Congolese dialogue finally beginning on 25 February.
Should that political process be successful, a
withdrawal of all foreign forces from the eastern part
of the country may lead to a large-scale return of
refugees from Tanzania and Zambia. So there are
prospects but it is still very difficult.

Africa must remain a top priority. The
international community cannot afford to neglect its
chronic problems of poverty, conflict and instability.
Neither can it afford to ignore the refugees that these
conflicts have generated.

Let me give one example. Western Sahara is an
example of a protracted refugee situation where there
are few immediate prospects for durable solutions and
where humanitarian assistance and protection for the
refugees remains under-funded. It is unacceptable that
in a long-term protracted situation our activities should
be under-funded.

Africa's leaders have committed themselves to
putting the continent back on the path to peace,
political stability, economic prosperity and sustainable
development. The New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) deserves full support.
Currently, the NEPAD initiative contains no specific
provisions for refugees and returnees. Therefore, my
Office is working closely with the African Union to
ensure that this issue is adequately addressed within
the NEPAD framework. I am pleased to note that G-8
countries are supportive of NEPAD, and I hope that
their interest will be reflected also at the International
Conference on Financing for Development, to be held
at Monterrey in March. The integration of refugees and
returnees into the African economy and into the
reconstruction process is key. It should also be of
interest to the Security Council: without such
integration, refugee populations will be a breeding
ground for new problems.

In the Balkans, we are often quick to describe the
problems. But we should not forget that there have also
been some important success stories. Democratic
Governments have replaced authoritarian regimes in
Croatia and in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and
more than 2 million people who were forced to flee
their homes during the wars of the last decade have
returned to their homes. Still, many challenges lie
ahead.

Serbia continues to host 230,000 ethnic Serbs and
members of other minorities who fled Kosovo, as well
as 390,000 refugees from earlier conflicts. All together,
that constitutes the largest single refugee community in
Europe. In spite of all our efforts to facilitate returns,
many of those people are likely to have to stay. The
Government has recognized the problem and is
working on a strategy for the needed local integration,
which of course will succeed only if jobs are created
and public housing is provided. It is good that this is
understood. Thus, we are working on two tracks:
integration for those who cannot return; and very active
action to promote returns where possible. In southern
Serbia, UNHCR has played an active role in preventing
new violence. I refer in particular to the mixed police
force.

In Kosovo itself there has been some limited
progress. In September 2001, we facilitated the first
return of Serbs to Kosovo after more than two years of
displacement. The number is still very small, but the
significance is greater. It sent a political signal that was
important for the peaceful conclusion of the elections
last year. However, the problem is not with the
election; the problem is in the countryside, where local
Government structures still have not sufficiently
changed their attitude. Therefore, there is still
instability. The continued displacement and isolation of
hundreds of thousands of Serbs, Roma and members of
other minority groups remains a real concern. Local
leaders are still failing to make it possible at present
for members of minorities to lead a normal life in the
province.

In the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
my Office continues to work alongside European
monitors and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in
conflict-affected areas to help build confidence
between communities. More than 80 per cent of the
170,000 people who were displaced last year have now
returned to their homes. But unless progress is made in
implementing the Framework Agreement of 13 August
2001, there will be a serious risk of further unrest and
population displacement. The Government's recent
adoption of the law on self-government is an
encouraging step in the right direction, but it needs to
be implemented as soon as possible.

In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia, more refugees and internally displaced persons
have been able to go home to areas controlled by
opposing ethnic factions over the past year. We are
talking about 100,000 in 2001. That is the highest
number to date. Still, significant problems remain. We
are speaking about 800,000 people from these countries
who have not been able to return to their former homes
and who have not yet found a durable solution.
Property repossession is the single most important
issue affecting the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons in both Bosnia and Croatia. UNHCR
is focusing its efforts on ensuring that local authorities
implement property laws and assist with the
reconstruction of properties destroyed by the war.

We thus see that throughout the Balkan region the
needs are shifting from emergency relief to
development. But just at the time when international
financial support is most needed, the amount of money
available appears to be diminishing. It is crucial that
we do not allow donor fatigue to jeopardize the
significant progress which has been made in the
Balkans towards resolving the problem of
displacement. Many refugees and internally displaced
persons find themselves returning to rural areas, where
they face considerable difficulties in their economic
and social reintegration. Unemployment continues to
affect a high proportion of returnees, making job
creation an urgent priority. International financial
support continues to be sorely needed in this process.

Let me move further east from South-East Europe
and say a few words about Georgia. I greatly welcome
the Security Council's recent call on the parties to the
conflict to reduce the level of tension on both sides of
the ceasefire line, building on the protocol presented by
Mr. Dieter Boden, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Georgia. Without a commitment
by the parties to ensure the security of the civilian
population, progress in meeting humanitarian needs
will remain very limited.

We are approaching 20 May 2002, independence
day for East Timor. I am pleased to say that almost
194,000 East Timorese refugees have successfully been
repatriated from West Timor. The challenge now is to
find durable solutions for the remaining 70,000 East
Timorese refugees. There are indications that the
militias in West Timor no longer have such a firm grip
on the camp populations, but there are still a number of
factors inhibiting returns. There is the issue of
Indonesian Government pension payments, and there is
the problem of the lack of adequate housing in East
Timor. These very practical problems have to be solved
to ensure that the remaining 70,000, or at least most of
them, can return home. These problems have to be
addressed urgently, because it is my intention to
complete voluntary repatriation before independence
day. UNHCR is not in a position to stay there month
after month, year after year. Here, independence means
that people can go home.

Let me mention another signal of hope in another
part of the globe: in Mexico. In Mexico, the
Government has in the last few years naturalized more
than 6,000 Guatemalan refugees who chose not to
repatriate, providing a successful example of local
integration. The state government of Quintana Roo has
also recently donated a substantial amount of land for
these former refugees, demonstrating its commitment
to ensuring the sustainability of this local integration.

It would be gratifying to cover the whole world,
but I must come to a close. At the end of 2000, my
Office launched the Global Consultations on
International Protection in order to reflect on how to
revitalize the international framework for refugee
protection set out in the 1951 Refugee Convention and
its 1967 Protocol, and to assist States to address the
current humanitarian challenges. One thing which
became clear was that there is still an enormous
commitment to protect refugees but that there is also a
need for more practical burden-sharing.

The unique consultative process 4 the Global
Consultations - have brought together representatives
of States from all regions of the world,
intergovernmental organizations, non-governmental
organizations and so forth, as well as refugees
themselves. This process will generate an agenda for
protection, which will serve as a guide for years to
come.

As part of this process, on 12 and 13 December
last year a Ministerial Meeting of the States Parties to
the Convention took place in Geneva. It was a rather
special event - the first such gathering of States
parties in 50 years. It was opened by the President of
the General Assembly and attended by 162 States,
including 76 represented at ministerial level. The
gathering adopted a landmark declaration of States
parties, which breaks new ground in a number of areas.
It specifically emphasizes the need to ensure respect
for the rights and freedoms of refugees, for
international cooperation to resolve their plight and for
action to address the causes of refugee movements and
to prevent them from becoming a source of tension
between States.

Let me conclude by making it very clear, in
relation to the Council's responsibilities, that refugees
are the consequences of conflict and persecution and of
a lack of security. But that is not the whole story. As a
consequence of the deficiencies in our political
systems, we need durable solutions for these
refugees - repatriation, local integration or
resettlement. If these solutions are not provided,
refugee camps and populations will become breeding
grounds for despair, and refugees in despair go on the
move. In fact, they fuel human trafficking and criminal
networks. Youngsters will be tempted to become, once
again, partners of agents of violence. The Security
Council, therefore, must also be aware of that.

It is not only a question of prevention in relation
to refugees; we must also find durable solutions and
call on nations to assist in that endeavour. In fact, if
solutions are not provided, we are talking about a
ticking time bomb. When we provide solutions, they
act as some of the most effective instruments to push
back and put a halt to these crimes, which are on the
rise. Solutions are among the most important
instruments to prevent new violence. They are, indeed,
a key factor in achieving the goal of security.

