Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): As this is the first
time that I am taking the floor in the Security Council
this month, I should like to begin by congratulating the
United States on acceding to the Council presidency,
and to thank it for its initiative of organizing this
important debate on children and armed conflict.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2014/339). It is a very important
document, and we hope that this meeting will make it
possible for us to achieve a broader overview in order
to promote efforts to protect children in armed conflict
and the non-participation of children therein.
We believe this meeting is important because it
focuses on issues related to children in armed conflict,
and in particular on the tragic conditions that Arab
countries are enduring, which have increased children's
suffering and the dangers they are facing, whether
through trauma or injuries, in the Arab world today.
This brings to the fore our responsibility to protect
one half of the population of the Arab countries. What
we sow today we will reap in the future. International
law forbids the exploitation of children and their use in
armed conflicts. Despite this reality, many countries,
especially in the Middle East, have resorted to recruiting
children without considering their wishes. They have
been forced to bear arms and become soldiers, as well
as to commit crimes, become a part of the machinery
of war and confront the dangers of facing a warring
opponent.

We should emphasize the promotion of the rights
of the child, particularly in the light of the changes
that have occurred in the Middle East since the end of
2011. At the 2012 Baghdad Summit of the Council of
the League of Arab States, a declaration was made at
a special meeting addressing the issue of a five-year
plan for promoting children's rights around the Arab
world in order to combat the negative effects of conflict
on children. That included follow-up mechanisms and
a revitalization of Arab entities' work in the area, as
well as organizing seminars and workshops aimed at
promoting the exchange of ideas and the role of civil
society organizations in promoting children's rights in
society.

The 2013 Doha Declaration also looked at the issue
of children in the Arab region. The Arab countries
reiterated the importance of cooperation among Arab
States in promoting the rights and well-being ofchildren,
both from a qualitative and quantitative point of view.
It also examined the importance of guaranteeing the
means necessary for providing protection to children
in areas of armed conflict. The Amman Declaration
emphasized for the post-2015 development agenda, in
a document that was adopted by the Ministers of Social
Affairs in 2011 and that provides for the importance of
guaranteeing social protection for children and putting
an end to all forms of violence against them, while
promoting development prospects in the Arab countries
and the post-2015 agenda.

Conditions in the Arab region are dependent
on the implementation of the relevant international
conventions relating to children's rights and the
prohibition of violence against children. We would like
to emphasize some of the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States to protect children, specifically
in the light of current political and social trends in the
Arab world and their impact on children.

First was our cooperation with Ms. Coomaraswamy,
the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. We were
involved in a campaign launched together with
UNICEF and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights as it related to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Through
various activities and working with various entities,
the League discussed the rights of children and the
possibility ofinviting Arab States that were not yet party
to the Optional Protocols to accede to them, particularly
that on the involvement of children in armed conflict. It
is very important that we become party to the Optional
Protocols if we are to protect children and their rights.

Secondly, the League of Arab States is working to
support the efforts of the current Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, to promote the rights
of children affected by armed conflict, to protect them
and to back the Children, Not Soldiers campaign that
she launched at the beginning of this year. Our goal is
to see all children demobilized by 2016 and to end their
recruitment by Government armed forces. We support
the efforts agreed to by Government bodies to deal with
this scourge and create greater cooperation.

We note the issue of violations perpetrated by
non-State armed groups and those non-governmental
armed groups listed in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/339). It is key that cooperation be promoted
between the Office of the Special Representative and
the League of Arab States, which will soon conclude an
agreement on the issue that will be very similar to the
one signed between the Special Representative and the
European Union. The goal is the protection of children's
rights. The League will also be promoting cooperation
with UNICEF in order to organize a conference on
rescuing Syrian children, thereby reaffirming the
importance of protecting children, especially in armed
conflict, and as a response to UNICEF's campaign to
promote the rights of Syrian children.

Lastly, I would like to highlight the fact that more
than 1 million Palestinians in Gaza are suffering from
collective punishment under the Israeli occupation, and
from the blockade that has been in place since 2007,
affecting about 90 per cent of the people living there. In
addition, a very large number of children were wounded
or killed in the most recent war in Gaza, which lasted
some 50 days. The children in Gaza need the efforts
of the international community and international help
in protecting their rights. They also need international
assistance, through the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
other specialized United Nations agencies, in order to
rebuild the Gaza Strip and guarantee their basic rights
and their right to a life of dignity, and to put an end to
the serious violations of the four Geneva conventions
and of international humanitarian law, as well as of
other conventions that were put in place in order to
protect the rights of people under foreign occupation.

