Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin earlier speakers in
welcoming you, Madam, to the Council and in thanking
the delegation of Venezuela for convening this debate. I
wish to also acknowledge the presence ofthe high-level
representatives of Angola and Spain.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We are also pleased to have with us Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon. We listened carefully to his
learned views, which give us much to think about and
reflect upon in this regard.

Malaysia firmly believes that all Member States
must remain united in our collective resolve to uphold
and respect the purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations. Such commitment
is especially urgent and crucial in the light of the
challenges we face in maintaining international peace
and security today. Indeed, this seems a world away
from the challenges faced at the time when the Charter
was first promulgated. Periodic conversations and
assessments such as today's, focusing on our collective
efforts in maintaining international peace and security,
are decidedly a welcome and useful exercise.

In its 70 years of existence, the global multilateral
system underpinned by the United Nations has paved the
way for great strides by Member States in fields such as
socioeconomic development, poverty eradication, the
promotion and protection of human rights, countering
terrorism and violent extremism and addressing
environmental concerns, among others. However,
the evolving nature of the threats and non-traditional
security challenges faced by the United Nations, and
particularly the Council, today threatens to undermine
many of the gains achieved. Today the prospect of
such threats and conflicts spilling over well beyond
local or domestic contexts are all too real. The threats
posed by the Ebola and Zika viruses, the scourge of
terrorism, the heinous crime of the trafficking and
smuggling of migrants, and the massive deplacement of
whole populations fleeing conflict are among the key
challenges that the international faces today.

At the same time, challenges of a more traditional
nature remain. The nuclear test detonation and ballistic
satellite launch by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea just some days ago shocked not only the
North-East Asian region, but the entire world. We
recall that upon its admission to the United Nations on
17 September 1991, the delegation of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, led by First Vice Foreign
Minister Kang Sok-ju, stated that

"the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, as a
State Member of the United Nations, will remain
faithful to the purposes and principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter" (A/46/PVI, p33).

It is our fervent hope that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea will renew and honour that
commitment. We hope that it will also consider
returning to peaceful negotiations with a view to
ensuring peace, security and stability in the Korean
peninsula and beyond.

Since its very existence, the United Nations has
contended with the question ofPalestine and the struggle
ofthe Palestinian people for their self-determination. To
date, the Security Council's approach to this issue stands
out as an example of selective inaction in implementing
the purposes and principles of the Charter. As long
as the situation of the occupied Palestinian territories
remains unresolved, the United Nations will continue
to be seen as lacking the necessary political will to
uphold the Charter or, at the very least, stand accused
of selectively applying it. In this context, the Council
bears a significant responsibility. It cannot continue
to be oblivious to the haunting cries of the Palestinian
subjugated to increasing dehumanization policies. The
longer that human rights and the rule of law are denied
to the Palestinians, the more we are collectively guilty
of not fully respecting and upholding the Charter.
Failure to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
exacerbates radicalism and fuels violent extremism,
the consequences of which are plain for all to see in
the increasingly frequent terrorist attacks targeting
civilians, including in capitals around the world.

I wish to recall the words of former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Mohammed
Zahnoun on Somalia, who in 1992 observed,

"When you drop a vase and it breaks into
three pieces, you take the pieces and put them back
together. But what do you when the vase shatters
into a thousand pieces?"
Nearly a quarter century later, such words also
aptly describe the conflagration in Syria, which
threatens to consume not only itself, but possibly
even its neighbours, should it deteriorate further. In
welcoming the agreement reached by the principals
of the International Syria Support Group in Munich
several days ago on a nationwide ceasefire, we call
on all parties to respect and implement the ceasefire
without preconditions. Pending the ceasefire, we further
call on them to ensure unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the country. The Syrian authorities must live
up to their international obligations and demonstrate
their respect for the Charter's humanitarian imperative
in this regard.

At the other end of the Middle East, the outlook
for the situation in Yemen seems equally bleak, with
no end in sight to the acute suffering of the civilian
population, who are besieged on all sides. We call on
the parties to the conflict to reinvigorate efforts to
resume negotiations for a peaceful settlement to the
conflict. Over in Africa, Malaysia is encouraged by,
among other things, the steady progress in Somalia,
supported by its international partners, in progressively
restoring normalcy to the country. We are also
encouraged by the collective resolve of the countries of
the region to make contributions to the Multinational
Joint Task Force, aimed at countering Boko Haram. The
collective actions of those countries, coupled with the
support of the international community, stand out as an
affirmation of Charter principles, including those laid
down in Chapter VIII.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore Malaysia's
firm belief that the Charter is a living document. We,
the Member States, breathe life into it through our
collective and ongoing efforts to respect and uphold its
principles and purposes. We must continue to live by
its ideals.

