Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to wish you and the delegation of
your friendly country every success. I would also like
to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock and Mr. Martin Griffiths
for their briefings.

The Yemeni Government has, by various ways and
means, tried to achieve sustainable peace and to put an
end to the suffering of the Yemeni people as a result of
the unjust war waged by the armed Houthi militias. We
have shown maximum flexibility in the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement and accepted all proposals
offered by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Griffiths, to reach an inclusive political
solution to the conflict in Yemen based on the three

agreed benchmarks: the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, especially
resolution 2216 (2015).

However, the Houthi militias thrive on war and
instability, adopting the same approach as Iran, which
supports them and is the main driver of instability in
Yemen and the region.

The Yemeni Government emphasizes the
importance of the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement, which is a positive step towards
comprehensive and sustainable peace and ending the
suffering of our Yemeni people. The Government has
expressed its full commitment to the implementation
of the agreement and underscored the importance of
the issues of security and local authority, which are
key to making progress in the implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement.

At the same time, we appreciate the tireless efforts
of Lieutenant General Abhijit Guha, Head of the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
and Chair of the Redeployment Coordination Committee
(RCC), to establish ceasefire and calm in Al-Hudaydah
governorate and to deploy observers on the front lines
and checkpoints, in accordance with the agreement
reached at the sixth joint meeting of the RCC. The
Governmental panel has reported to him that it is ready
to deploy observers starting the week following that
meeting, given its importance in ensuring continued
de-escalation and preventing violations, as well as in
facilitating redeployment and humanitarian assistance.

The Yemeni Government reiterates that all political
consultations on the comprehensive dispute settlement
hinge on the implementation of the Stockholm
Agreement. The Council and the international
community should work towards that end, as those
who failed to observe previous agreements will never
comply with them this time.

The Yemeni Government commends and highly
values the efforts made by our brothers in the Kingdom
ofSaudi Arabia to ensure the success ofthe Jeddah talks,
which should eventually restore the presence of the State
and all of its institutions to the temporary capital, Aden,
and to promote the unification of security and military
systems, ultimately preserving the security, stability,
unity and territorial integrity of Yemen and leading to
joint efforts to achieve the ultimate goal of putting an
end to the coup of Houthi armed militias, countering
Iran's influence in Yemen and the region and restoring
and bolstering the kidnapped State institutions.

Exploiting the Yemeni people as a means of
achieving political gains is unacceptable and totally
rejected. The Houthi militias continue to reject the
proposal to reopen the Sana'a airport for domestic
flights and to facilitate the travel of citizens who must
suffer and struggle through long hours of journeying
by land. The Yemeni Government, on the direction of
the President of the Republic of Yemen, His Excellency
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi, during the Stockholm
consultations round and thereafter, has proposed an
initiative to reopen the Sana'a airport. The Government
has made concessions in order to mitigate the suffering
of Yemeni citizens by resuming domestic flights,
and taken all necessary measures to also address any
potential security threats, since international flights
cannot be resumed as long as the airport is controlled
by Houthi militias.

The Yemeni Government renews its commitment
to implementing the agreement on the exchange of
prisoners, detainees, abductees and those forcibly
disappeared in the prisons of the militias, in accordance
with the all-for-all principle agreed in Stockholm and
upon the instructions of the President of the Republic.
The Houthis have released a number of civilians, but
that is not sufficient. That is why we reiterate that the
release of prisoners and detainees pursuant to the all-
for-all principle is a purely humanitarian issue that
should not be subject to considerations of political
advantage. In the same vein, we stress the importance
of lifting the unfair blockade imposed by the Houthi
militias on Taiz and of putting an end to the suffering
of its people.

The Yemeni Government continues to take
the necessary economic measures to support the
national currency and ensure economic stability,
as humanitarian relief alone cannot resolve the
humanitarian crisis, despite the great concern shown by
the international community regarding Decree 75, on
fuel imports. Today, after almost a year, we recognize
the effectiveness of that Decree, as it has relaunched
the financial cycle through the control of monitored
Yemeni and international banks. That has led to the
improvement and stabilization of the national currency
without creating any fuel shortages in local markets.

Similarly, Decree 49 is aimed at enhancing State
functions and responsibilities to increase revenues
and respond to the needs of the Yemeni citizens in all
governorates. Since it started to implement the Decree
on 8 August, the Government has increased revenues in
the liberated areas without any significant increase in
fuel prices or causing crises. In fact, private businesses
have expressed their readiness to comply with the
provisions of the Decree were it not for the pressure of
Houthi militias exerted against them. The Government
has expressed its readiness to transfer all types of fuel
to all areas, including those under the control of the
Houthi militias, as necessary and for lower prices than
those imposed by the militias. The United Nations
would be responsible for controlling the customs and
tax revenues due on those oil derivatives. Owners of
oil tankers will be obliged to deposit oil revenues at
the Al-Hudaydah branch of the Central Bank while
ensuring that they will not be withdrawn or used by the
militias. They will be used only to pay the salaries of
civil servants. Militias may not impose taxes on traders
or collect other fees, in order to ensure that they do not
affect market fuel prices. As Mr. Lowcock mentioned
earlier, the Yemeni Government has allowed 10 ships
access to Al-Hudaydah port in order to unload their oil
contents, in accordance with Decree 75.

Since November 2018 the Yemeni Government has
succeeded in paying 63 per cent of its civil servants,
nearly 82,000 of whom live in Houthi-controlled
areas, as well as more than 123,000 retirees who also
reside in those areas. The Government emphasizes that
customs and tax revenues on fuel will help to continue
funding those salaries, as well as those of civil servants
in other sectors. Despite the stability of the national
currency and its positive impact at the economic and
humanitarian levels, further measures must be taken
in cooperation with the international community to
increase the foreign currency reserves at the Central
Bank and fill the funding gap in order to pay salaries.
The Yemeni Government looks forward to cooperating
with our brothers, donor friends and development
partners to overcome our economic, humanitarian and
development challenges and begin the preparations for
reconstruction and the economic recovery phase, while
charting a brighter future for Yemen and Yemenis in
which peace prevails.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
brotherly and friendly countries and the international
donor organizations that have supported us in funding
the 2019 humanitarian response plan for Yemen. We
particularly want to thank the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, the State of Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates,
the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, the
European Union and China.

The Yemeni Government condemns the obstruction
of the work of the international organizations in
Yemen by the Houthi militias, who recently expelled
the representative of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, confiscated his
travel permit and ultimately forced him to leave Sana'a.
Such practices and actions demonstrate to the world the
role that these militias play in undermining the work
of such organizations. We also call on the international
community and the United Nations to condemn in the
strongest terms all such practices and Violations, whose
sole aim is to hinder access to humanitarian aid and
intimidate humanitarian workers in areas that continue
to languish under the control of the terrorist militias.
We also call for taking strict measures to ensure the
inviolability, neutrality and safety of the personnel of
international organizations and agencies in Yemen.

In that regard, we would be remiss if we did not
bring up the situation concerning the FSO SAFER
oil tanker and the risk that we run should its current
technical status continue without an evaluation. We
reiterate our call to the international community and
the Security Council to continue to exert pressure on
the Houthi militias without delay in order to prevent
a potentially devastating environmental disaster that
according to United Nations reports would represent
four times the amount of oil released from the Exxon
Valdez tanker in 1989.

In conclusion, the Yemeni State will eventually
return, and every manifestation of the coup, the
insurgency and the chaos will disappear from every
square inch of our beloved land. The Yemeni people
will enjoy a safe, stable and cherished homeland in
a just federal State, representing their aspirations,
safeguarding their rights to partnership, development
and a decent life while glorifying the present and future
of Yemen, founded on the civilization of a proud and
dignified people and a great human history.

