Ms. Beckles (Trinidad and Tobago): Allow me to
first congratulate Equatorial Guinea on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and to
commend you, Sir, for your leadership of this initiative
to address transnational crime at sea as a threat to
international peace and development. Trinidad and
Tobago appreciates the opportunity to address the
Council, as we View today's debate as a means to
further strengthen multilateralism, which is a most
crucial vehicle for resolving the peace and security
challenges we face.

Allow me to also express my delegation's
appreciation to Mr. Yury Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga,
Executive Secretary of the Gulf of Guinea Commission,
for their informative briefings, which allow us to
frame our discussion around organized crime at sea
as a multifaceted problem involving many criminal
activities and many practical difficulties for States, as
well as regional and international bodies.

Transnational organized crime and its global
networks pose a daunting challenge to the security
of all States. It attacks the functioning of State
institutions, intensifies vulnerabilities to governance,
fosters instability and, in doing so, undermines
the fundamental premise of our democracy, rule of
law, respect for human rights and efforts towards
sustainable development.

Trinidad and Tobago are the southernmost islands
of the Lesser Antilles and located just 11 kilometres
off the South American continent. As a small island
developing State, Trinidad and Tobago comprises an
area of only 4,828 square miles. Yet, our marine space
is 15 times larger than our land. That geographical
location, large marine space and porous borders
have rendered Trinidad and Tobago an easy conduit
for the transhipment between the major sources and
destinations of illicit drugs and the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons, often trafficked through
maritime domains.

Trafficking in illicit drugs and the illegal trade
in small arms and ammunition wreak havoc on the
economic, social and development fabric of Trinidad
and Tobago and the wider Caribbean. Furthermore,
we must also remain vigilant to ensure that crimes
such as piracy, human trafficking, illegal fishing,
trafficking in cultural property, wildlife smuggling and
pollution of the marine environment are also combated
and prosecuted wherever they occur. In doing so,
however, we are compelled to divert resources from
vital development activities, such as education, health
care and infrastructure development. Therefore, such
security challenges place an added burden on the
small and vulnerable societies ofisland States, such as
Trinidad and Tobago.

Notwithstanding that challenge, Mr. President, you
may rest assured that the Government of Trinidad and
Tobago will not be a bystander to these destabilizing
pressures. Rather, we accept our responsibility to
meet our obligations, both domestic and international,
and will continue to join multilateral efforts aimed at
combating threats to peace and security.

The effective repression of transnational organized
crime at sea requires a robust system of adequate and
precise bilateral and multilateral instruments. Given
the destructive impact of illegal small arms and light
weapons in our communities, Trinidad and Tobago
reaffirms its belief that the Arms Trade Treaty, if
implemented in good faith, could significantly reduce
human suffering caused by the illegal and irresponsible
transfer of arms and improve regional security
and stability.

Furthermore, as a State party to the United Nations
Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and its
protocols, as well as the United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, Trinidad and Tobago has adopted
and continues to implement a multifaceted approach to
tackling the issue, relying not only on law enforcement
but also on strategic interventions through cooperation
with regional and international partners, including the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Peace, Disarmament and
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean.

In keeping with the CARICOM. Strategic Plan
for 2015-2019, Trinidad and Tobago has continued its
unwavering efforts to counter transnational organized
crime and its illegal activities. Through its support
of the CARICOM. Implementation Agency for Crime
and Security, the region is focusing on deepening its
crime prevention initiatives, facilitating justice reform,
strengthening regional security systems and enhancing
maritime and airspace awareness.

Trinidad and Tobago is also working closely
with its development partners in the areas of
information-sharing, capacity-building and technical
assistance. Transnational crime is a common and
shared responsibility and, therefore, collaborative
partnerships will continue to support efforts to
strategically disrupt transnational crime and bolster the
capacity of developing countries to enhance the safety
of their citizens and the security of their borders, while
reducing the negative impact of crime at sea, as well as
on land.

Given what I have said, the challenge of transnational

organized crime at sea has to be addressed on different
fronts in a coordinated manner. With regard to the legal
framework, it is important to identify gaps that exist and
promote the ratification of existing multilateral treaties
concerning transnational crime and the harmonization
of domestic legislation to ensure that States parties
can fully and effectively assume their responsibilities
and obligations under international law. Further, there
is a need for a deeper analysis and understanding of
this problem and its impact on small island developing
States, given the acute vulnerabilities that countries
such as my own face.

In order to achieve that, we must focus on capacity-
building for enforcement and prosecution with regard to
international law, as well as on developing partnerships
for best practices in arresting and detaining suspected
offenders and protecting victims. As stated before,
that will require domestic, inter-agency, regional and
international intelligence and information-sharing. In
that regard, Trinidad and Tobago underscores the need
for regional and international agencies and bodies,
including UNODC, to be provided with adequate,
predictable and reliable resources to enable them to
effectively undertake activities within their mandates.

Lastly, women and girls remain most vulnerable
to migrant smuggling and human trafficking through
maritime channels. Therefore, it is imperative that
a gender perspective be mainstreamed into efforts
to address transnational crime at sea in ways that
foster the empowerment of women and place them in
decision-making processes for the maintenance of
peace and security. It is in that conviction that Trinidad
and Tobago first introduced the resolution on women,
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control in
2010 (resolution 65/69), as a means to promote the
crucial role of women in countering crime and violence.
Gender is an undeniable factor in peace and security.

In conclusion, Trinidad and Tobago constantly
strives to devise solutions to peace and security
challenges, including transnational organized crime
at sea. We remain committed to working with our
international partners and will continue to press for
more effective measures to curb the flow of organized
criminal activity within the Caribbean with a View
to achieving long-lasting peace and the safety of
our societies.

