The President: I acknowledge the presence in the
Chamber ofthe representatives ofthose countries elected
to serve as Security Council members for the period
2015-2016: Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand, Spain
and Venezuela, who commence formally observing
Council proceedings from today in preparation for their
membership.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The role of policing in peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding

Letter dated 4 November 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Australia
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/788)

The President: I would like to warmly welcome the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Police Adviser, the Heads of police
components and the other representatives.

I am very pleased that the Council is convening this
briefing from Heads of police components - the first-
ever dedicated Council meeting on policing issues.
The number of police deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
has increased dramatically in recent times, and policing-
related tasks in mission mandates have become more
complex. It is appropriate that the Council consider in
a holistic way the increasingly important role that the
United Nations work on policing plays in the restoration
and maintenance of international peace and security.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Greg Hinds, Police Commissioner of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia; Mr. Fred Yiga,
Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan; and Mr. Luis Miguel Carrilho; Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I give the floor to Mr. Ladsous:

