The President: In accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite The Honourable
Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola and current Chairman of the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement; Mr.
Terence Sinunguruza, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Burundi; Mr. Leonard She Okitundu,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
The Honourable Tuliameni Kalomoh, Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Information and Broadcasting of
Namibia; Mr. Patrick Mazimhaka, Special Envoy of the
President of Rwanda; The Honourable James
Wapakhabulo, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Uganda; The Honourable Keli S.
Walubita, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia; and
The Honourable Stanislaus I.G. Mudenge, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Zimbabwe, to take seats at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Miranda
(Angola), Mr. Sinungaraza (Burundi), Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo),
Mr. Kalomoh (Namibia), Mr. Mazimhaka
(Rwanda), Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda), Mr.
Walabita (Zambia) and Mr. Madenge (Zimbabwe)
took seats at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr.
Amos Namanga Ngongi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Mr. Amadou Kebe, Permanent Observer of
the Organization of African Unity/African Union, to
take seats at the Council table. I invite Mr. Archibald
M. Mogwe, representative of the facilitator for the
inter-Congolese dialogue, to take a seat at the side of
the Council Chamber. I invite Mr. Olivier Kamitatu,
Secretary-General of the Movement for the Liberation
of the Congo (MLC); Mr. Azarias Ruberwa, Secretary-
General of the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD- Goma); and Mr. Pashi-Claver, representative of the
Congolese Rally for Democracy-Kisangani (RCD-K),
to take seats at the Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Kofi Annan.


