Mr. Seger (spoke in French): Let me, at the outset,
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, who has just spoken, for his very
comprehensive briefing and his personal commitment
to the cause of Burundi. We had the pleasure to cross
paths in Bujumbura in mid-December 2014 and to
jointly attend several meetings, including the closing
ceremony for the United Nations Office in Burundi
(BNUB), on 12 December, which he mentioned. Also,
Mr. Feltman's participation in the round-table meeting
between the Government and its main international
partners on 11 and 12 December was an important
factor for its success.

Let me also welcome the presence of the Burundian
representative and my dear friend, His Excellency
Mr. Albert Shingiro, who was also in Burundi during
my trip and whose personal engagement was decisive
for the adoption of the joint declaration in Bujumbura.

Since today's briefing is the last one on BNUB,
I would like to join with others in expressing my
gratitude to the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, my dear friend Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, and his team for their outstanding efforts
for the Burundian nation and for our partnership in
this common endeavour. However, despite BNUB's
departure - and I am sure Parfait would concur with
me on this - it is not yet time to look to the past. On the
contrary, our focus should be on the future. The stakes
are too high, especially in the context of the electoral
process, to allow us to lower our guard.

In my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration, I visited Burundi from 8 to 12 December
2014 together with the Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco. Since I already transmitted a detailed report
to the Council, which was attached to my letter dated
30 December 2014 (S/2014/954), I will address only the
most important aspect, the round-table meeting.

I was heartened by the discussions we had during
the two-day event on important issues such as the
follow-up to the mutual commitments taken in Geneva
in 2012, the implications of BNUB's drawdown on the
wider international cooperation between Burundi and
its partners, and the future prospects for the partnership,
assuming that the elections will be free, transparent,

credible, inclusive and peaceful. In that regard, I
especially welcome President Nkurunziza's personal
commitment to free, inclusive and peaceful elections,
as expressed at the opening of the round-table meeting.
The joint communique adopted at the end of the round
table is a very promising step, and it is my hope that
going forward it will serve as a guiding document for
all of us. I appeal both to the Government of Burundi
and to international partners to fully implement the
political commitments made in the joint communique.
Let me now turn to three main points that, in my
view, merit particular attention from the Council: first,
the current security situation; secondly, the United
Nations presence on the ground; and, thirdly, the future
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

I fully share the concerns expressed by Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman regarding the recent
acts of violence in the provinces of Cibitoke and Ruyigi,
which, unfortunately, resulted in a significant number
ofvictims. Those recent attacks, as well as all recourse
to violent means for political ends, must be firmly
condemned. Given that uncertainties persist regarding
the identity of the armed groups and the exact nature of
the hostilities, I strongly recommend that the competent
national authorities carry out investigations into the
events in a quick and impartial manner. As long as the
facts have not been established, rumours will spread
and aggravate the already tense political environment
in the run-up to the elections. I am convinced that an
impartial investigation could serve as a much-needed
confidence-building measure.

In the same vein, I also strongly condemn the attack
on 4 January by unidentified assailants on supporters of
the ruling party, the Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratie-Forces pour la defense de la democratie
(CNDD-FDD), near the border with Tanzania, that
claimed three lives. Those incidents have shown once
again that despite BNUB'S drawdown, we - and here
I include the Council - must remain vigilant. The
electoral phase is getting into full swing and is creating
tensions that need be carefully managed. We would be
ill-advised to be lulled into complacency at this point.

It goes without saying that violence, by whomsoever
committed, should have no place in Burundi. In the
context of the electoral process, the only viable option
for all Burundian stakeholders is the path of dialogue,
based on the spirit of Arusha. This cannot be stressed
enough. Only a truly inclusive political dialogue and an
open political space that ensures the protection of all
public liberties and rights for all can lay the groundwork
for genuinely free, fair, peaceful and credible elections.

Let me now turn to my second point. The presence
of the United Nations on the ground is undergoing
substantial changes. The United Nations country team,
headed by the Resident Coordinator; the new electoral
mission, the United Nations Electoral Observer
Mission in Burundi (MENUB); and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights must work
hand in hand to ensure maximum impact. Also, the
Government must continue to cooperate with the entire
United Nations family constructively and in good faith.
Following BNUB's drawdown, the electoral
mission MENUB was officially inaugurated at a
ceremony in Bujumbura on Monday, 12 January, as the
Assistant Secretary-General noted. I welcome today's
signing of the status-of-mission agreement, which
forms the basis for constructive cooperation between
the Burundian Government and MENUB. I trust that
MENUB will now be able to play the role with which
it has been entrusted by the Security Council, and as
requested by the Burundian Government, including
engaging with all political actors in Burundi. We had
the pleasure to welcome the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General and Head of MENUB, Mr. Cassam
Uteem, at a Steering Group meeting of the Burundi
configuration on 22 December, and I very much look
forward to closely cooperating with him and his team
throughout the electoral period.

With BNUB's mandate at an end, the United Nations
country team, headed by the Resident Coordinator, now
leads the United Nations presence on the ground. In a
bilateral meeting with UNDP Administrator Ms. Helen
Clark last week, assured me that her office is well aware
of, and taking the measures necessary to accommodate,
the specific needs resulting from the current political
context in view of the upcoming elections, including
the appointment of the new Resident Coordinator, who,
I have been told, has been selected and has the right
profile. Ms. Clark also promisedto accelerate the process
of translating the latest grant of the Peacebuilding Fund
(PBF), totaling $11.65 million, into impactful projects
in order to support Burundi's peaceful transition.

One of the PBF projects that is ready for
implementation is the establishment of a network of
human rights defenders to be deployed throughout the
country. The project was elaborated over the past nine
months in agreement and in close cooperation with
Burundi. That observation network would be a very
welcome addition to the measures taken to protect
and promote the full respect of human rights and
fundamental freedoms during the electoral period. As
Burundi recently reiterated its commitment to pursue
the promotion of all public freedoms and to ensure the
protection of all human rights defenders in the round-
table communique of 12 December 2014, I urge all
parties involved to redouble their efforts so as to ensure
the prompt deployment of the network.

I was also informed that there are important
outstanding staffing needs within the United Nations
country team, particularly in the Resident Coordinator's
office. Given the importance of a well-functioning
country team, I strongly encourage Member States to
consider closing the capacity gaps by seconding staff
to the office.

Similarly, the OHCHR bureau is in dire need of
financial stability and operational predictability, and
has for this reason already lost experienced staff in
Burundi. Human rights support and monitoring remain
as important as ever in Burundi, and I therefore urge
Member States to contribute the necessary financial
resources to the OHCHR, to wit, $2.2 million per year.
I thank the Peacebuilding Fund and Germany for their
substantial support in this regard and hope that others
will follow suit as soon as possible.

My third and last point pertains to the future of
the PBC. As indicated in my report, my designated
successor as Permanent Representative, Ambassador
Jurg Lauber, joined me on my last trip to Burundi,
primarily to show Switzerland's commitment to carry
on with the mandate in case Burundi wishes to remain
on the PBC's agenda. We specifically raised this issue
at our meeting with the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Laurent Kavakure; of course, the question of
whether Burundi wants to carry on with the PBC must
first and foremost be answered by the Government. I
see merit in continuing the engagement beyond this
year's elections, for two reasons in particular.

First, the PBC would ensure an element of continuity
in the accompaniment of the country. BNUB is already
gone, and MENUB's mandate will also expire in the
aftermath of the elections. The PBC can help smooth
the effects of this transition by remaining engaged
through its three main pillars: political support,
resource mobilization and the promotion of coherence
in international assistance.

Secondly, and depending on the success of the
electoral process, the PBC could in future focus even
more on socioeconomic development. Here I fully agree
with the Assistant Secretary-General that the economic
aspect is very important. The current four-year poverty
reduction strategy paper will expire in 2016, and,
consequently, a new one will have to be elaborated
and promoted in order to attract investment. Given
the Burundi configuration's ability to convene and
the experience it gained in the context of the Geneva
process, it could play an important role in supporting
the dialogue on the second poverty reduction strategy
paper development strategy and in supporting its
implementation.

The PBC could also look into the possibility of
creating an international forum aimed at attracting
private investment in Burundi. I have already raised this
issue with the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
to the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Said Djinnit, and could
further explore it with the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. Continuing close cooperation with
international financial institutions would certainly
remain a pillar for future Peacebuilding Commission
engagement. In that regard, I warmly welcome the
World Bank decision, taken 13 January during a Board
of Directors meeting convened by the Swiss Executive
Director, to allocate $25 million to support economic
reform and to remain attentive to the situation in
Burundi.

Ultimately, the decision whether or not to continue
the involvement of the Peacebuilding Commission
will have to be taken by Burundi itself following
discussion within the configuration. To that end, I am
currently preparing a working document to guide our
consideration of the matter.

In the meantime, I will continue to fully discharge
my duties as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission throughout the electoral
process. I intend to visit the country two more times,
in April and June/July, before my own departure. As
per usual practice, I will continue to keep the Council
informed on the activities of the configuration, and on
my trips in particular, knowing that the Council will
remain firmly engaged in Burundi throughout the
crucial electoral period.

