Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your able stewardship of the
Council during the month of August. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General
and the relevant Member States for their involvement
and engagement and for their continuing commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). I
would also like to express appreciation to the troop-
contributing countries, the Commander of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), the
Strategic Cell in New York and the troops on the
ground. Israel appreciates the difficulty of their task
and values their dedication. They have been fulfilling
their mission serving the values of peacekeeping,
which has been characterized by growing complexity
and challenges, especially over the past year.

Israel welcomes the extension of UNIFIL's
mandate for another year. UNIFIL plays an important
role in south Lebanon, with the main task of assisting
in the establishment, between the Blue Line and the
Litani River, of an area free of all armed personnel,
assets and weapons other than those of the Government
of Lebanon and UNIFIL.

It has been more than two years since the
adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), and the situation in
Lebanon appears to be one of ongoing concern. Today,
more than ever before, we are witnessing challenges to
UNIFIL's activities and mandate. The presence and
massive redeployment of armed Hizbullah elements
and their acquisition of capabilities both north and
south of the Litani River, along with the continuous
transfer of weapons from Iran and Syria to Hizbullah,
are blatant violations of resolution 1701 (2006) and
08-49182
other relevant Security Council resolutions. In that
context, let me refer members to the first report of the
Lebanon Independent Border Assessment Team
(LIBAT), which speaks for itself. I am confident that
LIBAT's second report, which is expected shortly, will
only strengthen the findings of its predecessor.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2008/425)
highlights the challenges faced by UNIFIL. The report
clearly identifies several incidents in which hostile
groups equipped with unauthorized arms observed and
monitored UNIFIL's activities and impeded its freedom
of movement. Those incidents, which are only part of a
larger phenomenon, not only represent ongoing
violations of resolution 1701 (2006), but also constitute
a danger to the stability in our region. In that regard,
they also pose a threat to the safety of UNIFIL's
personnel.

In that light, Israel expects UNIFIL, under its
renewed mandate, to exert its authority to take all
necessary action in areas where its forces are deployed,
to ensure that its area of operations is not utilized for
hostile activities of any kind and to resist attempts to
prevent it from discharging its mandate. As we all see,
that is indeed a great challenge.

The new policy guidelines of the Lebanese
Government further complicate, inter alia, the efforts
of UNIFIL to fulfil its mandate. That development
contradicts the core elements of resolution 1701
(2006). Further, it raises concerns as to the
commitment of the Lebanese Government to extend,
under resolution 1701 (2006), its authority over all of
its territory through its own legitimate armed forces so
that there will be no weapons present without the
consent of the Government of Lebanon and no
authority other than that of the Government of
Lebanon. Instead of encouraging one of the main
elements of resolution 1701 (2006) - the disarmament
of all armed groups in Lebanon - the new guidelines,
in effect, support Hizbullah's actions. That should be
of major concern to all.

Let me stress once again Israel's appreciation to
the international community for its continued
engagement through the present resolution and for the
work of UNIFIL. Israel attributes great importance to
the cooperation between UNIFIL and the concerned
parties, including the cooperation carried out through
the tripartite meetings. For its part, Israel remains
08-49182
committed to cooperating with the Security Council,
the Secretary-General, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and UNIFIL on the ground in the fulfilment
of resolution 1701 (2006), other relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding Lebanon and this
important resolution.

