Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The effective implementation of the decisions
ofthe Security Council and its resolution 2118 (2013), on
the destruction of Syria's chemical arsenal - adopted
at the initiative of Russia and the United States of
America - is one of the Council's most significant
successes and reaffirms the possibility of engaging in
productive joint work on the most urgent problems of
our time.

Against that backdrop, the Council could not
ignore reports of the alleged use in Syria of toxic
chemicals as chemical weapons. In the spring of
2014, under the auspices of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the Fact-
Finding Mission in Syria began its work, which, with
a great deal of certainty, confirmed the use of chlorine
as a weapon in several populated areas of Syria. The
Russian Federation decisively condemns such acts. We
believe that they are unacceptable and run counter to
the Chemical Weapons Convention.

At the same time, the question ofwho used chlorine
remains unanswered, partly because the existing
mechanisms of the United Nations and the OPCW
are not mandated to identify those participating in
such acts. Moreover, we have heard many politicized
statements in that regard, which have clearly been
meant as propaganda. It was necessary to close that
gap, as was done with the adoption of resolution 2235
(2015) today, creating the preconditions for the launch
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the United
Nations and the OPCW.

We believe that today's decision is above all
preventive, and lays the foundations for ending any
use of toxic chemicals as weapons in Syria. We believe
that the Mechanism will work impartially, objectively
and professionally, as guaranteed by the successful
experience of the Secretary-General and the OPCW
Director-General in destroying Syria's chemical
arsenal, as well as the successful cooperation of the
United Nations and the OPCW in the framework of their
joint mission, within which their responsibilities had
been clearly delineated. We believe that this principle
should guide the further work of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism.

Taking into account the complex political and
military situation in Syria, we believe that it will
be extremely important for the Joint Investigative
Mechanism to develop appropriate relationships within
the country, without which the Mechanism will be
unable to work in the field. We are convinced that
Damascus, as it has done in the past - as repeatedly
confirmed in the documents of the OPCW and the
United Nations - will extend the necessary assistance
to the Joint Investigative Mechanism and the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission to establish evidence of potential
use of chlorine as a chemical weapon. We expect the
opposition to adopt that approach.

In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that any effort
in the Syrian issue must be in line with the logic of
assisting the search for a political solution to the
conflict and should not further antagonize the parties.
The priorities continue to include the fight against
terrorism and in finding a political solution to the crisis
in Syria.

