Mr. Vukasinovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agrement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we
have taken note of his forty-ninth report (S/2016/395, annex), covering the period from 22 October 2015 to
15 April 2016.

During the reporting period, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continued its steady work on implementing
its socioeconomic reforms. Bosnia and Herzegovina's
authorities at all levels have coordinated their efforts
in ensuring that all concrete measures necessary
to successful reforms are put in place. There is a
common understanding that refining the legal and
fiscal framework and creating an environment more
attractive to investment is essential to economic growth
and creating new jobs.

Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully chaired the
Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe, the
largest and oldest European political organization,
comprising 47 member States. During our Chairmanship,
we successfully accomplished all our priorities and
coordinated the response of the Council of Europe
to the refugee crisis at its peak. Furthermore, the
chairmanship of Bosnia and Herzegovina facilitated
the process of opening for signature the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention for the
Prevention of Terrorism, which focuses on the problem
of the foreign fighters.

Following the significant progress made on the
implementation of the reform agenda, Bosnia and
Herzegovina submitted its application for membership
to the European Union on 15 February. The submission
of the application of Bosnia and Herzegovina was a
concrete result of the new approach of the European
Union towards Bosnia and Herzegovina. We thank
the European Union and its member States for their
strong support for Bosnia and Herzegovina's European
perspective. On its part, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to work to implement its reforms, improve
the economy, and strengthen the rule of law and good
governance.

The economic and fiscal situation ofthe country has
been under influence of the global economic slowdown.
However, in the first three quarters of 2015 industrial
production increased by 2.5 per cent and the inflation
rate stood at 0.8 per cent, which means that consumer
prices fell slightly in comparison to the previous year.

The advancement of friendly and constructive
cooperation among the countries of the region in areas
of mutual interest is one of main priorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to
pay special attention to strengthening cooperation with
countries of the region. There is a common agreement
among Western Balkan States that collaboration in the
field of transportation and energy is the most important
area for economic growth.

The International Economic Fair Mostar 2016,
held from 12 to 16 April, , was a great opportunity to
further bolster regional cooperation. During that event,
members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
held a number of bilateral meetings with regional
leaders and leaders of neighbouring States, including
the President of Croatia, the President of Montenegro,
the Prime Minster of Serbia, the President of Slovakia
and the Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey.

Bosnia and Herzegovina stands committed to fully
cooperating with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, as well as to continue processing
war crimes before domestic courts. We reiterate that
fighting impunity at the local level is vital to Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a complex and multinational State.
In that regard, implementing the national strategy for
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origins of perpetrators or victims, is essential
to reconciliation and long-term stability.

Terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism
constitute one of the main security challenges at
the global, regional and national levels. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in accordance with the provisions of its
amended penal code, continues to process individuals
involved in fighting on behalf of terrorist and
paramilitary organizations, as well as those facilitating
the recruitment of terrorist fighters.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's judicial and security
institutions continue to implement our strategy for
preventing and combating terrorism. The strategy,
alongside security measures, includes preventive
activities for deradicalization undertaken by national
stakeholders, including religious communities,
educational institutions, civil society organizations
and media. We would also like to underline that
during the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina
made significant progress in combating organized
crime, corruption and money-laundering. Bosnia and
Herzegovina, supported by the European Union, has
introduced a regional initiative on the prevention of
terrorism and the illicit arms trade. The main goal of
the initiative is to establish a database of individuals
who constitute a security threat, as well as a regional
network for the prevention of arms smuggling from the
countries of the Western Balkans.

It is evident that flows of refugees and migrants
through the Balkans will continue to pose significant
challenges to the States of the region and their
instituions. Thus far, Bosnia and Herzegovina has not
been under pressure from the significant movement of
migrants through its territory. Nevertheless, Bosnia
and Herzegovina's institutions have undertaken a set of
comprehensive measures, including in the humanitarian
and security fields, in the event of a massive influx
of refugees. We believe that only extensive and
coordinated actions at the global level to address the
underlying causes of migration in countries of origin
can serve to bring about a satisfactory solution to the
migrant crisis.

Lastly, I wish to express the unwavering
commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina's authorities
to continue to work steadily towards building a better
future for its citizens. I would also like to thank our
international partners for their continued support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, a country that has travelled a
long way from being a security consumer to becoming
a police and military contributor to United Nation
peacekeeping missions worldwide.

