The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
meeting of Somalia's National Leadership Forum
(NLF) on the implementation of the 2016 national
electoral process.

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
political and security progress in Somalia since
2012, and underscores the need to maintain the
momentum towards democratic governance, with
an inclusive, transparent and credible electoral
process in 2016 as a stepping stone to universal
suffrage elections in 2020.

"In this regard, the Security Council notes
the consensus decision of the NLF, based on the
recommendation of the Somalia's Federal Indirect
Electoral Implementation Team, to extend the
timeline for the parliamentary electoral process
until 25 October 2016, and the timeline for the
presidential electoral process until 30 October
2016, to allow for the implementation of the
technical modalities for an inclusive process. The
Security Council notes the NLF's consensual
decision to extend the current mandates of the
federal institutions to respect this revised timeline.

"The Security Council regrets the delay to
the original timeline, and calls on all Somali
stakeholders to work constructively to implement
the revised calendar without further delay.

"The Security Council notes that this electoral
process is a historic opportunity to deliver more
representative governance to the peop1e of Somalia
and to reflect Somalia's diversity. In this regard,
the Security Council welcomes the decision of the
NLF on representation of minority clans and the
Banadiri community.

"The Security Council recalls the Federal
Government of Somalia's commitment to reserve
30 per cent of seats in the Upper and Lower Houses
for women. The Security Council welcomes
the further provisions in the NLF communique
of 9 August 2016 urging all parties to take the
necessary steps to ensure the implementation of
these commitments. The Security Council urges
the Federal Government of Somalia to ensure that
the electoral process is conducted in a transparent
and credible manner, in a climate of respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including freedoms of expression and association.
In this regard, the Security Council commends the
establishment of an Electoral Dispute Resolution
Mechanism. The Security Council emphasises
the importance of ensuring the Mechanism is
independent and implemented without delay.

"The Security Council also emphasises the
importance of adhering to the political road map
between now and 2020, in particular in order to
reach one-person, one-vote elections by 2020. To
that end, the Council notes the NLF's commitment
to promote the establishment and registration of
political parties within two years, starting from the
date when the tenth Parliament is elected, ahead of
elections in 2020.

"The Security Council recognizes that the
coming months will be a challenging period
for Somalia, it will continue to follow the
implementation of elections closely, and underlines
its support for peace, stability and development
in Somalia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2016/13.

The meeting rose at10'30 am.
