Allow me to express my gratitude to you, Sir, for calling this meeting today. Our deliberations should by no means be seen as business as usual. In this regard, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his insightful yet perturbing account of the situation in the Middle East - more specifically, the question of Palestine. Seventy-two-years ago, we spoke of a catastrophe - a period in Palestinian history known as "Al-Naqba" - when more than 700,000 Palestinians were forced to abandon their homeland and seek refuge in neighbouring countries and abroad as a Jewish State came into being on Palestinian soil. Today, 72 years later, it would seem that Palestinians are facing another imminent catastrophe as Israel is set to advance legislation to annex parts of the West Bank and the Jordan valley from as early as | July. These threats and pronouncements of annexation are in stark violation of international law, disregard international humanitarian law, Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 446 (1979) and 2334 (2016), and agreed-upon parameters for peace, and further undermine any prospect of peace between the parties. For more than half a century, the world has stood by and watched as Palestinian land - olive grove by olive grove, village by village, town by town - has been lost. We have witnessed the daily suffering of Palestinians as they are subjected to the continued construction and expansion of illegal Israeli settlements on their rightful land. We have watched as Palestinians have endured systematic discrimination, as opposed to settlers, who are provided services and allowed civil liberties such as freedom of movement and the issuance of building permits, a right denied to Palestinians living in the occupied territories. Moreover, we have observed as Palestinian land and property was seized and livelihoods snatched away and destroyed, despite being on the right side of the law, as determined by international law and numerous General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. We have borne witness as violence, riots and civil disobedience campaigns have swept across the West Bank and the Gaza Strip as Palestinians have engaged in their struggle for their inalienable rights to freedom and self-determination. We have looked on as men, women, the elderly and children have been victimized, assaulted and detained. We have looked on as the humanitarian situation has continued to deteriorate in the Gaza Strip, with Palestinians continuing to live in unacceptable, precarious circumstances, where their movement has been restricted, where they have been given limited access to water and electricity, and deprived of the basic human rights you and I take for granted on a daily basis. We have also witnessed the occupying Power restrict access to educational and economic opportunities. Additionally, at a time when the world is facing a global pandemic with the spread of the coronavirus disease, the Palestinians have to contend with a severely overburdened and fragile health-care system. We have also, unfortunately, seen the reduction of contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which, for decades, has been providing basic social and humanitarian services to Palestinians. It is said that history has a way of repeating itself, yet it would appear that we do not learn from these turbulent and painfully unjust historical events which continue to shape our present. My own country has in its past not been spared these injustices, where one people is assigned a higher value, above another. This, unfortunately, runs to the core of the occupation of Palestine and it threatens peace, stability and security, a collective value that is it at the very core of the United Nations, which is commemorating its seventy-fifth anniversary this year. Yet, we ask ourselves, what is the raison d'etre of the Security Council if we continue to look the other way, adopt hollow resolutions, ignore existing resolutions and fail to act against those who so arrogantly defy the very principles on which the Organization was founded? Israel, the occupying Power in Palestine, has consistently demonstrated, through its actions, total disrespect for legality and justice. This is, once again, evident in the Secretary-General's fourteenth quarterly report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/555), which contains detailed accounts of continuous settlement activity by the occupying Power despite the intentions set out in resolutions adopted by the Security Council, such as resolution 2334 (2016). In this regard, South Africa concurs with the observation by the Secretary-General that "(t]he establishment and expansion of settlements fuel resentment, hopelessness and disillusionment among Palestinians, are key drivers of human rights violations and significantly heighten Israeli-Palestinian tensions" (SS/2020/555, para. 57). Therefore, the intention to annex more Palestinian land should be regarded as the proverbial straw that broke the camel's back. It is time that Israel, as the occupying Power, be held accountable for its illegal actions and consistent violations of international law and resolutions of this Council. To date, the Security Council has taken no action to stop the building of settlements on illegally occupied land; to stop the confiscation and destruction of Palestinian land and property; or to stop the illegal blockade against Gaza. The Security Council's inaction has carried on for far too long and, in so doing, has failed the people of Palestine. How can we expect to remain credible and call on parties in other conflicts on the Council's agenda to abide by and implement resolutions or face further Council action when we seemingly condone the actions of the Israeli Government by failing to act against its violations? We should be ashamed of ourselves. We should be ashamed that, on our watch, we have ignored Palestinians and denied them their basic human rights and aspirations. We should be ashamed that, by our silence, we have protected the oppressor instead of the oppressed. We should be ashamed that, decades later, a lasting and just peaceful resolution of the continued occupation remains as elusive as it did in 1948, when this matter was first brought to the Security Council. We should ask ourselves what message is sent to those fighting for their inalienable rights to freedom, self-determination and sovereignty, and to those who oppress and deny those rights? Allow me to reiterate that South Africa will continue to support all efforts aimed at the establishment of a viable, contiguous Palestinian State, existing side by side and in peace with Israel, within internationally recognized borders, based on those of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with all relevant United Nations resolutions, international law and internationally agreed parameters. In this regard, peace can prevail only once both parties engage in inclusive dialogue and constructive negotiations without preconditions as this is the only means to ensure lasting peace, security and stability. Additionally, there must be an accountability mechanism in place to ensure that commitments made are implemented. To this end a viable and sustainable peace plan for the Middle East must ensure that Palestine's sovereignty, territorial integrity and economic viability are guaranteed, with sovereign equality between Palestine and Israel.
