Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): 1, too, thank
Special Representative Tanin for his briefing, and we
also welcome First Deputy Prime Minister Dacic' and
Ambassador Citaku to this discussion.

The European Union-facilitated dialogue continues
to play an important role in normalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. New Zealand is
pleased to see continued constructive engagement in
this dialogue by the leadership of Serbia and Kosovo,
including the recent high-level meeting in January.
Under the auspices of this dialogue, both sides have
made a number of commitments to each other, as we
have heard today. While many practical steps have
been taken to fulfil these agreements, important
work remains. This includes the ongoing process
of establishing an Association/Community of Serb
majority municipalities in Kosovo. We urge both sides
to engage constructively to deliver on the commitments
without delay.
While the overall security situation in Kosovo has
continued to be generally stable, we are concerned,
as others have noted, about the recent incidents of
politically motivated violence. There is no place for
this in a democracy. All parties should reject the use
of violence and intimidation to achieve political aims.
Disagreement can be resolved only through dialogue.

In this regard, it is most unfortunate that some
members of opposition parties are not setting a better
example through their own actions. The physical
disruption of the Kosovo Assembly, including the use of
tear gas, serves only to encourage those who wish to use
force to achieve political goals. Political leaders must
reject all acts that undermine the proper functioning of
democratic institutions. Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Tanin has given us some useful food
for thought today in his call to shift the focus away from
political battles and towards more fundamental issues.

We continue to follow the progress towards
establishing a special court to address serious allegations
arising from the work of the European Union Special
Investigative Task Force. In this regard, we welcome
the recent agreement by the Netherlands to host this
court. Like others, we hope that the court will be in a
position to commence its work as soon as possible.

While there are ongoing challenges, the security
situation in Kosovo is generally stable, as we have
said. Sadly, the same cannot be same for many of the
other pressing issues requiring the Council's time and
attention. On this basis, we reiterate our view that the
Council should adopt a more flexible approach as to
how and when it considers this agenda item.

I should also like to take this opportunity, as I did
not this morning, to thank you, Mr. President, for your
stewardship of the Council this month, and we look
forward to working with Angolan colleagues, who will
be presiding over the Council in March.

