Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Let me first
join previous speakers to express our condolences on
the deaths of peacekeepers from Malawi and Tanzania.

I would like to begin by thanking the Chinese
presidency for organizing this meeting. My thanks
also go to the Secretary-General and to the African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security for their
valuable input.

I also associate myself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

We welcome this open debate focused on increasing
the level of attention to, and investment in, African
peace and security in general, and on peacekeeping
operations there in particular. The United Nations and
the international community have a responsibility to
assist Africa in strengthening its capacity to maintain
peace and security. At the same time, the fact that the
five largest of the 14 United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed in Africa proves the importance
that the United Nations attaches to preserving and
promoting peace and security in Africa.

The United Nations also has a responsibility to
make use of the capacity of the African countries and
arrangements in promoting peace and security. We
support the principle of African solutions to African
problems. Chapter VIII, Article 52, paragraph 1 of the
Charter of the United Nations underlines the important
role that can be played by

"regional arrangements or agencies for dealing
with such matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security as are appropriate
for regional action".

It also obliges the Security Council, where appropriate,
to utilize such regional arrangements or agencies for
enforcement action under its authority. It is clear that
such activities must be conducted consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations.

Therefore, to promote peace and security in the
African continent and countries, Africa's leading role
in resolving its own security issues has to be respected.
Accordingly, we should promote African Union-led
peace operations authorized by the Security Council.
All such peacekeeping operations should be based on
respect for the basic principles ofpeacekeeping, namely,
the consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of
force except in self-defence or defence of the mandate.

At the same time, African countries and
organizations should be given assistance in playing
their role in promoting international peace and security,
since some African troop-contributing countries and
African Union peace operations are constrained in
terms of financial resources, equipment and internal
management, which limits their ability to respond to
peace and security challenges. It shall be appreciated
that more than half of the top 20 countries currently
contributing troops to United Nations peacekeeping
operations are African countries.

In conclusion, I should stress that Africa has already
proved its ability in overcoming challenges such as
apartheid, and we hope it will soon also overcome its
security challenges.
