Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): The Government of
Japan is deeply concerned at the fact that the vicious
circle of violence that has been raging in the Middle
East for more than a year has recently intensified, with
large numbers of casualties on both the Israeli and
Palestinian sides.

The Government of Japan once again urges the
Palestinian Authority, led by Chairman Arafat, to make
the utmost effort to suppress extremists. It also urges
the Government of Israel to refrain from actions such
as attacks against facilities of the Palestinian Authority,
which do not contribute to calming the situation, and to
make constructive efforts, including a genuine dialogue
with the Palestinian Authority.

As Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated before
the Council last week, it is imperative for the
international community to work with the parties in a
concerted manner towards a peaceful settlement of this
conflict. He also stressed the importance of addressing
security, political, economic and social issues together.
Japan has called for both parties to return to the
negotiating table, in the spirit of the Oslo Accords as
well as the Mitchell recommendations and the Tenet
understandings. Recently, the Secretaries-General of
the three ruling coalition parties of Japan met with the
leaders of the Government of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority, conveying letters to them from Prime
Minister Junichiro Koizumi, and urged both parties to
resume negotiations.

The Government of Japan also expresses once
again its appreciation for the active efforts being made
by the United States of America and European and
Arab countries, as well as the United Nations, towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict. In this connection,
we welcome the fact that initiatives have recently been
proposed from several quarters, in particular by Crown
Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. This is indeed an
indication of the international community's strong
desire for the resolution of the conflict.

In addition to its efforts aimed at the settlement of
the conflict, the international community has an
important responsibility to alleviate the economic and
social difficulties confronting the Palestinians as a
result of the present grave situation on the ground.
Since 1993, the Government of Japan has provided
economic assistance to the Palestinians amounting to
more than $600 million. Since September 2000, it has
provided approximately $50 million in emergency
assistance to alleviate the serious economic hardships
of the Palestinian people. In this connection, I regret
that facilities and equipment provided by international
donors, including Japan, were damaged in the Israeli
attacks against facilities of the Palestinian Authority.

In the aftermath of the terrorist attacks on 11
September last, there is a new momentum for
cooperation among the international community which
transcends religious, racial and cultural differences. On
the question of peace in the Middle East, it is important
that both parties seize this opportunity to redouble their
efforts to move forward, with a view to the attainment
of a durable peace in the region, based on a spirit of
conciliation and cooperation. The Government of
Japan, for its part, is determined to do its utmost to
support such efforts by the two parties.

