At the outset, allow me to thank His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russian Federation, for presiding over this meeting personally. I also congratulate your country on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. We appreciate your initiative in seizing this opportunity to convene this meeting. We appreciate the valuable participation of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Malley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the International Crisis Group, and Mr. Vitaly Naumkin, President of the Institute of Oriental Studies of the Russian Academy of Sciences. Our region is distinguished by a strategic importance that stretches beyond its geographical boundaries. That makes sustainable stability there an international goal. However, the beneficiaries of stability in the region are first and foremost its States and peoples. That is motivation enough for us to work for the peaceful resolution of crises, political stability and security and preventive diplomacy. The State of Qatar welcomes constructive initiatives that seek ways to de- escalate and resolve differences by means of dialogue. That approach is at the heart of Qatar's foreign policy and the way it deals with the Gulf crisis. The State of Qatar favours the voice of wisdom and the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes. From the start, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AI-Thani, Emir of Qatar, has called for serious and constructive dialogue based on common interests, good-neighbourliness, mutual respect for the sovereignty, independence and unity of States and non-interference in their internal affairs. His Highness has expressed his commitment to mediation - including the efforts of his Highness the late Amir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah - and the efforts of brotherly and friendly countries. In Qatar, as in other States, we strive to preserve our interests while adhering to established principles. But we are also aware that the interests and common destiny that unite the States of our region are vastly greater than what divides us. We remain fully convinced that sustainable peace in the region can be achieved only by an approach to crisis resolution that operates within collective frameworks. On that basis, the State of Qatar has always been a strong supporter of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) as a model subregional framework for cooperation and coordination. Disputes and conflicts between its members are settled under its aegis, which was one of the reasons it was originally established. That is why, even before the crises in the Gulf region deteriorated to their current state, His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AlI-Thani, Emir of Qatar, called in 2015 on the General Assembly to reach agreement on rules to regulate relations between Iran and the GCC States and to conduct a meaningful dialogue on the basis of common interests, respect for sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs of States. His Highness also put forward a specific vision for overcoming regional tensions by establishing an effective framework for collective security in our region. In his speech to the Munich Security Conference in 2018, he called for agreement on basic security guidelines and governance rules and for a minimum level of security that would allow for peace and prosperity. That would ensure not only an end to existing crises but also prevent their future occurrence or escalation through an approach based on integration rather than conflict and common interests rather than unilateral objectives. If we want to discuss how to reduce tensions, we must recognize that the first step towards sustainable stability and de-escalation is to sincerely adopt an approach towards ending these crises that is consistent with the principles of confidence- building, good-neighbourliness and common interests. There are a number of common challenges and risks before us. Perhaps the most notable are terrorism, climate threats and epidemics. As a first step, cooperation to meet these common challenges can pave the way for the resolution of the more complex crises in the Middle East, which can be resolved only on the basis of law, respect for the Charter of the United Nations and the establishment of security, development and protection for human rights. We affirm the fundamental role of the United Nations in conflict resolution as an effective international framework whose effectiveness and reliability must be further enhanced to realize solutions. The major Powers can also play an important role in supporting stability. No matter how interests might differ, there is always room for reconciliation. In conclusion, the State of Qatar will continue to support initiatives that promote diplomatic solutions to crises and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Once again, allow us to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for convening this meeting.
