The President: Under rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I should like to invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
Cyprus, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia, Nicaragua,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Somalia, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe to participate in this
meeting.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Reuben
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 February
2011 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2011/79 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Friday, 18 February 2011, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2011/24, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Afghanistan, Algeria,
Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Comoros,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland,
Gabon, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Jordan, Kuwait,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco,
Namibia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Portugal,
Qatar, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, the
Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Yemen and Zimbabwe.

I wish to point out that the draft resolution before
the Council contains a tentative list of sponsors. The
official list of sponsors will appear in the draft
resolution that will be issued under the same document
symbol as an official Security Council document.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

I shall first give the floor to the members who
wish to make statements before the voting.


