Mr. Awad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my thanks to Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/1025) on small arms and light weapons
pursuant to resolution 2220 (2015). I would also like it
to express the great importance that Egypt attaches to
the issue of the illicit trafficking and supply of small
arms, which has major security, economic and social
impact, especially if such weapons fall into the hands
of terrorist groups or armed movements.

The Middle East and Africa, where Egypt is situated,
are the most affected worldwide by the dangerous and
unprecedented increase in small weapons falling into
the hands of terrorists, armed groups and criminal
organizations. Unfortunately, it seems that this
development is supported by the Governments of some
countries in order to serve rejected political objectives
that run counter to some of the most important purposes
and principles of the United Nations and international
legitimacy, the foremost being the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of countries,
respect for sovereignty and State monopoly over the
legitimate right to use force.

We have recently seen a dangerous increase in the
number of martyrs and injured among the ranks of
civilians and security forces in different countries in
our region and the world, owing to some countries that
supply such terrorist and criminal organizations with
weapons. We want to clarify the extent of the imminent
danger of such a development, which lacks an agreement
on a comprehensive, legally binding international
framework to prohibit and halt it completely. That could
be achieved through the precondition of an official
license granted to the parties concerned by the supplier
country to ensure that such imports are legitimate.

Egypt recognizes that the core of the current
challenge does not lie in the lack of national control
regimes on exports, instead it is due to the deliberate
direct or indirect contribution of some countries that
provide terrorist and criminal groups and other armed
movements with illegal weapons and the necessary
funding to acquire such weapons.

We have taken note with interest of the Secretary-
General's report and would like to stress that Egypt
is seriously concerned about the increasing negative
impact, be they social, economic or security, due to
the illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons.
In that connection, we call upon the international
community, and especially the countries producing
and exporting such weapons, to spare no effort and
cooperate to counter this dangerous development.
We would also like to emphasize that we are still
committed to the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and
the International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. We also reaffirm the
need to respect the scope of both documents.

In principle, the delegation of Egypt welcomes a
number of positive recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General's report. However, we still need
some time to study in depth such recommendations. As
such, we would like to make the following comments
on the content of the Secretary-General's report.

First, many of the recommendations contained in the
report that are directed to the Security Council should,
in principle, be directed to the General Assembly and
to the Review Conference on the Programme of Action
on countering the illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons. The issues of legalizing and regulating
trade in conventional weapons and the adoption of
special mechanisms to counter the illegitimate trade
nationally and internationally fall under the mandate of
the General Assembly and the Review Conference, not
under the mandate of the Security Council.

Secondly, the report does not accord the necessary
priority to the security threats arising from the impact
of the illicit supply of small weapons on the issues of
terrorism and organized crime. Those are the most
important and dangerous repercussions of the problem
under review, if we compare them to the focus on the
social, economic and humanitarian impacts. We do
not underestimate the importance of such aspects,
but we believe that focusing on the symptoms would
make tackling the root causes more effective. In that
regard, Egypt looks forward to receiving more detailed
information from the Secretariat on the procedures
adopted to implement resolution 2370 (2017) on
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons.

Thirdly, Egypt believes that the proposal to develop
an international framework to document, collect and
standardize end-user certificates requires in-depth
study and prior consensus on the relevant terms of
reference. We must develop an international consensus
on a concrete definition of what is trafficking or the
illicit supply of weapons, which should be prevented
and countered, versus the legitimate and lawful trade
in weapons, which should not be restricted, while
considering the promotion of measures regulating such
trade in order to limit illicit trafficking. Egypt stresses
the need to avoid renewed controversial discussions
that attempt to politicize or restrict the legitimate trade
in weapons.

Fourthly, we would like to stress that measures
aimed at securing weapon and ammunition stockpiles
and disposing of excessive such materials is in principle
a purely national responsibility to be shouldered by
the Governments of the countries concerned. The
United Nations took great strides to develop a number
of guidelines that assist countries in developing such
procedures and measures and in providing international
assistance based on the request ofthe country concerned.

In conclusion, Egypt suggests that we consider
launching various initiatives or mechanisms to provide
developing countries with the necessary equipment
to monitor and control borders in order to counter the
illicit influx of weapons, especially in the areas of
the Middle East and Africa that are ravaged by armed
conflicts and where there are many terrorist groups.

