Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): Let me begin by greeting
all nations and peoples here, including many from
Afghanistan, with best wishes for the new year. The
Nowruz holiday is always an awakening and a new
start, and a moment that brings us into harmony with
nature. It is about forgetting the harshness of winter
and appreciating the warmth of the sun. And we are
very hopeful that its warmth will sprinkle some positive
energy on our deliberations today.

I would like to align myself with the statement
delivered by Special Representative Usackas on behalf
of the European Union (EU). While we fully support the
shared EU priorities in Afghanistan, let me emphasize
some points that we see as important.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/133). His briefing
and the report presented a comprehensive picture of
Afghanistan today. We are pleased with the steady
progress in the transfer of security responsibility and
the growing size of the Afghan National Police and the
Afghan National Army. In many areas where Afghan
forces have taken the lead, the security transition has
been going in the right direction. We welcome the efforts
of the Ministry of the Interior aimed at transforming
the police from a security force to a service focused on
law enforcement and protection. The role oflocal police
is vital, especially in remote parts of the country. But
the process of building functional and credible Afghan
national security forces must go on. In our view, the
main challenge is insider attacks, which negatively
affect the overall situation in multiple ways. The
Afghan National Security Forces have almost reached
the anticipated numbers. Therefore, the focus should
now shift to quality, loyalty and professionalism.

While the security sector is on track, it is equally
important to focus efforts on the political and economic
elements of the transition and to synchronize them with
the current plan to hand over full security responsibility
to Kabul in 2014. Further progress in reconciliation
is crucial to future success. The willingness of some
elements of the Taliban to leave the insurgency, join
in the dialogue and enter the political process can set a
positive example and deserves our support. The peace
and reconciliation process must have strong Afghan
ownership.

We see the political transition as a possible game
changer in Afghanistan's internal dynamics. We
believe that Afghans will take all necessary steps
towards achieving inclusive, free, fair and transparent
elections. Only a legitimate Government will be strong
enough to make progress in the areas of security, good
governance and development. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) can
play an important role in advising on how to proceed
efficiently with electoral reforms and broader political
outreach to Afghan society. Some fear that, after the
international forces have departed, Afghanistan may
slip back into insurgency, return to civil war or once
again become a hub for terrorism. We should unite
our efforts to ensure that we stand firmly side by side
with Afghanistan and the Afghan people on that issue.
The Bonn and Tokyo Conferences, the NATO, Chicago
and Lisbon Summits and other international forums
have ensured a strong commitment on the part of the
international community that the Afghans will not be
abandoned.

We must keep in mind the seriousness of the threat
posed by opium production in Afghanistan to the
stability of the region and the overall security situation.
We welcome the Afghan Government's commitment to
combating that problem. However, it cannot succeed
alone without regional cooperation and international
engagement. We therefore support the initiatives led by
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which
are aimed not only at eradicating poppy production but
also at dealing with related aspects, such as development
and law enforcement. It is crucial that neighbouring
countries cooperate and play an active role in that area.
In border control, for example, such cooperation is an
important factor in eliminating illegal trans-boundary
activities, including drug and weapons trafficking, as
well as terrorism.

Afghanistan today remains a proud Muslim
society with more women now serving in the Afghan
National Assembly than in many democracies. Access
to education is getting closer to being universal. Under
the Taliban, fewer than 1 million children, almost all
of them boys, were in school. Now more than 8 million
children go to school, and more than a third of them
are girls.

In 2001, Afghanistan's gross domestic product
was around $2 billion. In one decade, that number has
reached $20 billion, until now largely thanks to foreign
aid. But Afghanistan has the potential to build on
that investment. Among the most visible results is the
dramatic increase in the use of new technologies and
the growth of small and medium-sized businesses.

Under the Taliban, only one tenth of the population
had access to basic health care. Now that better
health care is generally available, life expectancy has
increased from 45 to 62 years for men and to 64 years
for women. Improved education, health care and an
atmosphere that is encouraging to small and medium-
sized business are the cornerstones of sustainable and
irreversible development after the military presence
has been reduced.

In conclusion, UNAMA is a crucial and
irreplaceable actor in Afghanistan, and its role should
be extended. In that regard, we appreciate the words of
support voiced for Mr. Jan Kubis for his professional
leadership of that challenging Mission. We know that
the United Nations and UNAMA will be important
players in Afghanistan, particularly after 2014. As time
is passing very quickly and there are many challenges,
we should start to think and discuss how to adjust
UNAMA's post-2014 mandate, which will have to be
provided with the proper resources. The United Nations
should act and deliver as one. Slovakia will support
Afghanistan until 2014 and beyond. While any military
support after 2014 will depend on the requirements of
the new NATO-led mission after the departure of the
International Security Assistance Force, we have made
a decision to provide financial support for sustaining
the Afghan national security forces at a level of
$1.5 million from 2015 to 2017. Afghanistan remains
the top priority of our official development aid.

One of most famous Nowruz traditions among
Afghans is to forget and forgive one another's mistakes
and to start the new year with new hope and new goals.
Only those who do nothing do not make mistakes.
Victory gives us joy; defeat gives us experience and
strength. They are wise who act and learn how to
achieve the new hope that all people in Afghanistan
deserve.

