Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset, Sir, to thank you for having convened
this meeting and to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency this month.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has consistently
reaffirmed its firm stance on the Palestinian question,
which is based on the need to implement the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
and to respect internationally agreed terms of reference.
Efforts to achieve a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian question can be successful only on the basis
of the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in keeping
with United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the decisions of the international Quartet and
the calls to lift the continued illegal Israeli siege on the
Gaza Strip. We call on the international community
to shoulder its responsibilities and to immediately
move to lift the siege and alleviate the suffering of the
Palestinian people living in the Gaza Strip.

At the summit held recently in Doha, His Majesty
King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa of the Kingdom of
Bahrain stated that many recent developments and
variables had set new conditions and created platforms
for a peace in the Middle East based on the two-State
solution, through the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on its national soil, with holy
Jerusalem as its capital.

His Majesty also noted the need to adopt a new
approach to the peace process in order to achieve ajust
and comprehensive peace in the region, as well as the
need to revitalize its mechanisms on all tracks, as those
mechanisms have been brought to a standstill by Israel's
refusal to abide by all relevant international resolutions.
Such efforts should be carried out in coordination with
the international community as a whole, on the basis of
the terms of reference of international legitimacy, the
Arab Peace Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut summit
and the principle ofland for peace, ensuring that an end
is put to the Israeli occupation, which started in 1967,
and to settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including in particular holy Jerusalem.

A peaceful resolution of the Middle East problem
must ultimately lead to an end to the Israeli occupation
of the Arab and Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, including East Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan,
as well as the resumption of Israel's withdrawal
from the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, in
keeping with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
It must also entail the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State within the 4 June 1967 borders, with
holy Jerusalem as its capital, and offer ajust solution that
would guarantee the return of Palestinian refugees to
their homeland, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).

We would reiterate also the need to implement
all relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions and to unconditionally abide by the
resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits any
demographic or geographical changes to areas under
occupation.

Let me say in closing that peace in the Middle
East is not just one option; rather, it is the only option.
That will require the implementation of the two-State
solution, of which the Arab Peace Initiative is one of the
most important foundations. That requires that Israel,
the occupying Power, stop its settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which only
undermine all efforts, be they Arab or international, to
achieve peace.

We call once again on the Security Council and
other mechanisms, including the Quartet, to exert
every effort to resolve this historical crisis in a manner
that serves the interests of the peoples of Israel and
of Palestine and preserves regional and international
peace and security.

