Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate. I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Alain
Le Roy for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/470). I recognize the presence of
Under-Secretary-General Susana Malcorra. Let me also
thank the representative of the African Union, Mr. Tete
Antonio, for his statement and thank His Excellency
Romano Prodi for his words of wisdom and for his
formidable leadership regarding the need for building a
strategic relationship between the African Union and
the United Nations.

This debate gives the Council and other Members
of the United Nations another opportunity to focus on
peace and security in Africa in general and on support
to African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations in particular.
We commend the panel led by Mr. Prodi for their
report (S/2008/813), which made a number of key
recommendations on how the strategic relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations
could be further strengthened. That report was an
important contribution towards the overall efforts to
enhance the capacity of the African Union in
undertaking peacekeeping operations.

We recall that after the debate on the Prodi report
(see S/PV.6092 and 6092 (Resumption l)), the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to submit an
assessment of the recommendations contained in it. We
are convinced that the Secretary-General has made a
reasonable assessment of the Panel's recommendations,
giving the Council a firm basis on which to take the
process forward.

The primary responsibility for maintenance of
international peace and security is vested in the
Security Council. But peacekeeping is increasingly
becoming a shared responsibility in which the United
Nations, regional and subregional organizations and
the wider international community have critical roles to
play. The United Nations/African Union Hybrid
Mission in Darfur (UNAMID) and African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are good examples of
the collaboration between the United Nations and
African Union.

The African Union has shown its resolve towards
conflict prevention, mediation and resolution in Africa.
It is working on a comprehensive peace and security
architecture, including an African standby force and
early warning system. The African Union has also
underscored the need for its member States to adhere to
constitutionalism, democratic governance and the rule
of law.

The African Union and its subregional
organizations such as the East African Community
(EAC), the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) and the South African
Development Community (SADC) have developed
significant capacity, as demonstrated by their response
to conflict situations in various countries. African
ownership has been shown through the contribution of
troops, logistics, political leadership and finances,
according to the capacity of its member States.

Uganda welcomes the ongoing efforts to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We commend the Secretary-General
and his staff, and also the Chairman of the African
Union Commission, for the efforts undertaken in
fostering stronger ties between the African Union and
the United Nations. We are convinced that building a
more strategic and effective relationship will be
mutually beneficial in our collective efforts towards
peace, stability and development. My delegation would
like to focus on three fundamental elements that we
consider critical for the success of this strategic
partnership.

First, when the African Union deploys
peacekeeping operations it is contributing to the
maintenance of international peace and security. It has
the advantages of proximity and capability to mobilize
and respond quickly. But often the African Union lacks
the financial resources to do that. The Security
Council, in its resolution 1809 (2008), recognized the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of funding for regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping operations under a United
Nations mandate.

It was the expectation of the African Union that
the Security Council would, this time, make a firm
commitment in this regard. The African Union-United
Nations Panel made an unequivocal recommendation to
consider the use of assessed contributions for specific
peacekeeping operations on a case-by-case basis for a
period of six months to facilitate transition to a United
Nations mission. That recommendation was also
positively assessed by the Secretary-General in his
report.

Both the Panel and the Secretary-General also
acknowledged that voluntary contributions are not only
unpredictable but also unsustainable. That is borne out
by the example of pledges to AMISOM. of over $230
million that were made in April 2009; to date only a
small proportion of the confirmed pledges have been
disbursed. And yet the AMISOM. troops are on the
ground in Somalia, taking enormous risks and at times
making the ultimate sacrifice, on behalf of the region
and the international community. The authorization of
a support package for AMISOM. was therefore a
welcome and significant contribution.

After several months of deliberations on the
critical issue of financing African Union peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council, it is not
enough for the Council to only undertake to keep all
options under consideration. It is important to
recognize that an ineffective United Nations
peacekeeping capacity anywhere in the world greatly
undermines the credibility of the United Nations in the
eyes of the population.

Secondly, there is a need to strengthen further the
relationship between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council with respect
to conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. We also call for the enhancement of
regular interaction, coordination and consultation
between the United Nations and the African Union
Commission on matters of mutual interest.

Thirdly, the institutional capacity of the African
Union needs to be enhanced to ensure the effective
planning, management and deployment of
peacekeeping operations. We encourage the African
Union Commission to develop a long-term
comprehensive capacity-building framework, in
consultation with the United Nations and other
international partners.

Let me reiterate that peacekeeping is an essential
and indispensable tool available to the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Its effectiveness will
be further enhanced through closer cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union. Uganda therefore considers this debate
to be part of a process in which actions and decisions
will be taken to better support and facilitate AU
peacekeeping operations.

It is time that the Council took decisive action
and committed itself to practical ways to provide
effective support for the African Union when it
undertakes peacekeeping operations authorized by the
United Nations. I wish to once again commend the AU-
United Nations panel and the Secretary-General for
their reports and, finally, I thank all delegations for
their contributions to the draft presidential statement as
an outcome of our deliberations.

