The Secretary-General: I thank Foreign Minister
Jean Asselborn of Luxembourg for organizing this
important thematic debate.

I have just returned from Sierra Leone. That
country is an important case study in the value of our
engagement. Under the guidance of the Security Council,
with the solidarity of the international community and
the strong engagement of the Sierra Leonean people,
we are seeing a remarkable transformation.

The Council took a series of wise and timely
decisions to deploy successive peacekeeping and
political operations, along with support for long-
term development. The United Nations also helped
the Government to set up the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which helped the country and contributed to
international jurisprudence. The Special Court and our
peacekeeping and political missions have closed, but the
United Nations country team will continue to support
Sierra Leone on the road to peace and development.

Not long ago, Sierra Leone was engulfed in war and
synonymous with the tragic plight of children in armed
conflict. As the former child soldier Ishmael Beah said,

"Somebody being shot in front of you, or you
yourself shooting somebody, became just like
drinking a glass of water. Children who refused to
fight, kill or showed any weakness were ruthlessly
dealt with. Emotions weren't allowed."

We have another successful young man, Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh, with us today. The first former child
soldier to address the Security Council (see S/PV.4422)
is back to address us today.

Those transformative examples attest to the fact
that, given a chance, former child soldiers can rebuild
their lives and help to build peace in their countries.

(spoke in French)
Fifteen years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999), its first
thematic resolution on the plight of children in armed
conflict. By means of that resolution, the international
community sent a clear signal: the suffering of children
in armed conflict is unacceptable, whether they be child
soldiers, sex slaves, victims in schools and hospitals or
affected in any way. Such attacks violate the most basic
human rights. They also threaten the achievement of
lasting peace and development.

I thank the Security Council for having taken
decisive action in establishing a solid framework to help
children affected by armed conflict. The Council has
developed practical tools to prevent serious violations
against children, combat them and put an end to them.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism shows how
tragic the situation of children who are Victims of
armed conflict is.

The special teams working at the country level
and supported by United Nations bodies promote
dialogue with the parties to conflict, which is essential.
Those teams are monitoring the situation closely and
contribute to implementing action plans.

It is also important that child protection be
an integral part of the activities of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, which means
that members of those contingents must be trained
prior to deployment and that the necessary resources be
systematically established.

Yesterday, at the launch of the campaign "Children,
not soldiers", which is supported by my Special
Representative, UNICEF and other partners, the
Member States concerned renewed their commitment
to the action plan. I welcome that initiative. I ask the
international community to provide assistance to those
States and make that a priority. The United Nations
system will seek to mobilize other non-State actors to
put an end to the recruitment of children.

(spoke in English)

All children deserve and are entitled to protection,
not exploitation. They belong in school, not armies and
fighting groups. Children should be armed with pens
and textbooks, not guns and grenades.

That brings me to the question of schools and
hospitals. Those should be places where children
can learn and receive care in safety. That is why our
peacekeeping policy prevents any military use of
schools by peacekeepers. In too many war zones around
the world, schools and hospitals have been targeted or
caught in the cross-fire. Those are egregious violations
of the rights of the child to education, health and life.

In Syria today, some 40 per cent of public hospitals
have stopped functioning. Many more are damaged. In
some areas, more than half the doctors have left. More
than 2.25 million children are out of school. One in
five schools has been damaged or occupied by families
made homeless by the conflict.

I am heartened that the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today seeks to encourage the
development of voluntary guidelines to prevent the
military use of schools in conflict areas. I urge Member
States to commit to greater protection for those essential
facilities in conflict zones by all parties.

Let us also intensify efforts to ensure that
perpetrators of grave violations against children are
brought to justice. That includes assisting affected
States to hold perpetrators accountable.

The draft resolution before the Council provides
valuable new impetus to the Council's work to protect
children in armed conflict. I count on the Council to
use all the tools at its disposal to protect children on the
front lines of conflict and to prevent a new generation
from having to endure the same privations. Let our
children be children - safe and secure, living lives of
dignity and opportunity.

