Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): At the outset,
allow me to thank the Turkish presidency for
organizing this debate on the relationship between the
Security Council, the troop-contributing countries

(TCCs) and the countries contributing financing, and
on the way such relations could be further
strengthened. I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
inviting my delegation to speak on this occasion. I
would also like to thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susan Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their very useful briefings. My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Morocco, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Nine years back, in November 2000, the
Bangladesh delegation, while speaking on the
recommendations of the Brahimi report to this Council,
emphasized in the context of the commitment gap the
need for all Member States to provide troops for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
delegation, referring to the tragic incident of genocide
in Rwanda and the Secretary-General's earnest
canvassing, which could in two months gather only one
tenth of the authorized strength for the second United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR II),
asked "where will these troops come from unless all of
us chip in?" Now, after almost 10 years, the relentless
and unwavering support that Bangladesh has been
providing to United Nations peacekeeping operations
for the last two decades can amply testify that we, with
our limited resources, have been able to live up to our
commitment to international peace and security.

Peacekeeping today has evolved into a complex
and multidimensional phenomenon incorporating
military, police and increasing numbers of civilian
personnel to implement robust mandates. The size of
human and financial resources has also seen
exponential growth. Under the present circumstances,
it is more necessary than ever to establish a genuine
and meaningful relationship between those who plan,
mandate and manage United Nations peacekeeping
operations and those who implement the mandates.
Such a relationship is needed in order to respond
effectively to the increasingly complex challenges.

It has been almost two decades that a debate on
the issue of consultation with the TCCs has been
ongoing, and the process has traversed through many
initiatives and arrangements based on them. Following
the Brahimi report, which emphasized the need for
better coordination among the Security Council, TCCs
and the Secretariat, in June 2001, under the Bangladesh
presidency, the Security Council adopted the landmark
resolution 1353 (2001), which provided the formats for
such consultation. After eight years, while we have
once again embarked on the debate on that same
necessity, my delegation considers it prudent to
examine whether or not the full scope provided under
resolution 1353 (2001) has been explored.

Resolution 1353 (2001) emphasized the need to
continue consultations with TCCs as the principal
means of consultations that may be convened at
different stages of peacekeeping operations, including
mission planning, change or renewal of mandate, rapid
deterioration of the security situation on the ground,
termination, withdrawal or scaling down in size of the
operation, transition from peacekeeping to post-
conflict peacebuilding, and so on. In this regard, my
delegation believes that, when decisions need to be
taken on peacekeeping operations, it is important for
the Secretary-General to include in his regular reports
to the Council information on the views expressed by
the TCCs.

At the same time, it is necessary to take into
consideration the provisions of resolution 1327 (2000),
which underlines the importance of an improved
system of three-way consultations to foster a common
understanding of the situation on the ground with
regard to the mission's mandate and its
implementation. That resolution provided for holding
private meetings with the troop-contributing countries
when considering a change, renewal or completion of a
peacekeeping mandate or when a rapid deterioration in
the situation on the ground threatened the safety and
security of United Nations peacekeepers.

This point was reiterated in presidential statement
S/PRST/2001/3, which established a Working Group of
the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations. It is important to mention, however, that
briefings by the Secretariat intended for the TCCs
should take place well ahead of mandate renewals and
new mission mandates.

In order to develop a mechanism for effective
interactions, it is important to make explicit the
available courses of action as specified by the Security
Council and other intergovernmental bodies like the
Committee of Thirty-Four (C-34). The possibilities of
the Working Group of the Whole on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations are underutilized. The
Working Group is supposed to address general and
technical issues without prejudice to the competency of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations of
the General Assembly.

My delegation would like to recall here that the
Committee of Thirty-Four has encouraged the Working
Group to implement recommendations concerning
cooperation with TCCs, as contained in document
S/2006/972. Meaningful consultation with the TCCs is
not merely a customary practice but a necessity in the
greater interest of peacekeeping operations. It is
therefore of utmost importance that their views be
taken into account. Given their wealth of experience
and expertise, as well as the commitments they have
made, the TCCs are in the best position to contribute to
the process of mandating, planning and implementing
peacekeeping operations. Needless to say, the sense of
ownership of the TCCs, which is due to be further
strengthened in the process, could be an added asset.

Turning to the briefings by Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra, we take note of the New Horizon concept,
which is likely to be presented for consideration by
Member States in the near future. As a preliminary
remark, I would like to refer to the reform initiatives
considered by Member States in recent years and
mention that the benefits of the reforms are yet to be
fully assessed; any new reform initiative should take
into account a thorough assessment of those earlier
initiatives.

We also take note of the challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping operations. It is the
prerogative of Member States to consider any proposal
to enhance the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.
My delegation is looking forward to working with the
other Member States on this matter.

