Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): It has been stated on various occasions in this
forum that the purpose of the sanctions provided for in
Article 41 of the United Nations Charter is to change the
conduct of parties that endangers international peace and
security, and not to punish or take other reprisals. It was
also made clear, during the consideration of the
supplementary document to the "Agenda for Peace", that
when the Security Council has recourse to the tool of
sanctions, it should attempt to guarantee the provision of
humanitarian assistance to the vulnerable groups of society
affected by the imposition of a sanctions regime.

My delegation is of the view that a sanctions regime,
when effectively applied, is an important tool for restoring
international peace and security and is preferable to the use
of force for the achievement of the desired effect. But we
also feel that when sanctions are imposed one should
consider specific measures to mitigate their impact on an
innocent civilian population; the longer the sanctions take
to achieve their intended effect, the more serious that
impact becomes. If there must always be a humanitarian
price to pay when sanctions are imposed, one should
discuss measures to minimize the harm done to vulnerable
sectors of the affected society, such as women, children, the
disabled and the elderly.

The decision to impose economic sanctions is taken
within the framework of the international legal order.
Therefore, account should be taken of humanitarian law,
which, as we know, includes norms relating to
humanitarian assistance applied to different categories of
protected persons.

Economic sanctions are more sharply felt by the
civilian population than by those in power. The current
situation in Iraq is a clear example of this: the economic
sanctions regime imposed on that country because of its
invasion of Kuwait has had an adverse impact on the
Iraqi population. Seven per cent of Iraq's population -
about 1,300,000 people - is at risk, being hardest hit by
the consequences of the sanctions regime. Of these,
750,000 are in northern Iraq, in the territory of Kurdistan,
while 550,000 are in the central and southern region of
the country. All these people require immediate
humanitarian assistance.

The draft resolution the Council is preparing to
adopt will make it possible to alleviate temporarily the
effects of the economic embargo on the Iraqi people and
provide for their nutritional and health needs until the
Government of Iraq complies fully with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and until the Council
decides what action to take in connection with the
prohibitions under resolution 661 (1990) of
6 August 1990. In order to implement the draft resolution,
we must have the cooperation of the Government of Iraq
in the task of equitably distributing humanitarian
assistance. We believe that such assistance to all sectors
of the Iraqi population must not be hindered, obstructed
or denied in any way, shape or form. We therefore urge
the Iraqi Government to comply scrupulously with this
draft resolution.

My delegation believes that the provisions of this
draft resolution are positive, and we are in full agreement
with the principles and premises on which it is based, as
well as with the temporary system it establishes. We
therefore support every aspect of it.

