Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Ithank the Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing, good analysis and, as always,
action-oriented approach. We thank the Bolivian
presidency for providing another important opportunity
for us to discuss the root causes that lead to or may
lead to conflict. For the Council to be effective in its
preventive role and in sustaining peace, it is crucial that
we better understand and address the underlying drivers
of conflicts. The root causes are different depending
on the context. They can include violations and abuses
of human rights, gender inequality, poverty and weak
governance and very often they are a combination of
several or all of those factors.

In July, Sweden hosted a debate in the Council on
climate-related security risks, focusing on climate as a
driver of conflict (see S/PV.8307). It is closely related
to the issue that we are discussing today and one of
the conclusions drawn at that debate was on the need
for the United Nations to better understand and analyse
those risks. The same can be said of today's issue. We
also welcome the upcoming Arria Formula meeting on
water and security. All such steps aim to improve our
track record in preventing conflicts.

Natural resources are clearly a driver of conflict in
many contexts. While resources such as oil, natural gas
and minerals have the potential to confer significant
benefits on populations and to improve development
outcomes, they can also fuel instability and violence.
The research presented in the joint United Nations-World
Bank report Pathwaysfor Peace: Inclusive Approaches
to Preventing Violent Conflict suggests that 40 to
60 per cent of intra-State armed conflicts over the past
60 years have been triggered, funded or sustained by
natural resources. During the recent Council trip to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as has been referred
to by my Peruvian colleague, we saw first-hand how the
rich natural resources there have largely yet to translate
into greater prosperity and stability for the broader
population in the areas where most of those riches
are found. In Liberia, disputes related to land tenure
have long been a key cause of conflict. The Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, which
I chair, is therefore beginning to focus its work on the
management of natural resources.

The United Nations system has a hugely important
role in ensuring that natural resources are turned from
the scourge of potential conflict into a common good
for development, stability and prosperity. We truly
appreciate the various actions set in motion by the
Secretary-General, as outlined this morning, such as
improved analysis and cooperation within the system,
supporting regional cooperation and initiatives,
strengthened mediation, including in hydro-diplomacy,
offering capacity-building to countries, looking into the
connection between land rights and conflicts and, of
course, the general empowerment of women, including
at the local level. Today I would like to point to three
areas that can help to tap the opportunities and positive
benefits of natural resources while mitigating the risks
of them being a driver of conflict.

The first area is strengthening governance and
national institutions. Natural resources are more likely
to be a cause for conflict when there is a governance
and public security vacuum. Functioning institutions to
protect national interests, to uphold legal frameworks
and to hold those operating outside the law accountable
are therefore critical. Democratic and transparent
national strategies for how natural resources are
extracted and used are an equally important part of the
equation. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, as the Ambassador of Kuwait
has just said, should be the logical starting point in that

regard. In line with Sustainable Development Goal
16, effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
should be built at all levels. That includes tax and audit
authorities that can develop fiscal policies and solid,
trusted systems for public financial management.

The second area is fighting organized crime.
Organized crime involving natural resources, for
example through fuel smuggling and illicit mining,
have become the largest source ofincome for non-State
armed groups and international terrorist organizations.
Those activities also contribute and are often connected
to corruption and erode institutions and trust in the
authorities, which in turn further spurs Violence
and violent extremism. Organized crime networks
must therefore be forcefully addressed, including
by enhancing the investigation and analysis of their
linkages to the extractive industry. International
cooperation and making full use of the United Nations
tools on offer is recommended.

The third area is the important role of responsible
business. The private sector has an important
responsibility to make sure that business activities
are sustainable and do not have a negative impact on
conflict dynamics and basic human rights. To that
end, businesses need to integrate corporate social
responsibility models into their core operations. That
requires dialogue with host Governments and, of
course, civil society, including local communities.

African countries are now taking the lead in
improving ownership models for extractive industries
to better benefit their communities and citizens.
We have just heard our colleague from Cote d'Ivoire
talk about some of the African Union initiatives.
Transparency is key to those efforts. There needs
to be a better understanding of financial flows and
banks have a particular responsibility, including at
the international level. In that regard, the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the United
Nations Framework Classification for Resources should
be supported. Governments should also be encouraged
to develop national action plans for business and human
rights. The United Nations Guiding Principles on
Business and Human Rights and the Global Compact
should serve as a basis for those efforts.

As is the case with many of the root causes of
conflict, challenges linked to natural resources do not
recognize borders. They therefore require a national,
regional and international response. The United Nations
system, as well as other international organizations
and bilateral partners, can help countries to reap the
positive benefits of natural resources and to move
away from a conflict-driven, informal and unprotected
economy towards a transparent formal economy that
can generate decentjobs and provide for social services
such as education and health.

The Security Council, for its part, needs to do a
better job of assessing root causes and taking a more
holistic approach to addressing the conflicts on its
agenda. That includes assessing and addressing the
issue of natural resources, as well as other root causes,
in a more structured and proactive way. In order to do
that, what the Council needs first and foremost is for the
regular reporting from the Secretariat to include more
integrated analysis of the drivers of conflict. Gender
analysis is a key aspect, as women are important actors
in addressing the drivers and root causes of conflict.
But the Council must also follow up such information
with action. When it is relevant, peacekeeping missions
should be mandated and given appropriate resources
to that effect so that they can manage such drivers of
conflict better, in close partnership with the broader
United Nations country teams and other relevant actors.
Targeted measures, including sanctions on individuals
and entities - or indeed certain goods - involved
in fuelling conflicts through illicit trade should also
be considered.

The Peacebuilding Commission, with its broad
agenda and a wider range of stakeholders, is well placed
to complement and contribute to Council efforts to
address the underlying causes of conflict, including the
issue of natural resources. The Commission can also
take a regional approach, which is often needed when
it comes to these borderless challenges. Actors such as
the World Bank, civil society and of course the private
sector can and should be invited to discussions that
provide advice on action to the Security Council.

In conclusion, we fully support the Secretary-
General's vision of putting conflict prevention and
sustaining peace at the centre ofwhat we do. Addressing
the root causes of conflict effectively, including by
improving the transparent management of natural
resources in order to benefit people, is a crucial part of
that vision.

