Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I, too, would first
like to thank Special Representative De Mistura for his
informative briefing and for his very challenging work
at the head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also welcome Foreign
Minister Rassoul to the Security Council. We listened
with great interest to and are grateful for his important
contribution to the debate today.

Austria aligns itself with the statement to be
made later by the European Union delegation on behalf
of the European Union. In addition, I would like to
make the following points.

We congratulate the Government of Afghanistan
and UNAMA on the very successful preparations for
and organization of the Kabul Conference two months
ago. This historic event was an important signal that
Afghanistan is willing and able to take responsibility
for its security and development.

The timely implementation of the commitments
made both by the Afghan Government and the
international community is key. We welcome the first
concrete steps taken by the Afghan Government.
Maximum ownership and empowerment of the Afghan
people in the political and security sectors will be
critical to the country's long-term stability. The Kabul
process can succeed only if it includes all segments of
Afghan society. We welcome UNAMA's efforts to
promote the participation of civil society, including
women's groups, and the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission in the Kabul process and
encourage it to further pursue these efforts.

We strongly believe that the Kabul process must
also yield a peace dividend for the Afghan people. The
improvement of livelihoods and creation of sustainable
income opportunities will help to contain the influence
of extremist groups. It is important to enhance
opportunities and to profit from the valuable role of
Afghan women and girls. We also need to address the
enormous increase in criminal incidents in
Afghanistan. Law enforcement authorities and all those
who can redress this emerging challenge to civilians
have to be supported.

The holding of parliamentary elections was
another important milestone in the democratic process
of State-building. While it may be too early for a
comprehensive assessment, we wish to commend the
Independent Electoral Commission and UNAMA on
tangible improvements made in the preparation of the
elections. These polls were conducted under truly
challenging conditions, and the millions of Afghan
citizens who went to the polls in defiance of threats
and intimidation by the Taliban deserve our full
respect. It was especially pleasing to see the great
participation of young Afghans. We now expect the
Afghan electoral bodies to address fully and in an
impartial and transparent manner all reports of
irregularities and complaints that have been filed.
Beyond that, comprehensive and long-term electoral
reform will evidently also be necessary.

We appreciate the steps taken by the Afghan
Government to advance a political solution by way of
launching and implementing the peace and
reconciliation programme. At the same time, all efforts
must be undertaken to ensure that those who are
already bearing the brunt of the ongoing conflict will
not be further victimized and that human rights, and
especially women's and children's rights, are not
compromised in the reconciliation process.
We thank the Special Representative for his
advocacy for broad representation of religious and
ethnic communities and the female population in the
implementation of the programme. We strongly
encourage UNAMA to continue to keep the Council
informed of further developments, including with a
view to the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1889 (2009).

During the recent Security Council mission to
Afghanistan, the Afghan authorities and the public
showed considerable interest in the review of the
consolidated list of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban, which I have the honour to chair. We are
pleased that, meanwhile, this process has been
concluded, allowing for a substantial update of the list.
At the same time, the consolidated list remains a living
document. We therefore need to continue to ensure that
the list reflects the actual threat, and that means that
entries that are no longer relevant must be removed and
new threats must be reflected in the appropriate new
entries. This will evidently require continued close
cooperation between the Committee and the Afghan
authorities, and I will do my best to promote such
cooperation for the remainder of my mandate as Chair
of the 1267 Committee.

The recent report of UNAMA on the protection of
civilians reveals the escalating human cost of the
conflict. The first six months of this year have seen a
significant rise in civilian casualties. Women and,
above all, child casualties have dramatically increased
compared to last year. Anti-government elements -
and I wish to underline this - were responsible for the
vast majority of civilian deaths and injuries. Their
means of warfare - the extensive use of improvised
explosive devices and suicide attacks, the use of
civilians as human shields, the recruitment of children
and the assassination campaigns directed against their
own fellow citizens - violate the most basic principles
of international humanitarian law. It will be crucial to
hold the perpetrators of these and past crimes
accountable. Effective forms of assistance for victims
need to be provided.

On the other hand, the significant drop in the
number of civilian casualties caused by
pro-Government forces is a welcome development. We
also welcome the efforts of the Afghan Government to
address the situation of children affected by the armed
conflict, in particular the launch of the
Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as the Government's intention
to develop an action plan to prevent the recruitment of
children.

Finally, we wish to commend the efforts of the

Special Representative in support of regional initiatives

and cooperation in order to bring all regional actors

together around the common goal of achieving

stability, prosperity and lasting peace in Afghanistan
and the region.

