Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
other representatives in thanking you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate. Our appreciation also
goes to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing.
My delegation also associates itself with the
statement made earlier by the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

This meeting is being held at a time of continuing
uncertainty, but also of hope. As long as conflicts in
the Middle East remain unresolved, we must be hopeful
and determined to achieve a resolution.

For Indonesia, the question of Palestine has always
been one of tremendous importance. We remain deeply
committed to supporting the cause of sovereignty that
Palestinians have pursued for over 60 years, and to
achieving peace.

We believe that last July's resumption of direct
negotiations between Palestine and Israel is an
encouraging development. It is our fervent hope that
the negotiation will lead both parties to the common
goal of an independent State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

In that regard, we recall the meeting of the Quartet
held in New York on 27 September, during which it was
briefed on the progress in the negotiations. The Quartet
appreciated the efforts of Palestine and Israel and was
determined to lend effective support to both parties to
reach a permanent status agreement within the agreed
goal of nine months. The Quartet also called on all
parties to promote conditions conducive to the success
of the negotiations and to refrain from actions that
undermine trust. Indonesia fully supports the position
of the Quartet and calls on Israel in particular to
maintain conditions conducive to fruitful negotiations.
History shows that that is the fate that has befallen some
previous attempts at successful engagement.

We would like to draw particular attention to
the continuing construction of settlements and the
separation wall, which present formidable obstacles
to progress. Similarly, we condemn the continuing
violations of the human rights of the Palestinian
people, including the prolonged detention of thousands
of Palestinians, the eviction of families from their
residences and the blockade on the Gaza Strip, which
has worsened the deplorable humanitarian conditions
of the population.

We furthermore note Israel's recent cancellation
of the visit of a UNESCO team to the Old City of
Jerusalem - the purpose of which was to examine
the condition of several religious heritage sites in the
city - in utter disregard of the principle of good faith
in international relations.
Indonesia has continuously expressed its
unwavering support of the two-State solution, based
on the conviction that it is the inalienable right of the
Palestinian people to have their own State. Furthermore,
the establishment of an independent State of Palestine,
with rights and responsibilities equal to those of other
States, will contribute to the attainment ofajust, lasting
and comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Indonesia
therefore takes this opportunity to renew its call on the
Security Council to take steps to compel Israel to stop
its illegal actions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
and to treat Palestine as an equal and respectable partner
in the negotiations. We remain convinced that peace
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as the capital of the State of Palestine, constitutes an
important element of any deal that may be achieved as
the outcome of negotiations.

I would like now to turn to the issue of Syria.
Indonesia remains deeply concerned about the ongoing
conflict in Syria, and its impact on the Syrian people.
The deaths of thousands of people and the widespread
destruction of property necessitates that all parties
immediately cease acts of violence and hostilities. It is
also paramount that all parties to the conflict uphold
international human rights and humanitarian law and
ensure unfettered and safe humanitarian access for
those in need.

Indonesia is of the view that Syria's favourable
response to the safeguarding and eventual destruction
of its chemical weapons, as called for in resolution 2118
(2013), while constituting an important step forward,
also presents an opportunity for renewed efforts to
find a peaceful solution to the conflict. Accordingly,
Indonesia again urges the international community
to deepen its commitment to promoting an inclusive
political process that reflects the wishes of all Syrians.

