Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2011/549) on Somalia and to thank Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, for his useful and informative
briefing this morning. We also thank Mr. Boubacar
Gaoussou Diarra for his contribution to today's debate.
We also welcome His Excellency Mr. Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali, Prime Minister of Somalia, and thank
him for his remarks.

Bosnia and Herzegovina notes with satisfaction
the recent security developments in Somalia. It is of
crucial importance that this window of opportunity be
used in the right manner. The consolidation of
authority, delivery of basic services to its people and
fighting corruption, as well as the process of national
reconciliation, are essential for the success of the
Transitional Federal Government. Strengthening State
institutions, particularly the National Security Force
and the Somali Police Force, should be accelerated
with the assistance of the international community.

We reiterate our full support to the Transitional
Federal Government and the Djibouti peace process.
We also welcome the signing of the Kampala Accord,
which overcame the political impasse that had
paralysed and endangered the peace process in
Somalia. We are pleased to note the timely
implementation of the Kampala Accord to date, and we
encourage the Transitional Federal Institutions to
continue their efforts in that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina strongly welcomes the
holding and outcome of the consultative meeting
organized and facilitated by Special Representative
Mahiga. The adopted road map, with clear timelines
and benchmarks for completing the current 12-month
transitional period, should be implemented in a timely
manner, bearing in mind that the future support of the
international community for Somalia depends on its
realization. We call upon the Transitional Federal
Institutions to demonstrate unity, cooperation and
commitment in carrying out their obligations through
an inclusive and genuine Somali-owned political
process.

The international community has already shown
its dedication to helping the Somali people achieve
lasting peace and stability in the country. We express
our hope that those efforts will continue, and reiterate
our call on the international community and Somalia's
partners to provide urgent assistance to the Transitional
Federal Government.

Other important developments are the recent
activities aimed at increasing the presence of the
United Nations in Mogadishu and other parts of
Somalia. We express our encouragement of further
coordination of the United Nations work in the country.

We are concerned about continuing grave
violations of human rights, especially against women
and children. We therefore urge all parties to the
conflict to fully comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law in order to
protect the civilian population.

Furthermore, we express our serious concern with
regard to the humanitarian situation in Somalia. While
famine is spreading, due to a deadly combination of
severe drought, ongoing fighting and difficulties in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, the people of
Somalia are facing a new humanitarian catastrophe.
Our thoughts and prayers are with those who endure
the terrible effects of the famine, which has already
resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of people.

More than 3 million people in Somalia depend on
humanitarian assistance, including internally displaced

persons, who represent one of the most vulnerable
groups in the country. The insecurity, compounded by
the drought, has led to migration in all directions
throughout the Horn of Africa.

We urge the international community to redouble
its efforts in providing assistance to the people of
Somalia. We share the assessment of the Secretary-
General that a multisectoral response is essential, and
call upon all Member States to contribute to the
consolidated appeal for Somalia.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends all
humanitarian organizations and workers for their
tireless efforts in providing humanitarian assistance to
people in need in Somalia despite the extremely
difficult environment in which they operate. We urge
that humanitarian agencies and workers be given
unhindered access to the populations in need.

The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) continues to represent an important factor
of stability in the country. We commend AMISOM
troops for their tireless efforts in stabilizing the
situation and hope that its troop levels will soon reach
the mandated strength. We call upon the international
community to continue its support to AMISOM, with
the aim of seeing its mandate fully implemented.

We recognize the importance of the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM, the United
Nations Political Office for Somalia, and the United
Nations country team for Somalia, as well as the hard
work of the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and all other humanitarian
organizations. We also welcome the efforts of the
United Nations Mine Action Service to reduce the risks
to the civilian population posed by mines and
unexploded ordnance.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to pose
a threat to international peace and security. The
phenomenon of piracy is one of the challenges that still
await a comprehensive, adequate and effective
response from the international community, although
some security, judiciary, prevention, best practices and
awareness-raising measures have been taken. We
should continue to cooperate and concentrate on
eliminating the root causes of piracy.

