The Secretary-General: The Security Council
resolution adopted today has strengthened the cause of
peace and given renewed impetus to the search for
security in an increasingly dangerous world. The
resolution sets out in clear terms Iraq's obligation to
cooperate with the United Nations in ensuring the full
and final disarmament of its weapons of mass
destruction. It leaves no doubt as to what these
obligations are or as to how they must be fulfilled. Iraq
now has a new opportunity to comply with all the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

I urge the Iraqi leadership, for the sake of its own
people and for the sake of world security and world
order, to seize this opportunity and thereby begin to
end the isolation and suffering of the Iraqi people. If
Iraq's defiance continues, however, the Security
Council must face its responsibilities.

This resolution is based on law, collective effort
and the unique legitimacy of the United Nations. It
represents an example of multilateral diplomacy
serving the cause of peace and security. It reflects a
renewed commitment to preventing the development
and spread of weapons of mass destruction and the
universal wish to see this goal obtained by peaceful
means.

I commend the leaders and the Council members,
who have worked so hard to negotiate this resolution. I
know that it has not been easy to reach agreement. It
has required both patience and persistence. But the
effort has been well worthwhile. Whenever the Council
is united, it sends a very powerful signal. And I hope
that Iraq will heed that signal.

I also wish to recognize those countries,
especially members of the League of Arab States, who
persuaded Iraq to change its previous position. It is
important that Governments with influence on Iraq
remain engaged in the efforts to obtain Iraq's
compliance with its international obligations.

The road ahead will be difficult and dangerous.
But empowered by this resolution, the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and the International Atomic Energy Agency stand
equipped to carry out their vital task. To succeed, they
will require full and unconditional cooperation on the
part of Iraq and the continued determination of the
international community to pursue its common aim in a
united and effective manner.

This is a time of trial - for Iraq, for the United
Nations and for the world. The goal is to ensure the
peaceful disarmament of Iraq in compliance with
Security Council resolutions and a better, more secure
future for its people. How this crisis is resolved will
affect greatly the course of peace and security in the
coming years, in the region and in the world.

I commend the Council for acting today with
purpose and resolve.

