Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I would like to thank His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Djibouti, Mr. Guelleh, for
his presence among us today and for his important
briefing.

(spoke in English)

In terms of talented and gifted individuals,
cultural heritage and natural resources , the Horn of
Africa is one of the richest regions in the world. At the
same time, that very region has faced instability,
insecurity, economic crisis and high political tension
for decades now.

Only a week ago, the Security Council discussed
what that means, especially for the Somali population.
In that context, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and Djibouti for playing a stabilizing
role in the region, inter alia, by having hosted the
negotiations between the then Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia and by hosting a regional
training centre for maritime officials, in connection
with the Djibouti Code of Conduct on the repression of

piracy.

Concerning the situation in Somalia, let me take
this opportunity to once again confirm the support of
my country for the Djibouti peace process, the TFG
and the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM).
We call on all parties to join the peace process, and we
urge the Government to rapidly resolve the internal
disputes and ambiguities as important challenges lie
ahead, among them the drafting of the constitution. In
that context, we condemn any attempt to undermine or
halt the peace process by attacking the TFG, AMISOM
or humanitarian deliveries or by supporting the
insurgents. Any person or entity committing such acts
risks facing sanctions imposed by the Security Council.

I listened with interest to what Ambassador
Heller, Chairman of the sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), has just told us about his trip to the
region, and we look forward to the full report on it. We
call on the Eritrean Government to urgently address the
concerns of the Security Council and the international
community, more particularly by fulfilling Eritrea's
obligations under resolution 1907 (2009) and other
relevant Security Council resolutions.

At the same time, in more general terms, we
believe and hope that the countries of the Horn will
assume their responsibility for bringing peace and
stability to the region. Deep-rooted conflicts, such as
the border conflict between Eritrea and Djibouti and
the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, need to be
addressed urgently for the sake of the people in the
Horn.

It is vital to continue to search for a solution to
the underlying political problems. Therefore, we also
welcome all oongoing mediation efforts by countries in
the region and urge the countries concerned to engage
constructively. No opportunity for dialogue should be
missed.

