The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the recent
killings, the violence and other human rights
violations and atrocities in Bunia, as well as the
attacks against the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) and internally displaced persons who
have sought refuge at the MONUC premises, and
reiterates that there will be no impunity for such
acts and that the perpetrators will be held
accountable. It demands that all hostilities in Ituri
cease immediately. The fighting is unacceptable.
It threatens the stability of the Ituri area and
severely undermines the continuation of the peace
process and the establishment of the Transitional
National Government.

"The Security Council fully supports the work
initiated by the Ituri Pacification Commission,
established by the Luanda Agreement of 6
September 2002, under which the Ituri interim
administration was formed, and encourages donors
to provide additional funding and emphasizes that it
is up to the various Congolese parties in Ituri to
pursue an effective inclusive political and
security mechanism in this framework.

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement signed in Dar es Salaam on 16 May
2003 and calls on the parties to implement it fully
and without delay.

"The Security Council calls on all parties in
the region to end all support to armed groups and
refrain from any action that might compromise
the return to peace in Ituri, in particular the work
of the Ituri interim administration, and reaffirms
its strong commitment to the sovereignty of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo over all its
territory.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the deteriorating humanitarian situation in
Bunia and demands that all parties grant full and
unimpeded access for humanitarian aid and
guarantee the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel. It also calls on the donor community to
continue to support the humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council pays tribute to the
work that has been achieved by the staff and
contingents of MONUC in Ituri in very difficult
conditions, and fully supports them.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts
by the Secretary-General to address the urgent
humanitarian and security situation in Bunia,
including options for sending an emergency
international force, and encourages him to complete
consultations to this end as a matter of urgency.

"The Security Council demands that all
Congolese parties and regional States involved in
the DRC conflict refrain from any action that
could undermine the possible deployment of an
international force."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/6.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

