Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Mr. President, Uruguay would like to thank you
for your detailed briefing in your capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009), concerning
Somalia and Eritrea. We also welcome the fact that this
briefing is open to the membership.

Uruguay would like to highlight the efforts of
the Federal Government of Somalia in providing
information with regard to arms imports. We welcome
the Committee's decision to draw the attention of
Member States to providing their support for the
programme to reform the security sector, which requires
the necessary financial and technical assistance.

Uruguay reiterates its concern about the ongoing
threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist group, which
continues to be present despite the measures undertaken
and the supposed loss of firing power. We should never
let down our guard when it comes to terrorism. Also of
alarm is the possibility that there may be open contacts
with other extremists in the region.

Uruguay would especially like to underscore
the need to protect civilians, especially women,
children and older persons. We encourage the Federal
Government of Somalia to seek mediation and stability,
in particular in areas where access to services and
humanitarian assistance is essential. At the same time,
we regret the fact that national and foreign forces
operating in Somalia continue to attack civilians and
Violate international humanitarian law.

With regard to the information provided by the
Eritrea Monitoring Group, Uruguay expresses its
concern about the fact that there has not been greater
progress i and there may even have been a setbackf in
achieving stability and peace in the region - if the
alleged support to armed groups in Ethiopia and Yemen
is confirmed, which has not been totally ruled out.

Lastly, Uruguay expresses its support and
commitment with the effort being done by the Somalia-
Eritrea Sanctions Committee. We look forward to an
update on its work in the months of April and October.

