Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to associate myself with the statement to be made
later in the debate by the Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

The recent terrorist attacks in Bali have shown
once more that terrorism knows no boundaries and
constitutes one of the most serious global threats to
peace, freedom and human dignity. Acts of terrorism
are under no circumstances justifiable on any grounds,
be they political, religious or philosophical. Those who
commit such horrific acts must be brought to justice.

The international community must once more
show its resolve and determination to collectively fight
this scourge. Appropriate action, at the national and
international levels, is an obligation for all Member
States, pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001), 1540 (2004) and related resolutions.

We would like to express our thanks to the
Chairman of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, for briefing us
today on the recent activities of the Committee. The
addition of 11 new individuals and one entity to the
Consolidated List is a welcome development. Listing
of individuals and groups has an important political
and psychological impact and can function as a
deterrent to the commission of terrorist acts. However,
there is a growing international concern about existing
listing and delisting procedures and the lack of due
process requirements. We believe that the Security
Council should address those concerns as soon as
possible, if sanctions are to be a credible and effective
tool in the fight against terrorism.

In that connection, during our open debates many
Member States have repeatedly proposed the
establishment of a review mechanism that would allow
access by individuals requesting delisting. That would
be an adequate response to such concerns. The
probable need to revise the existing guidelines was
foreseen by resolution 1617 (2005). Indeed, revision of
the guidelines so as to develop more precise and
detailed provisions regarding delisting procedures,
based on due process requirements and humanitarian
exemptions, should be a high priority for the
Committee, since that can considerably enhance the
sanctions regime.

We would like to extend our many thanks and our
appreciation to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Ellen Margrethe Loj.
She gave us useful insight into the Committee's
activities over the past three months, as well as
updating us on its programme of work for the
upcoming 90-day period.

We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate (CTED) is now fully
operational. It will contribute to the better provision of
assistance and guidance to States so as more effectively
to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We would like to
thank the head of the CTED, Ambassador Javier
Ruperez, and his team, for their ongoing efforts to
support the CTC.

We note with interest that the Committee has
enhanced its cooperation and dialogue with some
regional organizations, which may help them to build
their capacity to combat terrorism. We also welcome
the Committee's efforts to eliminate the backlog of
reports from States concerning their implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Likewise, we commend the
efforts of the Committee to explore ways to strengthen
the facilitation of technical assistance to States, with a
View to better implementing the provisions of the
resolution.

We are pleased to hear today that the CTC has
taken steps to ensure follow-up to resolution 1624
(2005), regarding incitement to commit terrorist acts,
which was adopted in September 2005 at the Security
Council summit meeting. The resolution requires States
to report to the CTC, as part of their ongoing dialogue,
on the steps they have taken to implement the
resolution. We would like to stress, however, that, in
implementing the resolution, States must ensure that
they comply with their obligations under international
law, refugee law, and international humanitarian law.

Finally, we fully support the decision of the
Committee to engage in a policy discussion on how to
incorporate a human rights perspective into its work. In
that regard, we warmly welcome the appointment of a
human rights expert to the CTED. We believe that the
close cooperation of the expert with the Commission
on Human Rights and the recently appointed Special
Rapporteur on human rights and terrorism will help
States to implement counter-terrorism measures in
conformity with human rights law.

We must thank you, Sir, in your other capacity, as
the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for
your briefing on recent activities and future work. We
are pleased to learn that the Committee has completed
the examination of all the first reports that were
submitted by 1 October. We believe that the
examination of State reports is an essential part of
efforts to implement resolution 1540 (2004) and
reinforce the global counter-proliferation regime. We
encourage States that have not yet done so to submit
their reports to the Committee so that it may assess
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and consider
further measures.

We note with interest the steps taken by the
Committee to facilitate the provision of technical
assistance to States to implement the resolution. We
support the Committee's ongoing efforts to establish
closer interaction and cooperation with relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
with the aim of reinforcing implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

Lastly, we fully support an increased cooperation
and coordination between the three Committees - the
1267, 1373 and 1540 Committees. We believe that
those Committees should continue to function in a
transparent and open way, particularly through the
holding of joint briefings and by providing information
on a regular basis to Member States on their respective
activities.

