The President: I thank Ms. Blanchett for her very
poignant and moving briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.

The plight of the Rohingya community is one of
the largest refugee crises in recent history, and it is
one of the most pressing humanitarian and human
rights crises facing the Security Council today. One
year since the Rohingya population of Rakhine state
was subjected to a campaign of the most truly horrific
violence, resulting in grave violations of their human
rights and expulsion and deportation from their homes,
the Council has a duty to ensure that they receive
justice and the prospect of a peaceful future. The
report of the Independent International Fact-finding
Mission on Myanmar (A/HRC/39/64) issued yesterday
by the Human Rights Council is the most authoritative
account to date of the crimes committed against the
Rohingya community. The report details widespread
rape and murder committed by the Burmese military,
the systemic oppression and persecution they have
suffered for many years, and the patterns of violence
and violations committed elsewhere in the country.
The Council is charged by the international
community with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Crimes against humanity, such as those detailed in the
Fact-Finding Mission's report, threaten international
peace. They threaten international security. Forced
deportations across borders, such as those that the
Rohingya suffered crossing into Bangladesh, are
unfriendly acts, but they also threaten international
peace and security. It is therefore incumbent upon the
Council that it consider the report in depth, once the
Fact-Finding Mission has made its final presentation to
the Human Rights Council in September.

But let us be clear: those most affected by the crisis
now reside in Bangladesh. As we already heard, with
more than 700,000 Rohingya refugees joining more
than 300,000 displaced people in previous rounds of
violence, Bangladesh, together with the United Nations
and other humanitarian organizations, has saved many
thousands of lives. Bangladesh, working together with
the United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations, has taken significant steps to mitigate
the worst effects of the monsoon season in recent
months. And as we already heard a indeed, so
movingly from Ms. Blanchett - the Rohingya need
our continued support. Their needs range from food,
shelter and clean water, to education, livelihoods and
specialized assistance, We must not forget that they
need specialized support and assistance for the victims
of sexual violence. The United Nations joint response
plan remains desperately underfunded, and it is
imperative that we all step up and play our part.

But the solution to the crisis - let us be clear - lies
in Burma. The Rohingya community deserves justice.
The Fact-Finding Mission has concluded that what
happened in Rakhine last year warrants

"the investigation and prosecution of senior
officials in the Tatmadaw chain of command, so
that a competent court can determine their liability
for genocide in relation to the situation in Rakhine
State." (A/HRC/39/64, para. 87)

With so much at stake, it is the Council that has a duty
to ensure that there is no impunity for such acts.

As Prime Minister Teresa May's Special
Representative on Preventing Sexual Violence in
Conflict, let me assure the Council, let me assure
Rohingya community: this is a key priority for our
Government, for our Prime Minister and for myself.
The Rohingya must be able to return home to Rakhine
safely, voluntarily and, importantly, with dignity. That
means more than returning to internally displaced
persons camps on the Burmese side of the border, but
real progress towards a more just long-term solution
and state of affairs in Rakhine.

As a result of the Council's concerted action,
though, we have seen some steps forward. The Burmese
Government has engaged with the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
whose diplomatic work we support. It has signed a
memorandum of understanding with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). It has established a commission of
inquiry to look into reports of human rights violations.
Those steps are welcome. They have not been easy
for the civilian Government, whose action remains
constrained by the military, but more needs to be done.
The steps taken are not enough. The Burmese authorities
need to provide UNHCR and UNDP unconditional and
unqualified access to northern Rakhine. Until those
United Nations agencies can operate effectively, it is
impossible to argue that conditions in Rakhine are
anywhere near what is required for the safe, voluntary
and dignified repatriation that the Council has called for.

There is an urgent need for domestic acceptance
and accountability in Burma. It is essential that the
Burmese Government set out how its commission of
inquiry will be able to investigate those crimes with
full impartiality, how it will access United Nations
information and how it will be linked to a judicial
process to hold accountable those responsible - and
let us be clear: particularly those in the military. It is
far from clear that any mechanism established by the
Burmese authorities can do that, which is why the
United Kingdom supports keeping open the option of
justice delivered through international mechanisms.

We need to see practical progress on
implementing the Rakhine Advisory Commission's
recommendations. That includes recommendations on
economic development, which are part of the solution,
but it also includes those related to the rights of the
Rohingya, including a pathway to citizenship. Those
recommendations taken comprehensively, as they were
set out by the revered and respected late Kofi Annan,
remain the best blueprint for a long-term solution
in Rakhine.

What does it mean for us? What does it mean for
the Security Council? It means, in our View, that the
Council should do three things. First, it should continue
to assist Bangladesh and the United Nations in providing
protection and assistance to the Rohingya population
and their host communities. Secondly, it should take
concerted action to push for justice and the prospect
of a peaceful future, which the Rohingya community
deserves. That includes holding a serious discussion on
the conclusions of the Fact-Finding Mission's report.
Thirdly, it should support those in Burma who are
pushing for progress. But we should also be prepared
to use the full range of tools at the Council's disposal
to apply pressure against those, including the Burmese
military, who obstruct it. The United Kingdom has
done that within the European Union, where we have
sanctioned seven senior Burmese military officials.

But we all accept that this crisis is complex and
has deep roots. It will not be solved overnight. But let
us also be clear: it will not be solved without continued
engagement and action from the Council. As we mark
one year on from the violence of August 2017, therefore,
the Council should shoulder its responsibility and do
justice to the gravity of the attacks on the Rohingya
community. We should not be just discussing and
debating. We need to be acting, acting to bring an
end to the appalling ethnic cleansing, to help those
suffering refugees and bring justice for the victims of
those appalling crimes.

I appeal to all fellow members. Let us put aside our
differences. Let us act on the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and on our obligations in front of
us. Let us act in the interests of Leila, in the interests of

Yousef and in the interests oftens ofthousands of Leilas
and Yousefs. Let us act for the sake of humankind.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

