President Poroshenko: First of all, I would like to
thank Prime Minister Key for his initiative to convene
this important high-level meeting. I also commend the
presidency of New Zealand for the excellent manner in
which it has organized the work ofthe Security Council
this month.

The Security Council was created 71 years ago to
bear the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It was meant to stop
ongoing conflicts and prevent looming ones. Back in
2000, upon the initiative of Ukraine, the Council held
its historic, first-ever summit meeting (see S/PV.4194),
in which it adopted a declaration pledging, inter alia,

"to ensure the effective functioning ofthe collective
security system established by the Charter"
(resolution 1318 (2000), annex). That summit
became one of many success stories throughout the
history of the United Nations.

Yet, there have been many dramatic failures. One
of them has been unfolding in front of us in Syria for
over five years. The conflict in that country is a tragedy
for millions of people and a serious challenge for the
international community. Hundreds of thousands of
people have been killed; over 13 million have been
forced out oftheir homes. These numbers are appalling,
and all the more so when we think of the countless
personal tragedies behind them.

The conflict has already had many serious negative
consequences: uncontrolled migration, the escalation
of terrorism, the expansion of the Islamic State and
other extremist groups, to name but a few. Yet it poses
other serious risks, including igniting a wider sectarian
war in the region. We are of the view that the Syrian
Government bears full responsibility for its country's
present condition and for the terrible sufferings of the
Syrian people.

It was with the utmost dismay that we learned just
two days ago of a barbaric attack on a humanitarian
convoy in Aleppo. That crime came after the Syrian
regime's unilateral withdrawal from the week-long
ceasefire. It is nothing but a clear proof of the culture
of impunity that has fuelled the Syrian conflict.
That outrageous lack of accountability is a stain on
this Council.

At the same time, it is external support for the
Al-Assad regime, in particular from Russia, that has
contributed significantly to the disastrous status quo
and to the recurrent waves of violence. As was the case
in Ukraine, those actions were part of an intentional
policy to first stir up hostilities, raise the stakes and
then offer yourself as a mediator in the settlement
process. In the meantime, you may grab ground and
secure your position for imposing any solution you
please. That strategy sounds pretty familiar to my
own country, Ukraine, which continues to be a testing
ground for very similar Russian tactics.

The United Nations and the Security Council have
failed to bring peace and security to Syria. That failure
undermines the whole mission of the United Nations
and challenges its very existence. The inaction of the
Council in dealing with the armed Russian aggression
against Ukraine and the occupation of Crimea has
allowed Moscow to use the peninsula as a military
outpost for projecting power in Syria. As war there rages
on, huge numbers of Russian war assets are deployed to
Syria via ships based in Crimea, occupied by Russian
troops. That highlights once again the absolutely urgent
and critical need to reform the Council, particularly
with regard to the veto power. No veto should be able
to block the Council's action when it has to respond to
situations of mass atrocities. With so many lives lost in
recent decades due to such crimes, we must finally start
the process of removing that obstacle to ensure a more
effective Security Council.

We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons,
barrel bombs, torture and other crimes being committed
in Syria, specifically against civilians. Again, these are
flagrant violations of international law. We insist that
those responsible for these horrific crimes be brought
to justice. The recent findings of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism must be duly
taken into account by the international community.
Furthermore, we condemn the denial of humanitarian
access to those in need - let along the bombing of aid
convoys - and sieges against civilian population. Any
and all employment of such tactics as a tool of war is a
serious violation of international humanitarian law and
must be stopped immediately.

Ukraine once again reaffirms the imperative of
full compliance with the fundamental principles and
norms of international law everywhere, at all times and
by all. The political process in Syria should be aimed
at restoring the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the country and establishing a credible, inclusive
transitional governing body with ample executive
power. That should be done in full compliance with the
Geneva principles of 30 June 2012 and resolution 2254
(2015). That is to be followed by the drafting of a new
constitution and elections.

A genuine political transition should be the first
and foremost priority for the Council and for all those
involved. The parties to the conflict, both inside and
outside Syria, will have to prove with deeds - not
words - that they are committed to meeting their
obligations and to fulfilling their agreements, including
the most recent. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to a diplomatic solution of the conflict and
call for consolidating international efforts to put an end
to this tragedy.

Sixteen years ago, in the declaration I referred to
at the beginning of my statement, our predecessors
pledged, "to enhance the effectiveness of the United
Nations in addressing conflict" (resolution 1318 (2000),
annex, p.2). We cannot afford to fail this time.

