Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): It is a
particular pleasure, Minister Passy, to see you in the
Chair. Welcome. I associate myself with the remarks
about to be made by the Italian presidency of the
European Union. I join others in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his briefing.

The efforts of Special Representative
Mr. Holkeri, the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to move forward the political
process in concert with the European Union, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the other international actors are very welcome. To
do that in dialogue with Belgrade is especially
important, and we look forward to the contribution
later of Mr. Sahovic, who is with us. That dialogue
needs cooperation, it needs substance and it needs
goodwill on the part of both participants. We look
especially to the authorities in Kosovo to display that.
It is very important that the working groups on areas of
practical cooperation, and especially on the areas of
concern, should be put in place and begin their work
quickly. The dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade is
critical to this process. No less critical are the
standards, and the document which has been released is
a vital step forward. The standards and what they
represent - democratic institutions, the rule of law, the
question of returns and reintegration into society of
different groupings - are basic to the future of
Kosovo. And they are basic to whatever future Kosovo
has.

Kosovo has been given an opportunity to emerge
from the shadows and to move forward. The whole
concept of standards before status is not rhetorical. It is
absolutely basic to the sort of Kosovo that all of us
want to see created. Under resolution 1244 (1999), if
status is to be discussed, then it should be absolutely
clear to all of us - and consistent with the
requirements of that resolution - that it must be on the
basis of an entity which is meeting the standards which
we expect of most European States - I say European
quite deliberately because it is a European destination
that Kosovo is likely to have. But the standards
currently enjoyed by others are essential for Kosovo. I
do not say that to patronize Kosovo. I say it because it
is the way the European Union and its associated
countries have evolved and will continue to evolve. If
Kosovo wants to be part of that, living as the sort of
entity we want to see - in harmony with itself and at
peace with its neighbours - then it must do this.

Thus, the implementation of the standards and the
review mechanism is crucial. We will all be watching
the implementation plan very carefully, but it needs
especially to be discussed by those involved and
worked up in conjunction with Belgrade and then -
especially - put in place.

That should be the priority for the authorities in
Pristina and, more widely, in Kosovo. Unilateral
actions and rhetorical resolutions which are prejudicial
to that process will not deter us. There can be no
question that until the standards are achieved, the
developments that we would all like to see in Kosovo
will not be put in place. There is an opportunity. We all
look now for those involved on the ground to fulfil
their responsibilities and to deliver that better future.

