The Secretary-General: It gives me great
pleasure to join the Council today for this open debate
on peace-building. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your initiative on this key aspect of
international peace and security. I am confident that it
will contribute to our efforts to arrive at a shared Vision
of peace-building with which all of us can move
forward.

Peace-building in the broadest sense is about
helping a country to put back in place the rudiments of
normal life after a period of conflict. Peace-building is
about the resumption of economic activity, the
rejuvenation of institutions, the restoration of basic
services, the reconstruction of clinics and schools, the
revamping of public administration and the resolution
of differences through dialogue, not violence. The
overarching challenge is to move societies towards
sustainable peace.

Peace-building done well is a powerful deterrent
to violent conflict. But it is not powerful in the way an
army can be powerful; rather, it is the sum of many
initiatives, projects, activities and sensitivities. Peace-
building is not the dramatic imposition of a grand plan;
rather, it is the process of building the pillars of peace
from the ground up, bit by bit.

The instruments of peace-building are as varied
as the United Nations system itself. Indeed, virtually
every part of the United Nations system, including the
Bretton Woods institutions, is currently engaged in one
form of peace-building or another. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants;
human rights education; the repatriation of refugees;
the promotion of conflict resolution and reconciliation
techniques - this is just a short list of activities. We
are also promoting cultural exchanges designed to link
States in networks of enterprise and opportunity, not in
webs of mutual antagonism.

In order to ensure the coherence of these efforts,
we are also trying to improve our own internal
arrangements, so that peace-building is not only
comprehensive, but done in an integrated way. With an
increasing number of United Nations entities
establishing peace-building units and funds, we will
need a major effort of coordination if we are to
reinforce one another's efforts and avoid duplication
and confusion.

We tend to think of peace-building as taking
place primarily in post-conflict settings. Here, the goals
are to consolidate peace, reinforce an often hard-won
and fragile stability and, above all, to prevent a slide
back into conflict. But I see peace-building also as a
preventive instrument, which can address the
underlying, root causes of conflict, and which can also
be used before the actual outbreak of war. A society on
the brink of breakdown is as much in need of such an
instrument as one in which disaster has already struck.
Its timely deployment at that stage could save many
lives and avoid much misery. The political, economic
and human logic of such an approach is impeccable.
The problem is that we do not practise prevention as
often as we could or should.

Whether started before, after or during the
eruption of conflict, peace-building must be seen as a
long-term exercise. At the same time, there is an
unmistakable element of urgency - a need to achieve
tangible progress on a number of fronts in a short
period of time. Peace-building must be, above all, the
work of the society that is threatened by conflict or that
has succumbed to it. International efforts to promote
peace or development must support, not supplant,
national ones.
Peace-building is an extremely difficult
undertaking. All too often, countries emerging from
prolonged conflicts are starting almost from ground
zero, under clouds of bitterness and loss. It requires
persistence and vision, as well as the courage to pursue
reconciliation in societies still fractured by suspicion
and mistrust.

Here I would like to say a word about the
fundamentally political character of peace-building,
which makes it distinct from normal development
activities in non-crisis situations. When a country is
sliding into conflict, or emerging from war, its needs
are qualitatively different from those of a stable
society. This requires a reordering of normal
developmental, humanitarian and other activities, so
that their first objective is to contribute to the
paramount goal of preventing the outbreak or
recurrence of conflict.

Some have described this as looking at
developmental and humanitarian work through a
"conflict prevention lens". Others have spoken about
"peace-friendly" adjustment programmes, with the
flexibility to take account of the exceptional needs of
countries emerging from or on the verge of conflict.
Indeed, at times, peace-building may mean giving
preferential treatment to some groups in a society in
order to redress pre-existing inequalities that may have
bred explosive tensions. This, in turn, may involve an
allocation of resources that might not be optimal from
a purely economic point of view.

During the last decade, both the General
Assembly and the Security Council have recognized
the importance of peace-building and the need to work
with a range of partners, including non-governmental
organizations and the private sector. The Council has
rightly recognized that peace-building can be a vital
component of peacekeeping missions, and that it needs
to include such preventive tools as early warning,
diplomacy, preventive deployment and disarmament.

In countries as diverse as Bosnia, Cambodia, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Liberia and Mozambique, peace-
building has helped to smooth the implementation and
prevent the breakdown of peace agreements. In
countries like Haiti, Guinea-Bissau and the Central
African Republic, peace-building activities have
contributed to the maintenance of fragile stability. In
response to growing demand, the United Nations has
opened, on a pilot basis, Peace-building Support
Offices in the Central African Republic, Guinea-
Bissau, Liberia and Tajikistan.
Although these outposts are relatively new and
are constrained by limited resources, they have helped
Governments to destroy weapons, build institutions and
mobilize international support for their societies'
needs. As you know, we are now exploring the
possibility of establishing a peace-building presence in
Somalia.

This Council has a prime role to play. Among the
major challenges of peace-building is the mobilization
of sustained political will and resources on the part of
the international community. A number of good ideas
have been put forward in key areas such as the
implementation of peace agreements and the design of
peacekeeping operations, which the Council could
incorporate into its future mandates.

Further contributions can be expected from our
meeting with regional organizations tomorrow and
Wednesday. I am delighted that the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council will be attending this
event, and I am confident that the Council will want to
lend its full support to the outcome.

Peace-building presents complex and diverse
challenges. I will do my utmost operationally to
improve the peace-building projects in which we
engage and to exploit the best possible effect - the
expertise that exists in the United Nations system and
among many partners. But I will also ask the members
to do more politically to give peace-building a higher
priority and a higher profile by bringing it closer to the
forefront of your awareness. Peace-building must not
be seen as an add-on or an afterthought, something to
save for later when conditions or resources or politics
permit. It is a central tool of proven worth. Let us
together pledge to develop and improve it, and then let
us use it in good time.

