Ms. Kamissa (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to extend to you, Mr. President, the warm
congratulations of the delegation of Mali on the
assumption by your country, the Dominican Republic,
to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January. I assure you of my delegation's full
cooperation in that regard. I would like to reiterate my
warm congratulations and best wishes to South Africa,
Germany, Belgium, Indonesia and the Dominican
Republic in the execution of their terms as new
members of the Council. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegations of Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden and
to thank them for their valuable contributions to the
pursuit of international peace and security.

This meeting gives me the welcome opportunity
to reiterate to all members of the Security Council,
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and all United
Nations staff who deal with Mali the deep appreciation
ofthe President ofthe Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, and the Government and
the people of Mali for their continued commitment to
peace and security in Mali, the Sahel and the rest of
the world.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1l74) under consideration.
I congratulate Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, on
her brilliant briefing and updates since the issuance
of the report. I also take note of the comments and
high expectations that Council members have just
expressed. I would now like to share the observations
of the Government of Mali on the report in terms of
progress made, the major challenges encountered and
the prospects for the coming months in the context of
the process of ending the crisis in our country.

I would therefore like to begin by affirming that
the President of the Republic of Mali, the Government,
the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and
the Platform coalition of armed groups remain fully
committed to the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process. Today, I am
pleased to say that the Government and the signatory
movements are now a single Malian party, which speaks
with one voice and is determined to ensure peace for
the benefit of our people, who have suffered six years of
a multifaceted crisis. That common will of the Malian
parties to ensure peace in our country continues to
demonstrate real progress, and I am pleased that the
report under consideration has acknowledged those
encouraging advances.

As part of the political and institutional reforms,
the period was therefore marked by the reaffirmation
of the Head of State's resolve to revise the Constitution
in order to assume responsibility for certain relevant
provisions of the agreement and to adapt our institutional
practices to the current realities. In order to achieve
that, at the Council of Ministers on 20 December 2018,
the Head of State instructed the Prime Minister, Head
of Government, to initiate the constitutional review
and the necessary institutional reforms as part of a
consensual and inclusive process.

In accordance with that presidential instruction,
the Prime Minister set up a committee of experts to
undertake the constitutional review. In that regard,
we plan to hold the referendum on the revision of the
Constitution in the first quarter of 2019, the legislative
elections in May/June 2019 and the local elections in
July 2019. I should say that, in order to achieve reforms
acceptable to our people, the Government has also
started consultations with political and societal actors,
including the signatory movements, with a View to
reaching a consensus on those reforms.

At the same time, consultations on the territorial
division project continue in order to bring our
administrative structures closer to our people and their
needs. I am pleased that the Secretary-General has
noted that the percentage of civil administrators and
other State representatives in the northern and central
regions has slightly increased over the reporting period,
from 31 per cent to 34 per cent.

In the area of defence and security, I am pleased to
note that the ongoing security sector reform has resulted
in the registration of combatants of armed movements,
with a total of 32,908 troops and, in terms of weapons
and ammunition, 5,943 submachine guns, 3,736 rifles,
990 machine guns, 473 pistols, 225 rockets, 490 heavy
weapons, 6 122-mm missiles, 39 improvised explosive
devices, 3,177 grenades, 201 shells and more than
85,000 munitions.

That operation was followed by the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process of the Operational Coordination Mechanism
elements, launched on 6 November 2018 with the
support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The operation made it possible to register and to
disarm 1,423 ofthe planned 1,600 combatants from two
signatory movements and other armed groups. Those
disarmed combatants will go through an upgrading
phase before being redeployed to take on the tasks of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism, namely,
ensuring the security of the rest of the DDR process in
a climate that, as members know, is difficult. I welcome
the cooperation of MINUSMA, which has contributed
significantly to the success of the process.

On the same topic, I would like to underline that the
security sector reform process also led to the holding
of a high-level workshop on security sector reform in
Bamako from 12 to 14 December 2018, during which
the key issues that had remained outstanding for three
years were addressed in order to obtain a consensual
response that would allow for progress. That relates
in particular to the concepts of a reconstituted army,
special units and territorial police. The exact details
and the specific content of those concepts have been
established. There are also modalities for the return of
the Malian armed forces to the northern regions, which
were decided upon in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the agreement and the texts and principles
governing the defence and security forces of Mali. The
draft decrees on the conditions of graduation and the
conditions for the return of former elements of the
Malian armed forces are now available. In the same
vein, the Government decided to establish a border
guard to better monitor Mali's seven borders.

With regard to economic and social development,
during the period under review the Government
allocated an additional $6 million to enable the interim
authorities to finance projects envisioned in their
priority action plans, including the water supply system
for the city of Kidal, the construction of six schools
and six water points in the Menaka region and the
establishment of three camel meat and milk processing
plants in the Taoudenni region.

In the context of the national reconciliation,
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
is pursuing its mission throughout the country,
particularly in the regions affected by the crisis. Since
January 2017, more than 10,000 people have testified
before the Commission.

Needless to say, the progress made in the
implementation of the agreement has not led us to lose
sight of the worrying security situation in the centre
of Mali. Terrorist groups are fuelling and fanning the
flames of intercommunal violence in the Mopti and
Segou regions, against the backdrop of assumptions and
tensions over water resources, animal routes to grazing
areas and the fields of farmers practicing sedentary
farming. Considering the full scope of the gravity of
the situation, which unfortunately continues to inflict
losses on our people, the President of the Republic
visited the bereaved families in the village of Koulongo
on 4 January following several such visits by the Prime
Minister to those two regions.

Rapid and robust measures have been taken to halt
such intercommunal clashes, including dynamic efforts
tied to the implementation of the integrated security plan
for the centre, with particular emphasis on strengthening
security arrangements in those regions, especially
through the 2018 deployment of 13,000 men, half of
whom were deployed in the centre of the country; the
creation of 16 new security posts; the enrolment of more
than 600 young people from those regions in a special
programme for reducing intercommunal violence,
including a tailored disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration component, which has so far led to
the recovery of 444 weapons; the disarmament of all
militias by late January; and development activities and
the provision of basic social services for the benefit
of our people, with a view to achieving a lasting
resolution of the crisis. Similarly, the Government is
working to improve the management of pastoral routes
so as to minimize the risk of tensions among herders
and farmers.

The tragic events of Koulongo, like the other
crimes committed in the central part of Mali, will
not go unpunished. As of now, I can inform the
Council that seven people have been arrested for their
alleged involvement in the Koulongo massacre, and
investigations continue to identify and bring to justice
all those responsible and their accomplices. I must add
that, during the same period, an additional 24 people
were arrested in connection with a similar attack in
Bobosso, a neighbouring village ofKoulongo. However,
we are aware that security measures alone will not
suffice, especially in an environment in which terrorist
groups are working relentlessly to destroy social
cohesion and weaken the State with a view to expanding
their territorial domination. We have therefore also
planned to focus on political, administrative and social
work with the involvement of all the vital forces of our
country, including political, traditional and religious
leaders and national frameworks so as to build a
national consensus, first, to identify those who benefit
from such crimes, and, secondly, to find solutions in
which the entire Malian nation can participate.

With regard to the human rights situation, Mali
welcomes the decrease in the total number of cases of
human rights violations. The Government is aware of
its primary responsibility to protect the population. It
will therefore continue to make the efforts necessary
to ensure the safety of the people and their property
throughout the entire country. The 14 per cent of human
rights violations attributed to the Malian defence and
security forces, as indicated in paragraph 36 of the
report of the Secretary-General, have already been
subject to administrative and disciplinary measures,
and relevant investigations are under way to attribute
responsibility and bring the alleged perpetrators to
justice so that they can be held accountable before the
competent national tribunals.

As the Council is aware, a lasting solution to the
crisis cannot be limited to security considerations
alone. In that regard, it is necessary to pursue efforts
aimed at dealing with development issues so as
to improve the living conditions of the population
throughout the country. The legal and institutional
framework of the sustainable economic development
fund is now complete, providing a relevant tool for
the implementation of the economic component of
the agreement, without which the peace dividends
benefiting citizens would be negligible. That measure
will enable structuring investments, the financing
of the local economy and basic social services under
the project ownership of the communities concerned,
administered by interim authorities and transitional
institutions set up under the peace agreement, pending
the holding of local and regional elections and following
the planned institutional reforms.

As Council members are also aware, the crisis in
Mali entails repercussions for the region that fall under
the mandate of the Sahel Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the current operational level
of which is very encouraging. Like the other G-5 Sahel
countries, Mali will continue to provide its full support
to that organization, which is enjoying increased support
from its partners, as was demonstrated by the holding
of the conference in Nouakchott on 6 December 2018,
at which pledges totalled €2.4 billion - €500 million
more than originally sought. While reiterating the
gratitude of the Government of Mali for that show of
solidarity, I echo the call of the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State and the Secretary-General for a robust mandate
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
and for predictable and sustainable funding for the
activities of the Joint Force, including through the
United Nations.

As Council members can see, the Malian parties are
focused on the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. We will continue
to work together to provide appropriate follow-up to
the relevant provisions of resolution 2423 (2018), in
particular paragraph 4, so as to achieve further progress
in view of the Secretary-General's next report and the
Security Council's planned visit to Mali in March.
In conclusion, I firmly reiterate that the
implementation of the agreement continues to
progress meaningfully, although I am aware that
the achievements are fragile and that the challenges
facing our peace process are immense. The security
situation in the Mopti and Segou regions remains today
a priority concern of the President of the Republic,
the Government and all the vital forces of the Malian
nation. The measures 1 have just presented are likely
to bring lasting peace and stability to the northern and
central regions of Mali.

On both fronts, Mali and its people require the
support and solidarity of the international community.
On both fronts, Mali and its people require the continued
support of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council. I know that the members of the Security
Council have contributed enormously to the peace
process under way in my country, particularly through
MINUSMA. I take this opportunity to commend the
outstanding work that MINUSMA is doing on the
ground under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Mali and Head of MINUSMA, and to
convey the same sentiments to all the women and men
of MINUSMA, who are working in conditions that, I
know, are very difficult. I pay tribute to all the civilian,
military, foreign and Malian victims of the Malian
crisis, who have fallen on the field of honour in our
country. I reiterate the gratitude of the Government and
the people of Mali to the French forces of Operation
Barkhane, to the troop-contributing countries of
MINUSMA and to all the multilateral and bilateral
partners for their unwavering support for a lasting and
definitive settlement to the Malian crisis.

