Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to join others in thanking Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his excellent statement, and I
would like to thank you, Sir, for hosting and
coordinating today's meeting on the very important
subject we are discussing. Under-Secretary-General
Egeland's presentation is both daunting in the array of
challenges it raises and cause for some hope that all of
us can do a better job in dealing with them.

My Government has long believed that
safeguarding civilians from the devastating effects of
armed conflict is at the very heart of the United
Nations Charter. Our fondest wish would be that this
Council could protect from harm all those who are
subject to aggression. And while, of course, it cannot,
there is much that we can do to work towards that goal.

The Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have given us
some good suggestions for the way ahead.
Mr. Egeland's statement today, the updated aide-
memoire and road map are very useful in addressing
the challenges and in organizing our efforts to respond
to them. The general principles of providing
humanitarian access to vulnerable populations where
feasible, the separation of civilians and armed elements
and the restoration of the rule of law, justice and
reconciliation are all fundamental to the protection of
civilians. We will pursue their implementation and
practice. We also support the participation of children
in the design of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and special efforts to deal
with the particular threats to children and women.
These are important issues that we will discuss and
address in the future, including with regard to the
situations in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Liberia, the Sudan and others.

We welcome the road map and the
implementation of many of the objectives it calls for,
and we hope that Member nations will be involved in
this process. We also welcome the revised aide-
memoire and view it as a vital resource for the Security
Council in applying best practices in future resolutions.
Consistent and systematic application by the Council of
the valuable tools it has at its disposal, such as
previous resolutions on protection of humanitarian
workers, on women, peace and security and on children
in armed in conflict, is a goal we strongly support. We
will work to promote its realization.

We commend the Under-Secretary-General and
his colleagues in the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for their contribution to
developing practical ideas on future steps, and we
reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's efforts
to protect civilians. We encourage the Secretary-
General and other key actors in the United Nations
system to continue the dialogue with us on how United
Nations organs can better work together to promote
protection and to present country-specific
recommendations for the Council's consideration.

We look forward to the promised comprehensive
plan of action to be presented to the Security Council at
the time of the Secretary-General's next report on
protection of civilians and to our further discussions.

