Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the situation in the Palestinian
occupied territories.

Resolving the Palestinian question and achieving
a comprehensive Middle East settlement based on
Security Council resolutions must remain a priority for
world diplomacy. We say that because the Middle East
is still in the grip of destabilizing trends, many of them
intentionally introduced from outside. The result is that
new crises are piled on top of old ones. In our opinion,
the recent growing tension in the Persian Gulf is being
artificially Whipped up. That crisis is threatening peace
and security in the region along with the international
efforts to resolve the crises and conflicts there,
including between Palestine and Israel.

This is an urgent warning. Any adventurist
attempts using force, should they be carried out, will at
the very least bring disaster. It is not hard to predict that
there would be outbreaks of violence and new waves
of migration, and the consequences for anyone making
such attempts would be horrifying. What we need is
immediate de-escalation and efforts to seek a negotiated
settlement of the current disputes. Confrontation must
give way to dialogue, right now. We want to once again
remind the Council of the mandate whereby resolution
598 (1987) requests the Secretary-General to examine
measures for the security of the region in consultation
with the parties in the region. Security is indivisible.
It is one and the same for everyone, without exception,
and no preference for any individual State. A formula
that says what is permitted for some is forbidden for
others is not going to work.

We cannot allow a new fault line to nullify the
positive trends that we have been seeing recently in
the region. Life in most of the Syrian Arab Republic is
gradually returning to normal. Iraq, which has chosen to
make good-neighbourly relations a priority of its foreign
policy, is receiving political and economic assistance.
The Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
are working actively to find formulas for resolving
other conflicts in hotspots in the region. Work is being
done to bolster efforts to combat the threat of terrorism,
which can be defeated only by putting together a front
that is as united as possible.

However, the quest for a solution to the key Middle
East issue of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is still at
an impasse. This area has recently been dominated by
dangerous trends, in the form of unilateral measures
and aggressive revisions of previously settled
agreements. In our view, the international legal basis for
a settlement in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
adopted by the Heads of State of the Arab world, and
the Madrid principles, remains inviolable. We see no
alternative to a two-State solution. Any proposals for
improving the economic situation in the Palestinian
territories must be part of a package with the political
components of a settlement, or the peace initiatives
are doomed to failure. We want to point out that there
has been an international consensus on this issue for
many years. The status of the occupied Palestinian
territories and other occupied territories, including the
Syrian Golan, is determined by the relevant Security
Council resolutions. No unilateral steps can change
that reality.

We believe firmly that no breakthroughs can succeed
in isolation. History has shown that. We consider the
Middle East Quartet of international mediators to be
a unique mechanism, endorsed by Security Council
resolutions, and a relevant and essential format. We
would like to remind Council members of the Quartet's
2016 report, which includes a detailed road map for the
resumption of a sustainable political process.

Historically, Russia has supported trusting,
friendly relations with both the Israelis and the
Palestinians. That is Why we believe that establishing a
political process to implement a two-State formula not
only meets Palestinians' expectations but also satisfies
Israel's security concerns. We believe it is vital to
involve the countries of the region and the League of
Arab States more actively in the efforts to achieve peace
in Palestine and the Middle East as a whole. We support
a strong and united League with regard to a number of
international issues, including the Palestinian question.
Russia will continue to cooperate in establishing a
positive agenda for a settlement in the Middle East. Our
proposal for holding a summit in Russia between the
leaders of Palestine and Israel remains on the table. It
is high time to implement the Russian initiative for a
Security Council mission to the Middle East. We have
been working for decades to establish contacts with all
the parties, and we can help to restore unity among the
Palestinians. We greatly appreciate the efforts of Egypt
in that regard.

We also need active international measures aimed
at improving the dire humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip. However, any assistance for Gaza must be
provided in coordination with the legitimate authorities
under President Abbas and should be part of the efforts
to restore Palestinian unity. We assume that this
principle will guide the work of the United Nations and
all the parties concerned. We will continue our active
support for the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
which has a serious political dimension as well as a
humanitarian one.

The instability in the Middle East requires united
measures. We urgently need to take steps to overcome
the impasse in the Palestinian-Israeli issue. Measures
must be taken to spread a culture of peace among
religious groups, which will help to prevent new
upheavals based on ethnicity or religion and protect
the Christians and other religious minorities who have
lived in the Middle East for thousands of years and
have been a vital cultural and civilizational element,
professing principles of tolerance, but who have had to
leave the region having become targets of genocide.

However, rather than imposing an outdated herd
mentality aimed against the other, we should act
with a view to creating platforms for dialogue that
will enable us to pursue the quest for solutions to the
security issues in the Middle East. We want to once
again draw attention to the related Russian initiative on
a security architecture for the Middle East. Russia is
ready to cooperate constructively with partners on all
issues on the Middle East agenda on a platform - to
which there is no alternative - for seeking political
ways to overcome the existing challenges. Establishing
joint political rather than military efforts for the Middle
East demands that we renounce any arbitrary concepts
of a rules-based order and return to respect for the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.

