Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our pride in Kuwait
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. We unconditionally support Kuwait's
efforts in that office

(spoke in French)

I thank the Kuwaiti presidency for having
convened this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. We particularly welcome the
deserved institutionalization of this topic, to make it
an annual consideration by the Council. This positive
development allows us today to address such an
important issue among members and non-members of
the Council alike.

My delegation takes this opportunity to pay tribute
to the outstanding work of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions and
the adoption, on 30 August 2017, of note S/2017/507,
issued under the presidency of Egypt. This note, as
updated, provides us a current, coherent and substantive
document for reflection. We welcome the key role
of Japan at the helm of the Working Group over the
past two years. We are convinced that the Group will
make significant progress under your chairmanship,
Mr. President.

All of these elements, accompanied by ongoing
and sustained efforts, will certainly advance our goal
of improving and harmonizing the activities of the
Security Council by enshrining the role of the Council
as guarantor of the maintenance of international peace
and security on behalf of all Member States of the
United Nations. The Charter of the United Nations has
conferred on the Council important powers that it is
duty-bound to use effectively. We commend the Council
for efforts made to date, and we encourage further work
in this area.

Indeed, the Council broke a record this past year with
the holding of no less than 282 public meetings - that
is, 41 more than in 2014 and 45 more than 2016. It is a
testament to the growing responsibility of the Council.
Nevertheless, the review of the working methods of the
Council was only addressed twice in 2017, at the behest
of the Ukranian and Egyptian presidencies in February
and August, respectively. Five such meetings were held
in 2016.

In that context, Morocco welcomes the many
positive developments in recent years with regard to
improving the Council's operations and bolstering its
effectiveness and inclusiveness, including the issuing
of joint letters from the Presidents of the Security
Council and the General Assembly to all Member
States listing the names of candidates for the Secretary-
General position; the openness and greater interaction
with non-Council-member States; more systematic
use of new technologies, notably videoconference; the
election of chairs of the Council's subsidiary bodies
that are more accessible to non-permanent members;
and interactions with chairs of the country-specific
configurations in the Peacebuilding Commission.

Those new practices contribute to enhancing the
transparency and quality of the work of the Council and
also allows it to benefit from the diversity of positions
and views of Member States. It should be kept in mind
that improving the working methods of the Council is a
permanent and evolving process. The presidental note in
S/2017/507 is a major feat in this quest for transparency,
effectiveness and greater authority for the Council. In
that regard, it is particularly important to take into
account the current global international context in all
discussions on the working methods of the Council.

Moreover, as a troop-contributing country, the
Kingdom of Morocco can attest to the lasting effects of
the Council efforts in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, particularly
in Africa. Morocco also attaches great importance to

the development of preventive diplomacy, hand in hand
with the need for rapid and effective action to maintain
international peace and security and promote political
solutions to conflicts, and to the development of the
support that the international community extends to the
actions taken by the Council. It goes without saying that
improving the working methods of the Council through
the joint reflection of all Member States, accompanied
by the political will of the members of this executive
organ of the United Nations, will contribute to the
achievement of its goals.

Finally, we would do well to not forget that the
debate on the improvement of the working methods
of the Council is part of a united vision of the new
architecture of the United Nations, as expressed by
the Secretary-General in his reform proposals. The
Kingdom of Morocco is ready to contribute to this
important work, just as it did during the two years ofits
mandate in the Council, in 2012 and 2013.

I would be remiss if I did not pay a heartfelt tribute
to the Security Council Affairs Division, which,
through its reports, analyses and its accessibility to the
Member States of the United Nations, contributes to the
improvement of the Council's working methods.

