The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Losada Fernandez for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

At the outset, allow me to thank the Secretary-
General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Mali, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the observer of the European
Commission for their respective briefings. I also thank
the Secretary-General for the submission of his report
(S/2017/869) on how we can ramp up force generation
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel). Following the Security Council's 10-day
visit to the Sahel, his report provides us with a very
solid basis for discussion as we pursue talks on how we
can support this exemplary initiative.

The situation today is unambiguous: terrorist
groups in the Sahel today represent a global threat, both
for the stability of the region but also to international
security. Terrorists take advantage our weaknesses and
our divisions. They are financed by drug trafficking
and human trafficking. On repeated occasions, they
have demonstrated their ability to strike in Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso, as well as their determination
to expand to neighbouring countries. The threat has not
spared our nationals and our forces, who are waging
the war by the sides of our Sahel partners in the region.
This situation has a direct impact on the security of
many other countries beyond the Sahel - in Africa,
Europe and in the world as a whole. It therefore requires
a clear, strong and coordinated response by the United
Nations, and indeed by all of us.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force is a proper response to
the challenge. When faced with a threat that makes a
mockery of borders, the response must be organized
among neighbouring States on a cross-border basis.
This is what makes the Joint Force such an exemplary
initiative. It deserves our support as it seeks to expand
its operational capacity in order to respond to the
regional terrorist threat. By combining their forces with
the explicit goal of securing their borders and equipping
themselves with the means to succeed, Burkina Faso,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Chad are clearly
seeking to complement efforts already under way by
the international community in the region. In that
regard, I refer to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the European Union capacity-building and training
missions, which have made it possible to rebuild Mali's
military and security forces. I would of course also
mention the 4,000 soldiers of Operation Barkhane.

The G-5 Sahel Joint Force should enable
MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to focus on the
core areas oftheir respective mandates, as requested by
the Government of Mali, in order to gain even greater
efficiency. That is why the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
must gradually improve its ability to tackle terrorism
and trafficking.

The Security Council's recent visit to the Sahel
revealed the current status of the Joint Force, which is
now operational in the region's central zone where it is
undertaking its first operation. The visit assessed the
Force's need and potential, with armed forces rapidly
increasing their interoperability, and also verified the
seriousness and determination of the G-5 Sahel States
in implementing the Joint Force initiative. I would
like to commend the representatives of each of those
five States. Their commitment is the key to success. I
want to say once again that they have the full support
of France.

The initiative is still young. There are a number
of remaining challenges that must be overcome before
it becomes fully active in all three of the region's
time zones. It must also respond to the challenges
posed in terms of respect for human rights, without
which the fight against terrorism cannot be effective.
Nevertheless, it is clear that today, eight months after
the initial announcement, the Joint Force is a reality. It
is beginning its operations in the central zone, which is
where it must play its first major role.

The question is no longer whether the international
community should support the response of the G-5
Sahel States. I think I can safely say that we are now
all firmly convinced. We must now ask ourselves how
we can help, without taking away from the G-5 Sahel
States their primary responsibility for securing their
borders. Bilateral support, as pointed out in the report
of the Secretary-General, remains crucial in helping
the Joint Force to reach its full potential. In that regard,
France is playing its full part in contributing to that
effort, which must be collective, through the material
and technical support provided by Operation Barkhane
and its security and defence cooperation framework.
The European Union has also mobilized support by
immediately deciding to provide substantial aid of
€50 million to support the launch of the Joint Force.

I call on our partners to play their full part in
supporting this vital effort, especially in view of
the planning conference to be held in Brussels on
14 December. At that conference, announcements that
are as significant and concrete as possible are expected
to be made. However, we must also develop multilateral
aid. That would provide long-term operational and
logistical support to the Joint Force and would represent
an important signal of the international community's
support for the G-5 Sahel countries in their struggle
against terrorist groups.

The report of the Secretary-General offers us well
defined options for possible support. It is an ambitious
report, and for that I want to thank the Secretary-
General. It will be up to us, over the coming days, to
put the report to good use and render it operationally
applicable. The Security Council, and through it the
international community, must rise to the challenges
faced by the States of the region in order to fight
terrorism together.

The Security Council must support the increasing
operational capacity of the Joint Force. First, it must
do so by playing its full role in the mobilization of the
international community to support the initiative, but
also by thinking about forms of multilateral support as
proposed by the Secretary-General. The Joint Force's
logistical support options, as currently conceived by
MINUSMA, must be studied as quickly as possible,
as proposed in the Secretary-General's report. I am
convinced that that support can be implemented without
altering the capacity of MINUSMA's peacekeeping
operation. I would therefore like to invite participants
to consider the options openly.

Let us be ambitious, but also pragmatic and
realistic, as is the approach of the Secretary-General's
report. The key is to get off to a good start and sustain
the initial build-up of the Joint Force. It will be up to
us to then make a progress report with the G-5 Sahel
countries and decide how to develop support based on
the results obtained by our partners on the ground.
However, we must not be found wanting during these
initial stages, which is why we are meeting today to
chart the path we take with the G-5 Sahel countries.
We will have to support the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
by supporting the planning conference to be held
in Brussels.

Of course, given the threats facing the Sahel, the
answer is not only of a security nature. There can be
no lasting peace without sustainable development.
An additional effort in that area must therefore be
undertaken to stabilize the region. France is fully aware
ofthat, which is why it is spearheading the Alliance With
the Sahel project, together with Germany, the European
Union, the World Bank, the African Development Bank
and the United Nations Development Programme. The
project aims to achieve significant and swift results in
key development areas, such as youth employability,
agriculture, energy, governance and security. Without a
guarantee of access to education and a brighter future,
we will not be able to prevent many young people
from falling into desperation and into the clutches of
terrorist groups.

Finally, all those efforts require us to fully
implement the peace process in Mali. I appeal again
today to the responsibility of all those concerned. I also
call for the necessary efforts ofgovernance and dialogue
with the communities concerned in the area where the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force will be deployed, especially on
the borders of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Sweden.

