Mr. Al-Khalifa (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your friendly country's membership in the Security Council and on its presidency of the Council this month. We welcome the participation of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam in this meeting and commend Viet Nam's choice of theme for this open debate. We thank the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders for their valuable briefings. We would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate those countries that joined the Council as non-permanent members at the beginning of the year. We look forward to working with them and the other members of the Council in the years to come. We also commend the efforts and contributions of the five countries whose membership of the Council has just ended. The founding of the United Nations constituted the beginning of a promising new era in achieving security, peace and prosperity for all peoples and in upholding respect for human rights. Given the growing challenges to global stability, we are today in need of greater effort and increased cooperation as we strive to adapt to new developments. We must overcome current challenges by renewing our commitment to the purposes, principles and goals of the United Nations, the cornerstone of which is the maintenance of international peace and security. This requires us to translate our political will into action, including through the implementation of international treaties and conventions in the economic, political and social spheres as well as through enhancing cooperation in conflict resolution and the uprooting of terrorism and extremism. There is no better solution to these problems than implementing the provisions of the United Nations Charter. We recall that the Charter of the United Nations was originally developed as a comprehensive solution designed to address the most daunting challenges to international peace and security in an era that is not so remote from ours. The Charter exemplified humankind's best wisdom for avoiding, or if necessary, tackling such challenges. Accordingly, we do not lack a point of reference for ways to maintain international peace and security. Nevertheless, we have not succeeded in the practical implementation of the international instruments at our disposal, principally the Charter of the United Nations. Numerous experiences over the decades have proven that failure to adhere to the provisions of the Charter is the underlying reason for the many threats to international peace and security, the outbreak and escalation of conflicts and the occurrence of violations to which countless innocent people have fallen victim. It is in this spirit that various States Members of the United Nations have stressed the utmost need to strengthen and adhere to the provisions of the Charter in order to duly maintain international peace and security. As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations, its Charter constitutes the most important international document for establishing a global multilateral system that guarantees peace, security, stability and prosperity around the world. This Organization and its Member States must renew their efforts to ensure the effective implementation of the letter and the spirit of the Charter so that its noble purpose of serving the peoples of the world may be achieved. The State of Qatar seizes the opportunity presented by this seventy-fifth anniversary to reaffirm its commitment to the Organization as the most important and irreplaceable forum for collective action aimed at achieving peace and_ security, development and human rights. We look forward to working with all Member States to adopt a declaration in line with General Assembly resolution 73/299 on the commemoration of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations that will express the collective commitment of Member States to multilateralism, the United Nations and their shared vision for a common future. We are extremely proud that Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Ahmed Bin Saif Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of the State of Qatar to the United Nations, will be working together with Her Excellency Ambassador Anna- Karin Enestre6m, Permanent Representative of Sweden to the United Nations, on the task of facilitating intergovernmental negotiations to reach a consensus on the text of that declaration. Peace and security cannot be achieved in the absence of a collective approach at all levels. In that regard, the ongoing blockade against the State of Qatar, which has now been in place for two and a half years under fake and exposed justifications for the international community, constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions of the United Nations Charter and of international law. It also contributes to undermining regional and international peace and security. The State of Qatar has consistently called for resolving the crisis through constructive dialogue that guarantees State sovereignty within the framework of respecting the Charter, which places emphasis on developing friendly relations among countries and the peaceful settlement of disputes as the only way to defuse crises and achieve international peace and security. In line with the policies of the State of Qatar, which is renowned for its commitment to international law and its respect for the Charter of the United Nations, we renew our support for international multilateral action. It is our goal to resolve all crises and settle disputes by peaceful means through dialogue, mediation and enhancing respect for human rights, in accordance with the provisions and purposes of the Charter and in cooperation with all parties that believe in the rule of law and collective action.
