Mr. De Palacio Espafia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to join others in expressing my
condolences at the tragic loss of human life of
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone in the accident that occurred this morning.

I also wish to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals for their statements and
their thorough assessments. Allow me to make a few
brief observations and to formulate a question.

The assessments of both Tribunals confirm that
much remains to be done to complete the transfer of
certain cases to national jurisdictions. Despite some
encouraging data, it is disturbing that the Tribunals of
the affected States are still not in a position to judge
with full guarantees persons indicted by both
Tribunals. In order to be able to act appropriately, it
would be important to clearly determine which of these
cases are due to limitations of a material nature and
which are due to a lack of political will.

With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), as pointed
out in the report of the Prosecutor, Mrs. Del Ponte,
Spain believes that the possibility of transferring to
national jurisdictions not only cases related to mid- or
low-ranking indictees, but also some high-ranking
suspects, must not be dismissed, due to exceptional
current circumstances. Rather, it should be considered
very carefully and on the basis of a detailed case-by-
case study.

Spain views with great concern the precarious
financial state of both Tribunals. This is an ongoing
and unacceptable situation. Successive changes in the
Tribunal's work programmes, as a result of non-
payment of contributions, would be a distressing
message to the international community, and we make
an appeal that that be avoided.

Equally concerning is the unsatisfactory
cooperation of some States, which are most directly
affected. Even though we welcome the improvement in
the assistance given by the Croatian authorities, we
must also mention the specific cases of Serbia and
Montenegro. Regarding the latter country, we believe
that the situation requires firm and decisive action by
the Council. Even though everything seems to indicate
that the recent elections have generated more
promising hopes to put an end to a substantial lack of
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, we believe that the Council
must not lower its guard and must act appropriately.

I also wish to refer to the impact the expiration of
the mandates next year of the permanent judges and the
ad litem judges will have on the trial process. The
Spanish Government continues to believe that any
corrective measures must be based on respect for the
prerogatives of the General Assembly. In particular
reference to the ad litem judges, we believe that the
delicate situation of the Tribunals should lead us to not
exclude from the outset the possibility of allowing their
re-election. Alternatively, the Council could actively
encourage the election of current ad litem judges who
are put forward as candidates to fill the posts left
vacant by outgoing permanent judges.

I wish in conclusion to ask the Presidents of both
Tribunals whether, since their last appearance before
the Council, there has been any significant progress in
negotiations on agreements with various third States
with respect to carrying out sentences imposed by the
Tribunals. My delegation had had a few more
questions, but I believe these were covered by previous
speakers.

