Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): When we speak of countering terrorism, we
refer to terrorism that has led us to suffer for eight
years, claimed the lives of hundreds of thousands of
Syrians and destroyed our infrastructure. When we
talk about terrorism and say that an individual is a
Kuwaiti, Egyptian, Tunisian, Australian, American
or Belgian, it does not mean that we are accusing the
Governments of those countries. We are drawing the
attention of those Governments to the presence of
people sponsoring terrorism in their countries. Salafist
movements are known throughout the Gulf, not just in
Kuwait. There are Salafist and Wahhabi movements
that are influenced by the Saudi Wahhabi ideology. The
Kuwaiti Government is well aware of that.

For years, we have unequivocally proven that there
are members of the Kuwaiti Parliament, for instance,
who are part of the Salafist movement, such as
Al-Tabatabai and Shafi Al-Ajmi. Are not they Kuwaiti
nationals? They are two members of Parliament. I
believe one of them is still a member of Parliament and
the other is a former member. There are video clips
on several social media platforms in which those two
terrorists encourage the slaughter of Syrians, based on
their sectarian and religious affiliation.

The New York Times featured a full-page article
in 2013 about a staff sergeant called Al-Mutairi,
whom we mentioned previously. He alone had sent
$400 million to Syria in cash and weapons. He was a
staff sergeant in the Kuwaiti army. The representative
of Kuwait compels us to mention names. There is
another Kuwaiti terrorist called Al-Jalahma - one of
the many terrorists active in Syria, alongside Saudis,
Egyptians, Tunisians and others. That does not mean
that the Kuwaiti Government sponsors terrorism. We
are simply drawing the attention of Governments to the
fact that terrorists from their countries come to Syria.
They are not Syrians. They are foreign terrorists. It is
our right, as a Syrian State, to fight and expel them. If
those countries are concerned about them, they should
take them back, as we said in our statement. They
should return those monsters back to their caves in
their countries.

