The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Iraq in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Humaimidi
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council is appalled by the
horrific death of members of the Russian
diplomatic mission in Iraq who had been
kidnapped by a terrorist group and later ruthlessly
and in cold blood executed by their captors.

"The Security Council in the strongest
possible terms condemns this crime committed by
the terrorists and conveys its deepest sympathy
and condolences to the families of the deceased
and to the people and Government of the Russian
Federation.
the

"The Security Council confirms that no
cause can justify such acts of terror as this crime
and previous attacks on foreign diplomats
committed by the terrorists, and reaffirms its
utmost determination to combat terrorism, in
accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council urges all States, in
accordance with their obligation under resolution
1373 (2001), to cooperate actively in efforts to
find and bring to justice the perpetrators,
organizers and sponsors of these barbaric acts.

"The Security Council also calls on the
international community to support the
Government of Iraq in exercising its
responsibility in providing protection to the
diplomatic community in Iraq, United Nations
staff and other foreign civilian personnel working
in Iraq.

"The Security Council also underlines the
importance of continuing the efforts of the
Government of Iraq and the Multinational Force
in combating terrorism and improving security in
Iraq in line with resolutions 1546 (2004) and
1637 (2005).

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of efforts to promote national
reconciliation, dialogue and inclusion in ensuring
peace, security and stability in Iraq, and in that
context commends the Iraqi Government for
initiating the Reconciliation and National
Dialogue Plan.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Iraq."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/29.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
06-41019

