Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First, let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his
concise and very useful briefing. I should also like to
point out that I associate myself with the statement that
will be made by the Italian presidency of the European
Union at a later stage in this meeting.

The series of violent incidents over the past
weeks highlights the urgency of dialogue and
reconciliation in Kosovo. We should not allow the
actions of a few extremists and criminals to divert us
from the task of creating a stable, peaceful and
democratic Kosovo.

The leaders in the region have condemned the
violence and say that they want to be responsible
partners of the international community and join the
European institutions as soon as possible. But they
have so far failed to take many of the difficult steps
necessary to realize their ambitions, above all the full
implementation of the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999).

We are disappointed that the recent declaration on
Kosovo passed by the Parliament of Serbia laid the
blame for the failure to implement resolution 1244
(1999) solely on the side of the ethnic Albanians.
Clearly, both sides have failed to meet their
obligations. For example, the creation of illegal parallel
structures in northern Kosovo and in Serbian enclaves
elsewhere has been a major impediment to
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). Moreover, it was
disappointing that the parliamentary declaration said
nothing about the interests and needs of the ethnic
Albanians, who make up the overwhelming majority of
the residents of Kosovo.

On the other hand, we urge the representatives of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo to continue to speak out against violence, to do
more to promote ethnic tolerance and to encourage the
acceptance of the rule of law. That is the only way to
create a more favourable climate for refugee returns.
Ending violence and ethnic intimidation is the most
important element of progress. Another critical element
is the need for direct dialogue between Pristina and
Belgrade about how they can best cooperate on
practical issues. We hope that this dialogue will begin
soon. This does not mean the talks about the final
status of Kosovo, which can take place only when
standards of democratic practice and ethnic tolerance
have been achieved.

We have high expectations for the programme of
action of the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we fully support his priorities.
In that connection, we are eager to receive the
operationalized benchmarks and work plan, which will
lay out the concrete tasks to be achieved over the
coming months.

