I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Fernando Arias for their briefings. Let me begin by reiterating my delegation's consistent position that chemical weapons constitute a threat to international peace and security and that their use cannot be tolerated anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances. Any such use is an act that we strongly condemn and that is in total contradiction of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention and international law. We therefore support the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and commend its efforts to shed light on the use of chemical weapons in Syria. My delegation reiterates its call to members of the Security Council to avoid any politicization of this topic and to work to create an environment conducive to a calm and technical analysis of the results of the OPCW investigations. The lack of consensus on how to deal with the issue of the use of chemical weapons in Syria is the main obstacle to holding the true culprits accountable, which in turn is likely to prolong the finalization of the investigations and delay the holding of the perpetrators of those acts to account. The same also applies to the composition of any team tasked with investigating the alleged incidents, which must be inclusive and participatory so as to avoid the outcomes suffering the same fate as previous findings. We will not cease to reiterate that our common and collective efforts in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic must not distract us from the fight against terrorism. All allegations of the possession and stockpiling of chemical agents by armed terrorist groups in Syria must also be a focus of the OPCW's attention, since if substantiated they would be very dangerous, not just for Syria but for the entire region. In conclusion, my delegation encourages the OPCW and the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to pursue and strengthen cooperation in order to reach an agreement on the issues outstanding with regard to Syria's initial declaration, and thereby advance the work of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), in accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention, OPCW Executive Council decision EC- M-33/DEC.1 and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). In that regard, we were pleased to note in the Director-General's report (see S/2020/1152, annex) that the twenty-third round of consultations held in Damascus between the DAT and the Syrian authorities facilitated the settlement of three outstanding issues concerning the Syrian authorities' initial declaration.
