Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
think all of us will feel that what has already been said
in the Council this morning is all we really need to
hear. The statements by the Secretary-General, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, Ms. Carol Bellamy and, in particular,
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh have brought home to us that
the work of the Council is there to affect real people on
the ground in real ways. I am sorry that our
intervention, and the interventions of my colleagues,
will have to deal with the bureaucracy of What the
Council does. But we have been asked some questions
in this morning's statements, and I think that we have
to try to point the way to some answers.

The Secretary-General's report, which he has
addressed both to the Security Council and to the
General Assembly, is a very relevant document in this
respect, and I thank him for it. The Special
Representative and the Executive Director have also
pointed very sharply to ways in which the Council, as
one of the organs of the United Nations concerned with
children in armed conflict, has to act. Later on,
Belgium will make a statement on behalf of the
European Union that will also express some
fundamental points. But there are some things that I
would like to bring out.

The whole subject is of legitimate interest to the
Council, because how the international community
deals with this issue of children and armed conflict has
a direct consequence, not only for the welfare of
children in itself, but because failure to recognize the
subject and tackle its effects will have a damaging
impact on the international peace and security efforts
of the Council. This is not simply an issue of morality;
it is an issue of security. That is the point.

The report and our draft resolution outline very
well the importance of designing a robust normative
framework within which the practical work of the
wider United Nations system can have an impact on the
ground. The Geneva Conventions, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the Optional Protocol on child
soldiering, the Statute of the International Criminal
Court and the International Labour Organization (ILO)
Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of
Child Labour are all vital policy tools in that respect,
and, of course, command the full support of the United
Kingdom.

But it is particularly important to make those
conventions bite. I welcome the Secretary-General's
and the Special Representative's intention to name and
shame those who contravene those norms and to take
follow-up action.

When considering the report within the Council
as well as the draft resolution we are to adopt, we
should be aware of the need to understand the linkages
between this subject and other relevant concerns in the
area of those most affected by conflicts. This is
important to ensure that we are developing the
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention and
peace-building that the Secretary-General exhorted us
to consider in his report of June 2001 and which is
enshrined in our resolution on the prevention of armed
conflict, adopted this August.

The thinking outlined in resolution 1325 (2000),
on women, peace and security, in last month's
presidential statement on the same subject and in our
work on civilians affected by armed conflict, to be
discussed tomorrow, are all relevant here.

We welcome the progress that has been made in
establishing child protection units in the context of
peacekeeping missions. We are encouraged by progress
in this respect in the work of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and the role that
child protection officers play in the implementation of
their mandates.

In resolution 1355 (2001), on MONUC, the
Council called for all relevant parties to ensure that
child-protection concerns were addressed. We
encourage the efforts of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and of the Special Representative to
continue to work to strengthen the role of these units in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the design of effective reintegration components of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programmes for child soldiers and other children most
affected by conflicts. I think that Babah Sawaneh has
brought that home to us in his statement this morning.

The United Kingdom will continue to support the
system's efforts to extend the role of child protection
advisers both at Headquarters and in the field. We hope
that their work can also be linked, where appropriate,
to the need for the important work of mainstreaming
gender in the context of peace-building strategies,
especially in situations of rehabilitation and
reconstruction following the end of hostilities. Olara
Otunnu and Carol Bellamy have pointed this out this
morning, in particular in the context of the
vulnerability of girls in armed conflict.

The United Kingdom takes note of the emphasis
placed in the report and in the draft resolution on the
inimical effects of illegal trade in natural resources and
in small arms by parties to armed conflict and the
direct negative link to the interests and well-being of
children. We welcome the report's and the draft
resolution's emphasis on these areas, as well as the
direct link they draw to our work on HIV/AIDS, which
is recognized in our draft resolution.

Let me say a final word on the cohesion of the
system. Not least because resources are scarce, we
would like to underline the need for the various parts of
the United Nations system working on conflict issues
to do so in a complementary fashion. It is a familiar
theme, and perhaps we are now getting somewhere.
The integrated mission task force philosophy has to
spread out from New York to the ground and, of
course, back to the intergovernmental system. There is
a real chance to get this right again in the context of
Afghanistan.

The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Office of the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, and we are working with UNICEF to
help build the capacity of its Emergency Operations
department to integrate children and conflict issues into
their programmes more effectively.

We look forward to seeing these two Offices
working increasingly closely together to continue to
share information and approaches with each other, with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
members of the United Nations system, and with non-
United Nations partners in the development of
effective, durable responses.

We share the Secretary-General's disappointment
at the fact that the special session on children had to be
postponed from this September. But our debate today,
and the draft resolution we are going to adopt, can help
inspire a really effective preparatory process - begun
under your excellent coordinating role, Madam
President - for the special session next year. Perhaps
by then we shall feel that we have begun to make our
"redemption songs" a reality.

