Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his report contained in document
S/2009/72 and for his informative briefing on
developments in the situation in Timor-Leste.

We are pleased to welcome to the Security
Council the President of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta. The tragic events of 11 February 2008 were a
source of profound concern for us, and we express our
admiration for the steadfast courage shown by the
President. We listened carefully to his remarks
concerning the success that has been achieved in his
country and the complex problems being resolved by
the Government and people of Timor-Leste.

It is indeed gratifying that Timor-Leste has
achieved significant progress in settling the
consequences of the 2006 crisis. The petitioners are
returning to peace-time life and internally displaced
persons to their homes. The time has come for this
young, independent country to focus on other high-
priority objectives, including strengthening State
institutions and security structures, establishing
legality and the rule of law, developing the judicial
system, making provisions for social and economic
development, eliminating poverty and generating
employment for the population. These goals can be
achieved only through the concerted efforts and
cooperation of all the political forces of the country
and civil society. In that context, the holding of local
elections, planned for this year, is of great importance.

The strengthening of the national security forces
is of the highest priority for the restoration of stability
in the country and an important indicator of the self-
sufficiency of the State. An important function being
carried out by UNMIT is the provision of assistance to
Timor-Leste in training a strong and professional
national police force that will be able gradually to take
over exclusive responsibility for maintaining the rule
of law.

In view of Dili's continuing need for the
assistance of the international community, we support
the Secretary-General's recommendation to extend the
United Nations Integrated Mission mandate for 12
months. Russia expresses its solidarity with the people
and Government of Timor-Leste in their efforts to build
a stable, democratic and flourishing State.

