Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the briefing that we have heard from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore' Braithwaite. We also welcome
the presence here this morning of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis.

Chile aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the delegation of Peru on behalf ofthe Group of Friends
of Haiti.

On 15 July, the ship Sargento Aldea arrived in
Valparaiso, bringing home the last Chilean troops
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and thus wrapping up Chile's more than
12 years of participation in the Mission. Although our
military presence is coming to an end, the principles
that inspired our involvement in the first place still hold
true. Together with supporting security standards in the
country, including through the strengthening of police
capacity, our contribution to Haiti also focused on a
broad array of tasks aimed at supporting communities,
including the repair and rebuilding of educational
establishments, the building of kindergartens and
the financing of scholarships, among other areas of
cooperation. Our support and cooperation, together
with other actors and stakeholders and guided by
Haitian priorities, will continue as we seek to further
cement the achievements of the past 13 years.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/604)
details the major achievements in the stabilization of
Haiti, including the headway made in the consolidation
of democracy there. We congratulate President Jovenel
Moise on the actions taken during his first 100 days
in office, including the "Caravane du changement"
initiative, which, hopefully, will lay the foundation
for a more equitable Haiti. We also welcome the
creation of a legislative agenda in keeping with the
way in which the Haitian people are coming together to
pursue a common goal. These milestones represent an
opportunity that we cannot let slip through our fingers
if we wish to consolidate the principle of national
ownership and foster the necessary synergies with the
international community.

The support of the United Nations for Haiti will
remain essential in the process of the consolidation and
transition. We welcome the joint plan drawn up between
MINUSTAH and the country team, which was arrived
at through a careful planning process. We reiterate
that we must be aware at all times of conditions on the
ground, and in particular of the need for coordination
among all stakeholders. We cannot allow the gains
achieved on the path towards stability and development
to be rolled back.

There is no doubt that the main humanitarian
challenge facing Haiti on the path towards sustainable
development is that of tackling the cholera epidemic.
We welcome the recent adoption of General Assembly
resolution 71/314, supporting the new United Nations
approach to cholera, which was co-sponsored by my
country. We hope that the adoption of the resolution
will strengthen the United Nations Haiti Cholera
Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, and we appeal
to the international community to contribute to the
financing of said instrument.

Finally, it would be remiss ofme to conclude without
drawing attention to the tireless efforts of Ms. Sandra
Honore Braithwaite to bring the process to a successful
close. Chile expresses once again its appreciation for
her commitment and that of her team to the Haitian
people and to the United Nations.

Finally, we reiterate Chile's commitment to
Haiti and its people and reaffirms the importance of
continuing to support this sisterly nation, which has
sovereign authority over its own development.

The meeting rose at 1.20pm.
