Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I wish to pay tribute
to the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this important debate on the issue of
security sector reform (SSR), which is of significant
importance to all countries, especially those emerging
from conflict. Today's debate in the Security Council
is adequately justified, as 24 out of 47 resolutions
adopted by the Security Council in 2013 made explicit
reference to SSR, and 14 peacekeeping and special
political missions are currently mandated to provide
SSR support to host Governments.

Today's debate is an integral part of a broader
ongoing discussion about the interlinkages between
peace and security, on the one hand, and the
prosperity of people on the other, as well as about
the complementarities between conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities and their
respective impacts at different stages of conflict
resolution while supporting building the institutional
capacities of States emerging from conflicts.
Security sector reform is imperative in the context
of United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding. In
that context, Egypt emphasizes that national ownership
is not only a prerequisite for SSR but also the backbone
of any viable SSR programme. The challenge is not
to conceptualize national ownership but rather to
operationalize it in such a manner that fully guarantees
that SSR remains a demand-driven process. The
relevance of SSR to the actual needs of each country
in post-conflict situations is solely dependent on
the ability of that country to be fully engaged in the
design, implementation and monitoring of all SSR
activities. National ownership and international support
considerations should not be seen as competing with
each other.

Egypt believes that security sector reform is not a
goal to be pursued in isolation from addressing other
societal challenges to peace and security in countries
emerging from conflicts, such as youth unemployment,
organized crime, poverty eradication and the lack of
adequate education and health services. However, there
are no easy answers or responses to the complexity of
all those challenges. No one size fits all. We need to
avoid expanding SSR to encompass every challenge
in one single process, in order to attain the desirable
results and deliverables.

Moreover, Egypt underlines that international
support to security sector reform must be anchored in
broader national institution-building efforts that aim
to address the social and economic causes of conflicts
and the complex security environments to be found in
countries emerging from conflicts.

While acknowledging the Security Council's
mandate in the domain of peace and security, we need
to bear in mind its limited membership. Hence, Egypt
believes that the development of a United Nations
strategy for SSR must take place in the General
Assembly, in order to ensure that its formulation,
including its scope, mandate and constraints, is carried
out through an inclusive intergovernmental process
that guarantees the full participation of the wider
membership of the United Nations in such an important
debate, taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any concerned country to
determine its national priorities in that regard.

In conclusion, we also believe that the Peacebuilding
Commission is in a better position to coordinate the
activities of the different organs and agencies of the
United Nations in that regard, particularly in light of
the experience that the Commission has gained through
its engagement with the countries on its agenda.

