Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): First of all, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine.

Building upon the momentum generated by the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Annapolis conference,
which were hailed by the international community as
positive steps in the Middle East peace process, we
have witnessed some encouraging developments. They
include the renewed dialogue between Israel and
Palestine on such core issues as the status of Jerusalem,
the borders of a future Palestinian State, settlements in
the West Bank, the return of refugees and security and
water resources. The $7.4 billion pledged by countries
and international organizations at the Paris donor
conference to support the development of Palestine
should also be mentioned, as should the commitment
by the Government of Israel to freeze the construction
of settlements in the occupied West Bank and release
Palestinian prisoners and the commitments made by the
Palestinian Authority to implement economic reforms,
restore law and order and seize unlicensed weapons.
With those developments and the scheduled Moscow
conference, the Middle East peace process seemed to
be moving in the right direction and promised progress.

Unfortunately, our new hopes were damaged by
recent developments that involved new loss of life
among Palestinian and Israeli civilians. I would like to
refer to the statement by Mr. Pascoe, in which he

described the past month as a month of bloodshed.
There were also new tensions in the region, and, more
seriously, a humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip,
putting more than a million people in harm's way.

In that connection, the decision of the Security
Council to hold, on 22 January 2008, an emergency
debate on the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
was necessary and timely.

We remain concerned about the worsening living
conditions of the people on the ground and the cross-
border influx of refugees to neighbouring countries,
causing anxiety and uncertainty. My delegation once
again emphasizes the need for the parties concerned to
exercise restraint, respect international law, including
international human rights and humanitarian law, and
cease all acts of violence. We call upon Israel to put an
end to all restrictions on the movement and business
activities of people and to take steps to protect civilians
and create safe conditions for the return of refugees,
thus reducing tensions and helping to bring the Middle
East peace process back on track.

A durable peace in the Middle East will only
come with a lasting solution to the Israel-Palestine
issue. The establishment of an independent Palestinian
State that coexists in peace, side by side with Israel, on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
taking into account the legitimate rights and interests
of all parties concerned, remains the only viable
solution. The real momentum for continued direct,
substantive and peaceful negotiations along that line
must be restored. The forthcoming Moscow conference
can and should be exploited towards that end.

While commending the efforts undertaken by the
League of Arab States and the Government of Lebanon
in advancing the political process in the country, my
delegation is deeply concerned about the volatile
situation there, especially the 25 January 2008
bombing in Beirut and the repeated postponement of
the presidential elections. We urge all parties
concerned to search for compromise solutions to bring
the country back to normalcy, thus contributing to
regional peace and stability. Noting with great concern
the recent tension in the Israel-Lebanon relationship,
we urge the parties concerned to exercise restraint with
a View to settling disputes through peaceful
negotiations. We call for the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), especially with regard to
respect for Lebanon's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and the protection of assets and livelihood of
civilians.

In conclusion, let me once again express Viet
Nam' s appreciation and support for the role of the
Quartet, the League of Arab States, regional countries
and the United Nations, especially the Security
Council, in the quest for a lasting solution to the
conflict in the Middle East. We look forward to making
our own contributions.

