I would like to express my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency for convening this open debate. I wish to take this opportunity to further elaborate on Japan's views regarding the implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, discussed during the informal interactive dialogue between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on 22 July, in which Japan had the pleasure to participate as the PBC's Vice-Chair for this year. This will be a long haul. The adverse effects of COVID-19 are tremendous. In addition to the acute health threat, there are the economic fallout, the loss of jobs and income, the disruption of supply chains, food insecurity, the lack of access to basic social services, increased poverty and inequality, rising communal tensions and the list goes on, all making this pandemic an unprecedented human security crisis. Resolution 2532 (2020) recognizes that peacebuilding and development gains made by countries in transition and post-conflict countries could be reversed owing to the pandemic and acknowledges the disproportionate negative impact on the vulnerable. We welcome the adoption of this resolution, which reminds us of our collective responsibilities to ensure that hard-won gains are not reversed. Any response to COVID-19 needs to be sought through a human security lens. The pandemic poses a multifaceted threat to the survival, livelihood and dignity of people, disrupting social cohesion and exacerbating tensions. Therefore, closer attention to the interlinkages among peace and security, development, human rights and humanitarian needs is necessary. Coherent and coordinated engagement by the United Nations system is crucial to realizing an integrated multisectoral response across the humanitarian-peace-development nexus. Moreover, partnerships with international financial institutions, traditional and emerging bilateral donors, regional organizations, civil society and the private sector should be further strengthened. The PBC has much to offer. From the outset of the pandemic, the PBC has worked tirelessly to shed light on the situation in different countries and regions, leveraging its unique bridging role to facilitate cooperation and coordination among multiple actors within and outside the United Nations system. The PBC can and should support the Security Council by providing valuable advice and sharing compiled diverse lessons learned and experiences. We are pleased to see that the Council is taking steps to engage more with the PBC, including at a recent informal interactive dialogue, where we saw Council members' willingness and readiness to take on board the PBC's inputs. National ownership supported by sensible leadership is crucial for building and sustaining peace. However, national leadership is being put to the test by COVID-19, as it attacks weak health systems, impedes access to education and other basic social services, as well as delays the institutional reforms in the political and security sectors. A society can be peaceful when people trust their Government. Strong and sound institutions contribute to strengthening governmental credibility, reducing vulnerability and nurturing people's trust in their Government. The 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture gives us a perfect opportunity to refocus our energy on these critical matters, in particular the importance of institution-building, in the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We are stronger together. At the PBC, we have seen Member States rallying around those countries that came to the Commission to discuss their peacebuilding efforts, exchanging their stories and lessons learned and showing support and solidarity. Seeing this has made me believe that we can, and we will, get through this crisis and build back better together.
