Mr. Mose: It is a pleasure to address the
distinguished members of the Security Council and to
present my assessment of the progress made towards
the implementation of the completion strategy of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as
envisaged by resolution 1534 (2004). An updated
version of our strategy was already submitted to the
President of the Security Council on 30 April 2004,
and I am now pleased to provide some oral
explanations, Sir, under your distinguished presidency.

My intervention today can be summarized up in
three points. The first is that the ICTR is on schedule.
The second is that measures have been taken to comply
with the deadlines in resolution 1503 (2003). The third
is that, based on the information presently available,
there is every reason to believe that the trials will be
completed by the 2008 deadline.

On my first point, that the ICTR is on schedule, a
priority at the commencement of the third mandate in
May 2003 was to render judgements in four cases
where trials had been completed. I am referring to the
Media case, the Kajelijeli case, the Kamuhanda case
and the Cyangugu case. Members will recall that in the
completion strategy that I introduced on 9 October
2003 (S/PV.4838), we envisaged that by the end of
2003 or early 2004 the ICTR would have completed 15
judgements involving 21 accused. That promise was
kept. Consequently, the four judges whose terms of
office were extended by resolution 1482 (2003) have
all left the Tribunal.

Another important aim early in the third mandate
has been to start new trials. Four trials involving 10
accused started between July 2003 and November
2003. The Gacumbitsi case commenced on 29 July
2003 and concluded with judgement on 17 June 2004.
Trial in the Ndindabahizi case started on 1 September
2003 and judgement will be rendered very soon. In
other words, two judgements, each involving one
accused, are already the result of the activities
undertaken at the commencement of the third mandate,
and they were both completed in less than one year.
Furthermore, the two so-called Government cases, each
involving four accused, commenced on 3 November
and 27 November 2003, respectively.

New trials are starting in 2004. We have already
started the Muhimana case, which commenced on
29 March 2004, and the prosecution has presented its
case in that trial. The defence case will commence on
16 August 2004. Judgement in that case is expected by
the end of this year. Two other single-accused cases
will start in August and September this year. They will
be followed by the commencement in September of the
Military II case, involving four accused. The Military
II case is the last big trial at the ICTR. That implies
that by the end of 2004, the number of persons whose
trials have been completed or are in progress will have
reached 48, just as envisaged in our completion
strategy.

Turning now to my second point, regarding the
measures adopted to ensure progress, it is obvious that
the most important development since we last met in
this room has been the increase in the number of ad
litem judges that can sit at any one time from four to
nine. I would like to express my sincere thanks to the
Security Council for having adopted resolution 1512
(2003) so rapidly after our meeting on 9 October 2003.
That reform has significantly increased the efficiency
and the flexibility of the ICTR.

Let me give one example. The arrival of the fifth
ad litem judge made it possible to start one trial, ensure
the continuation of another trial, where the judge had
fallen ill, and schedule the third trial. In other words,
one additional ad litem judge had a direct impact on
three trials. New additional ad litem judges will sit on
trials commencing in August and September this year.
For instance, in the Military II case, the bench will be
composed of one permanent judge and two ad litem
judges.

Single-accused cases are, of course, much more
complicated at the international level than at the
national level. But at the ICTR we now have
considerable experience in handling them in an
efficient way. Recent examples are the Niyitegeka,
Gacumbitsi, Ndindabahizi and Muhimana trials, where
the prosecution presented its evidence in four weeks,
followed by a similar period for the defence after a
break. The number of days required to hear all
witnesses in single-accused cases has steadily
decreased, as mentioned in paragraph 21 of our
completion strategy. The fastest was the Ndindabahizi
trial, where all witnesses, both prosecution and defence
witnesses, were heard in 27 trial days. Additional time
is then required for the parties to present their written
and oral submissions and for the Chamber to write its
judgement.

The main challenge for the ICTR now is to
ensure progress in the five multi-accused cases. They
involve a total number of 22 accused. I am referring to
the Butare trial, with six accused, and the Military I
and Military II trials, as well as to the Government I
and II trials, each involving four accused. This leads
me to an important point. In our planning, we are
giving priority to the steady progress of the large trials.
Visible results of this strategy can be seen in the Butare
and Military I cases. In both trials, the prosecution case
is approaching its end. It is important to complete the
large trials as soon as possible in order to devote our
time fully to the remaining single-accused cases.

With several trials - multi-accused and single-
accused - and only three courtrooms, the Chambers
must to some extent sit in morning and afternoon
shifts. This shift system works well, but each shift is
somewhat shorter than a full day in the courtroom. In
order to increase our judicial output even more, we
have looked into the possibility of constructing a fourth
courtroom. This is mentioned in paragraph 52 of our
completion strategy.

I am very pleased to report that one Government
recently decided to fund the construction costs for such
a courtroom. The availability of a fourth courtroom
will increase our efficiency and flexibility further. It
will make it easier for us to ensure the right balance
between the steady progress of the big trials and the
slotting in of the single accused cases.

I should also mention that we have encountered a
couple of unforeseen problems. For instance, a judge in
the Government II case had to retire because of health
problems. Fortunately, the trial case could continue
with a substitute judge after limited interruption, and it
is now proceeding well. A problem in the Government
I trial is now being addressed. I mention these
examples simply to illustrate the complexity of our
task and to provide a full picture of the situation.

Our completion strategy lists a number of
legislative and practical measures adopted in order to
speed up trials. I will not repeat them here, but I would
stress in particular the importance of the Trial
Committee. Composed of representatives from
Chambers, the Prosecution and the Registry, its main
purpose is to ensure that cases are trial ready on
schedule. The establishment of the Committee,
combined with long-term planning, is one of the
reasons why we have been able to start so many trials
in record time.

Rule 11 bis concerning transfer has been
amended in a similar way, as described by Judge
Meron. We did that in April. Thus, cases will not be
transferred to jurisdictions that do not obtain minimum
guarantees of procedural fairness and international
human rights. So far, there are no applications for
transfer before any Chamber.

Regarding my third and last point - the
deadlines set by resolution 1503 (2003) - we can
already draw some conclusions. First, by 2005 and
2006, we will have completed all cases involving the
27 accused on trial in 2004. This will, as already
mentioned, bring us to 48 accused, who all held
leadership positions in 1994.

The question is then how many additional
accused the ICTR can deal with by 2008. In our
completion strategy, we have indicated an estimate of
65 to 70 persons, based on the information presently
available. This number will include 10 of the 15
detainees presently awaiting trial in Arusha, whereas
the Prosecutor intends to transfer the other five to
national jurisdictions. Of the 17 indictees at large, the
Prosecutor will try to bring 13 to justice in Arusha and
seek the transfer of four accused. As regards the 16
suspects at large, they could, as a maximum number,
potentially be tried at the ICTR. It is clear, however,
that the trials in Arusha will involve fewer than those
29 persons at large. Some of them will be dead,
whereas others may never be arrested. The Prosecutor
will concentrate on those bearing the greatest
responsibility and transfer cases involving
intermediate- and lower-rank accused to national
jurisdictions, in conformity with resolution 1534
(2004). This is dealt with in our completion strategy
and I know that it will be further developed by the
Prosecutor today. I will therefore not enter into details
here. Let me simply stress that both of us agree that the
deadline set by resolution 1503 (2003) will be
respected, provided that we have the necessary
resources.

This brings me to an important point. I am aware
that budgetary issues are not the responsibility of the
Security Council, but the fact that some States have not
paid their contributions to the ICTR could threaten our
completion strategy. The present freeze in recruitment
may have serious consequences for all branches of the
Tribunal. I therefore want to draw this to the attention
of the members of the Security Council. The ICTR has
increased its efficiency significantly. It would not make
sense to prevent us from fulfilling our task.

I should also stress the need for continued
cooperation from all States. I am pleased to report that
witnesses have continued to come from Rwanda since
our 9 October meeting last year. The ICTR certainly
appreciates that and all other assistance provided by
the Rwandan authorities.

Let me finally mention that our completion
strategy and my present statement concentrate on the
deadline for trials. It is premature at this stage to go
into the issue of the 2010 deadline for the appeals.

I have deliberately kept this address brief, but
hope to have conveyed the message that the ICTR is
working efficiently and in full conformity with
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). Let me add
this: It may be difficult, visiting New York, to convey
the full picture of all we are achieving in Arusha. The
ICTR would certainly be pleased if the Security
Council decided, for instance, that its Working Group
were to pay a visit to Arusha in order to get the full
picture of what we are achieving there. I look forward
to the exchange of views with the members of the
Security Council.

