Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio
for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
commend his stewardship of the Committee and also
the professionalism with which the Committee has
been implementing its mandate.

I would also like to congratulate the members of
the Panel of Experts on their reappointment following
the adoption of resolution 2049 (2012), by which the
Security Council extended the mandate of the Panel
until 9 June 2013.We thank the Panel for presenting its
programme of work for 2012-2013. We expect that the
Panel will continue to implement the programme of
work with due diligence, independence and objectivity.
Impartiality, transparency and fact-based assessments
without political bias must guide its work. Information
concerning the Panel's activities should be regularly
provided to the Committee. The Panel should continue
to work under the direction of the 1737 Committee
and assist the Committee in the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to the peaceful use nuclear energy, in accordance
with their respective international obligations. India
supported the resolution, adopted by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on 13 September, which decided that Iranian
cooperation with IAEA requests aimed at resolving
all outstanding issues is essential and urgent in order
to restore international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear programme. Diplomatic
efforts made by the international community to resolve
Iran's nuclear issue through dialogue and negotiations
are noteworthy and should be pursued vigorously to
bring them to a successful conclusion.

India supports the full implementation of relevant
resolutions of the Security Council concerning the
Iranian nuclear issue. While those resolutions are being
implemented, it is necessary that all efforts should be
made to ensure that legitimate trade and economic
activities do not suffer.

Before I conclude, Mr. President, I would like
to ensure Ambassador Osorio of my delegation's
continued cooperation to facilitate the work of the 1737
Committee.

