Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to thank you, Sir, and the

 

members of the Security Council for giving the opportunity
to non-member States of the Council to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to begin my brief statement with a special
recognition of the bodies of the United Nations system that
contribute to the protection of minors in armed conflict.
The entire international community, each of its member
States and, in particular, boys, girls and adolescents affected
by armed conflict have benefited from the activities of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the United Nations
Children's Fund, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, other specialized agencies of
the United Nations and various regional multilateral
organizations. Colombia stresses the professional manner in
which each of these has worked to promote the welfare of
minors in the many armed conflicts that, unfortunately,
persist throughout the world. This should, however, provide
the opportunity to call for a sufficiently clear definition of
the competences of these bodies in addressing such a
complex situation as that before us today.

This meeting of the Security Council, like that held in
June 1998, is a further demonstration of the importance
which the international community attaches to this
humanitarian topic. As then, it is now acknowledged that
the issue of children and armed conflict is an area in which
each and every member of the Security Council has serious
concerns. It is high time. These efforts complement those
of various United Nations agencies that are equally
interested in delving deeper into this item on the
international agenda.

We were most gratified, for instance, to note the
reference made to children and armed conflict in the
conclusions agreed at the humanitarian segment of the
session of the Economic and Social Council held in Geneva
last July. There, in a very specific and emphatic way, the
Council emphasized, inter alia, the importance of
recognizing the particular vulnerabilities of children and
adolescents in armed conflict and of including specific
provisions for minors in peace agreements and negotiations
between parties to a conflict.

It is precisely this reference by the Economic and
Social Council that leads us to ask a question that we have
raised in various international forums open to all States.
The Government of Colombia is convinced that the most
effective way of protecting civilians, particularly children,
in an armed conflict is to end the conflict through a
negotiated political solution.

A negotiated political solution is the ideal instrument
to shield children from the dangers of war. It would help
to prevent internal displacements - particularly important
given the high proportion of displaced minors - mitigate
the effects of the illegal traffic of weapons on children,
put an end to the practice engaged in by rebel and other
illegal armed groups of recruiting minors to participate in
hostilities, and, finally, help children regain the dignity to
which they are entitled in all societies.

I shall conclude my statement by inviting members
of the Council, the other States that have participated in
today's debate as well as those that, for one reason or
another, were unable to do so, and States members of the
Group of Friends of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Olara Otunnu, to continue this
debate in the General Assembly - the forum best suited
to an exchange of views on topics such as the one we are
discussing today. The General Assembly is a most
appropriate place to debate, discuss, indulge in polemics
on, reflect, consider and examine in depth the situation of
children and armed conflict.

The time is ripe to forge a genuine global consensus
that will consolidate a just system for the protection of
minors affected by armed conflict. It is for that reason
that we reiterate our readiness to work towards the
common dream of a childhood free from the heavy
burdens that adults have unfairly placed on the shoulders
of our greatest hope.

