The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Togo.

I thank Ms. O'Brien and Mr. Fedotov for their
very detailed briefings on the issue of piracy, which
remains a significant concern today, in particular in
Somalia and other regions of the world. Furthermore,
for that reason the Security Council decided to urgently
consider the possibility of establishing specialized
courts to investigate and try individuals suspected of
piracy in that region, with the participation and/or
crucial assistance of the international community.

My country, Togo, congratulates the Somali
authorities and other States of the region on efforts to
prosecute or imprison individuals suspected or found
guilty of acts of piracy. My delegation thanks the
various bodies of the United Nations system providing
multifaceted assistance in order to build or strengthen
the capacities of national courts to that end.

Togo also welcomes the fact that the number of
acts of piracy noticeably decreased in 2011, according
to the statistics of the International Maritime
Organization. Such encouraging results stem from a
combination of several factors, including, among
others, the activities of naval forces patrolling the
Somali coasts, better implementation of the guidelines
of the International Maritime Organization, in
particular the presence of armed men aboard merchant
vessels, and the imprisonment of several hundreds of
individuals suspected or found guilty of acts of piracy.

However, the finding that pirates now operate in
the high seas at greater distances is of concern owing
to their increasing frequency. That is why my country
is very concerned about the fate of ship crews who are
taken hostage and serve as human shields for pirates.
Moreover, the fact that the number of trials in the
world against acts of piracy remains low is a source of
concern.

The review of the legal frameworks, the current
capacities of specialized anti-piracy courts in Somalia,
Seychelles, Kenya, Mauritius and Tanzania, and
international assistance to those courts reveals several
shortcomings, which are clearly described in the report
of the Secretary-General under consideration
(S/2012/50). Togo welcomes proposals for the
establishment of anti-piracy jurisdictions in the region.

Within this general framework, my country
recognizes the priority need for countries of the region
to conclude agreements for the transfer of alleged
pirates with States having vessels patrolling the zone.
It is also critical for investigations to be undertaken
and for individuals who fund, plan or organize piracy
attacks off the Somali coast to be prosecuted and
extradited. An adequate national legal framework, in
line with relevant international instruments -
including the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea - must be adopted by the Somali
authorities so as to effectively bring to justice those
suspected of committing acts of piracy.

My country encourages States and the maritime
transport sector to continue to contribute to the Trust
Fund to Support Initiatives of States Countering Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. Similarly, Togo calls on all
agencies of the United Nations system to provide
multifaceted aid to Somalia and the States of the region
so as to increase the number of trials, bolster penal
capacity, and strengthen capacities to investigate and
prosecute those accused of financing, planning or
organizing acts of piracy.

Turning now to specific measures, Togo believes
that assistance provided to States must depend on the
particular needs of each. The proposals made by the
Secretary-General in his report are relevant in that
regard because they seek to provide the States
concerned with an adequate legal framework and the
material, human and financial resources commensurate
with achieving the desired objectives.

My country calls on the Security Council to
consider establishing anti-piracy courts in the States of
the region and a regional prosecution centre. Togo
remains convinced that such measures would
contribute to deterring perpetrators of piracy in other
regions, in particular the Gulf of Guinea.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further names inscribed on the list
of speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.rn.
