Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the convening of
this important meeting and Kuwait's commitment,
Mr. President, exemplified by your presence here today,
to promoting the critical issue of missing persons in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Ms. Ghelani
and Mr. Maurer for their briefings. We particularly
applaud the Council's adoption of resolution 2474
(2019), submitted by your country, Mr. President,
through which we are taking a definite step forward
in comprehensively addressing the humanitarian
consequences of armed conflict, in this case that of
missing persons and the impact that the problem has on
their families and communities.

We welcome the resolution's operational focus as
a concrete step towards prevention and early action
in dealing with the issue of missing persons as a path
to lasting stability, reconciliation, security and peace.
However, we still believe that there is room for the
Council to continue to fine-tune its approach to the
issue, and we regret that nowhere does the resolution
explicitly state that families have the right to know
the whereabouts of their missing loved ones, whether
civilians or combatants, in situations resulting from
armed conflict. Not knowing whether they are alive or
dead creates wounds for the families of the missing that
are difficult to heal. It leads to unrest and can end up
jeopardizing the reconciliation that must follow after
peace has been achieved. For the Dominican Republic,
the right of families to know the whereabouts of their
missing relatives must therefore be fully respected by
all parties to the conflict. That requires preventive
work and early actions such as registering detainees,
facilitating the exchange of news within separated
families and ensuring the appropriate and dignified
treatment of human remains. That right is particularly
important for women, children and the elderly, who are
more vulnerable in the face of this kind of uncertainty,
and for whom ignoring their specific needs can
perpetuate feelings of resentment and exclusion for
decades and in turn lead to new violence.

We applaud the efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and its Central Tracing
Agency to address the hundreds of thousands of cases
of missing persons. We encourage States to collaborate
closely with them in order to honour their commitments
under international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, with a View to offering families
long-awaited information about loved ones who
have disappeared.

There are considerable gaps in States'
implementation of their obligations concerning
disappeared persons, from the perspective of the
protection of civilians and within the framework of
international humanitarian law and human rights.
Above all, all parties must take every measure
necessary to avoid attacks on densely populated areas
and civilian infrastructure, which helps to prevent
people's death or disappearance, and we must continue
to emphasize that. Tragically, however, civilians lead
the death statistics in conflicts today, as we continue
to see in Syria, Libya and Afghanistan, to mention just
a few places. In view of that unfortunate situation, the
parties to conflict must take every possible measure to
clarify the fate of disappeared persons and provide their
families with all the information available on the fate
of their relatives, respect the remains of the deceased
and where possible return remains to their relatives.
Procedures for the exhumation, identification and
repatriation of remains, and for the tracing of unmarked
graves, must be systematized.

In that regard, we believe that national and regional
measures that promote cooperation, training, the
exchange of good practices and relevant information on
missing persons are still areas where there is much to
be done and where more progress is needed to address
the issue of the hundreds of thousands of disappeared
people all over the world. We are of the view that
the families of disappeared persons, as well as civil-
society organizations and academia, can and should
play a constructive and significant role in establishing
mechanisms and national legal frameworks to respond
to their needs. Confidence-building is essential. It is
therefore necessary to support families by creating
spaces where they can be provided with credible and
concrete information about the fate of their relatives,
including the circumstances and causes of their
disappearance or death and possible arrangements
for their return. Psychological, legal, economic and
protective support for family members who remain in
the dark about the whereabouts of their loved ones is
particularly essential to the healing and reconciliation
process. For the Dominican Republic, access to justice,
accountability and the fight against impunity are as
important or even more so in that context.

In conclusion, we want to emphasize how essential
it is to ensure that the step forward we have made today
is followed by the determined exercise of political
will at the local, national and regional levels in order
to respond effectively to the issue of missing persons
and be able to put into practice the provisions of
international humanitarian law and resolution 2474
(2019), which we have just adopted. Collectively and
at all levels of the affected societies, we can offer a
little hope and a sense of closure to the families that the
disappeared leave behind.

