Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel, Ms. Hiroute Guebre Sellassie, for her
valuable briefing, which complemented the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/397) on the progress
towards the United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel.

Despite the major challenges facing the region
caused by the long years of civil conflict, the persistent
efforts of the international community, the United
Nations and its entities, stakeholders and regional
organizations have yielded some progress. Jordan
affirms the close link and interdependence among the
strategy's three pillars of governance, security and
resilience. In that context, we emphasize the following
main points.

First, while the countries of the Sahel may
urgently require sustained efforts to integrate correct
governance principles and build governance structures
after years of civil conflict, that process must be based
on a stable security situation. It is well known that the
security challenge in the Sahel region is not limited to
containing or ending civil conflict. It requires further
efforts to deal with the trafficking of small arms, illicit
drugs, valuable resources and livestock. Obviously,
the financial windfalls of such operations may be
used to finance the terrorist activities of extremist
organizations inside and beyond the region, given
the very close linkages between organized crime and
terrorism, especially the pervasive corruption and weak
State control of the borders.

Secondly, Jordan has repeatedly affirmed the
need to focus on partnership and inclusiveness of
all groupings - including the religious, ethnic and
political sectors - in efforts to restore stability and
rebuild State institutions in the Sahel. Alienation and
marginalization policies have led to growing outrage
on the part of some groups, thereby broadening social
divisions that have led to increased civil strife based
on religious, ethnic and tribal factors that have proved
extremely difficult to overcome in the recovery period.
As witnessed recently, extremist groups have exploited
civil conflicts in various regions of the African
continent so as to broaden their influence and win the
sympathy of sectors of society that have provided them
with an enabling environment that has allowed them
to penetrate national security agencies and target the
international presence.

Thirdly, addressing the difficult humanitarian
situation faced by certain countries of the Sahel
requires concerted national and international action and
persistent efforts to lessen the humanitarian suffering
resulting from that situation. In that context, Jordan
affirms the need for efficient burden-sharing among
national and international parties based on each party's
competencies and comparative advantage. We must
also work diligently to achieve economic development
and create employment opportunities, especially for
the young, and provide incentives for migrating capital
to return to the homeland, as an important part of the
effort to attract investment, while focusing on education
as a long-term investment to ensure stability. It is also
important to strengthen and rebuild judicial institutions
to ensure the entrenching of the rule of law.

Finally, the coordinated efforts of national and
international stakeholders and regional organizations
to implement the strategy require continued monitoring
and evaluation, in view of possible changes in the field
that may, in turn, require adjusting some elements
of the strategy. We also reaffirm the importance of
accurately measuring the impact of efforts to implement
the strategy in the field and to redirect financial and
human resources to achieve the desired outcome most
efficiently.

