Mr. Hau Do Suan (Myanmar): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to the Malaysian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
this important meeting. Our appreciation also goes
to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their dedication and tireless efforts to protect
children affected by armed conflict.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Thailand on behalf
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

I thank the Secretary-General for reflecting in
his report (S/2016/360) the many positive steps taken
by Myanmar in relation to recruiting child soldiers.
Myanmar's efforts to stop the recruitment of children
intensified after it signed the joint action plan with the
United Nations in 2012. Since then, a total of 744 former
child soldiers have been released and reintegrated
into their families and communities. Actions have
been taken against 382 military personnel, including
73 officers, for violating recruitment rules. Among
the 744 children who have been released, 553 have
benefited from various support programmes provided
by the Government, such as education, vocational
training, jobs and family subsidies. The remaining
are mostly those who could not be contacted owing to
various reasons.

In collaboration with the United Nations country
task force on monitoring and reporting, UNICEF,
international non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and other NGOs, Myanmar has launched a nationwide
Children, Not Soldiers campaign to raise awareness
against child recruitment. Hotlines have been set up
to receive complaints or enquiries concerning child
recruitment and the reintegration of the former child
soldiers. Legal briefings and awareness-raising on the
prevention of the recruitment of underage children and
the four Geneva Conventions have also been continued.
At the same time, a monthly meeting with the country
task force on monitoring and reporting have been
regularly held to verify suspected child recruits.
Increased access to military battalions and units has
been granted for monitoring.

In recent months, the Government has also taken
additional measures to identify the remaining gaps in
full compliance and delisting. In May, a 12-member
Committee for the Prevention of Recruitment of Minors
in Military Service was formed by presidential decree.
The Committee has been tasked with implementing
measures, including strict enforcement of recruitment
procedures, and with enhancing cooperation with United
Nations agencies. Subsequently, a new joint action plan
has also been signed between the Committee and the
United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting. Our strong commitment to working with the
United Nations to solve this problem was manifested
yet again during the successful visit of the Special
Representative in July last year.

As the Secretary-General has rightly pointed out in
his report, sustainable peace is the only way to reduce
conflict-related displacement and to alleviate the plight
of children in armed conflicts. Peace is a prerequisite
to sustainable development and the perpetuity of
democracy and human rights. Bearing this in mind,
the Government of Myanmar has made peace and
national reconciliation its highest priorities on the
national agenda. We are now preparing in earnest a
union peace conference scheduled to convene by the
end of this month where all armed groups are invited
to participate. The peace conference will be attended
by the Government, the political parties, ethnic
nationalities and representatives from civil societies.
The conference will deliberate and strive for achieving
a comprehensive, all-inclusive and lasting peace, and
building a democratic federal union. We are confident
that we shall soon witness the dawn of a new era in
Myanmar where there is no more armed conflict and
peace prevails across the country. All children will
enjoy their full rights of freedom, education and
opportunities for the better future they deserve. They
shall no longer be the victims of armed conflicts when
the guns fall silent.

As a result of the unfailing commitment and
relentless efforts of the Government of Myanmar,
significant progress has been made in the prevention
of child recruitment, the release of child soldiers and
their reintegration into the communities. Despite all
these positive developments, Myanmar Tatmadaw,
the Myanmar Army, has yet to be delisted from the
United Nations report. Therefore, we hope that the
Myanmar Tatmadaw will soon be delisted from the
report in recognition of the Government's continuous
cooperation with the United Nations and the progress
made in this regard.

