Mr. Kumar (India): Let me begin by thanking the
Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing today.
We have also taken note of her report on the situation
in the Sudan, submitted pursuant to paragraph 8 of
resolution 1593 (2005).

The continuing conflict in Darfur is cause for
serious concern. We support all efforts to bring that
conflict to an end. We also support the activities of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) aimed protecting civilians,
in cooperation with the African Union's High-level
Implementation Panel led by President Thabo Mbeki to
restore an enduring environment of peace and stability
in Darfur. An inclusive political process to address
the legitimate aspirations of all sectors of the Darfuri

population will go a long way in resolving the conflict.

Despite ongoing hostilities in some parts, the
overall humanitarian situation in Darfur has improved
since the signing of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. The efforts of UNAMID, in cooperation with
the Sudanese Government and other partners, have also
contributed to the restoration of peace and security
in several areas and have facilitated the return of
thousands of displaced persons. What is needed now is
for the international community to support those efforts
and to make adequate resources available to the new
institutions created under the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur so that they can become fully operational and
address the political, socioeconomic and social needs
of the Darfuri population.
In that connection, we call upon all parties to
recognize that there is no military solution to the
conflict in Darfur. The Security Council should
consider targeted measures against those groups and
movements that have refused to join the political process
and that continue to pursue a military approach. The
Security Council must ensure that all such groups join
the political process without preconditions and without
further delay. It is also important for the proceedings
in the International Criminal Court to be undertaken
in a manner consistent with its obligations and to assist
efforts aimed at ending the conflict in Darfur.

India is not a signatory to the Rome Statute and
is not a member of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), for reasons that are well known. I need not
reiterate them. India strongly condemns all acts of
violence committed against civilians. We believe that
the right to life is one of the fundamental rights and
that it is the foundation of any social order. It is the
obligation of all States to take appropriate measures to
protect the life oftheir citizens while maintaining social
order. The States concerned must also bring to justice
those responsible for Violations of that right. At the
same time, the ICC should not make any suggestion that
has the effect of creating new obligations for States and
regional organizations that are not parties to the Rome
Statute. Such suggestions will not serve the purpose
of peace in Darfur, nor will they be legally sound. For
those reasons, we cannot support such suggestions.

In conclusion, India will continue to support all
diplomatic efforts for the early establishment of peace
and security in Darfur that will afford all sections of
the Darfuri population opportunities for socioeconomic
development and peaceful coexistence through an
inclusive political process.

