Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis
and Executive Director Fedotov of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime for their briefings.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.

The 2014 presidential election was an historic
moment for Afghanistan, its transition and democratic
development. We pay tribute to the people of Afghanistan
for their courage in casting their ballots despite threats
and attacks by the Taliban and other extremist and
terrorist groups. The people of Afghanistan have
proven that votes, not violence, count. In particular, we
commend Afghan women for their determination, in
the face persistent stigmatization, to have their rightful
say in the election and to engage more actively in the
country's political life. Among the teams ofcandidates in
the first round, three included female vice-presidential
candidates. It is encouraging that there were almost 300
women among Provincial Council aspirants and that,
according to the preliminary results, 97 of them are
winners.

It is critical that the will of the people be reflected.
The work of the Independent Election Commission and
the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission will
be important in the days ahead. We urge the remaining
candidates to engage constructively with the electoral
institutions and refrain from any acts that could incite
violence or civil disorder or that could lead to instability.
Once complaints have been considered in accordance
with the law, we urge them to accept the outcome.

We welcome the support of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and its
engagement with the Afghan authorities and people
during the run-up to the elections and while they were
being held. The EU and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe deployed their election
observation teams. We urge the Afghan leadership to
make full use of their observations for future elections.

We commend the efforts of the Afghan National
Security Forces (ANSF) in ensuring security during
the elections, which demonstrated its growing ability
to carry out large-scale security operations and provide
effective country-wide security. I want particularly
to underline the ANSF's role in protecting women
and providing a favourable environment for their
participation in the elections.

However, the security situation remains a source
of concern and a challenge for the new leadership of
Afghanistan. Civilians continue to be caught in fighting
between the Government and the armed opposition. We
are especially worried about the increase in civilian
causalities, which include women and children. Once
again, explosive weapons have been the leading cause
of civilian casualties, with improvised explosive
devices standing out as weapons of particular concern.
During the past three months, more than 100 children
have been killed or wounded as they stumbled upon
ordnance, which is often poorly marked. We also note
with concern the growing number of incidents in the
east of the country carried out by a range of Al-Qaida
affiliates working parallel to the Taliban.

International assistance in support of the Afghan
army and police will remain essential during and beyond
the transition period. We reiterate our support for the
transition and look forward to the swift conclusion of
the status-of-forces agreement by the country's new
leadership. Lithuania has pledged to contribute in
support of the ANSF after 2014.

We also note that only scant progress has been
achieved in the dialogue between the Government
and the armed opposition. Those efforts need to
continue, including on the local level, where they are
most effective. We welcome UNAMA's engagement
in facilitating local dialogue and peace initiatives,
including through community efforts in Nuristan and
by launching the latest report of the Afghan People's
Dialogue on Peace.

A stable, secure, economically sustainable
Afghanistan can be built only based on the rule of
law, strengthened democratic institutions and the
implementation of citizens' rights. Progress in the
Afghan human rights situation, however, remains
limited. We are especially concerned that children's
rights continue to be gravely violated, as reported by
the Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting
on Children and Armed Conflict. We express our grave
concern that schools continue to be attacked by parties
to the conflict, teachers continue to be threatened and
more than 100,000 children continue to be deprived
of their right to education. We call upon the Afghan
authorities to endorse a road map to enhance the
implementation of the children in armed conflict action
plan.

We welcome the reinstatement of provisions of the
Criminal Procedure Code that enable women to testify
against relatives. We also welcome the measures taken
for tracking enforcement of the law on the elimination
of violence against women, and for tracking civilian
casualties disaggregated by gender. However, further
efforts are required to promote and advance human
rights. UNAMA has an important further role to play
in that regard. The independence and effectiveness of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
should be ensured.

Regional cooperation is essential for developing
a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, since today's
challenges know no borders. We are heartened by the
support and determination of the States in the region,
including through the Istanbul Heart of Asia Process.
Afghanistan's grave economic situation, illicit economy
and the issue of combating drug trafficking will all
continue to require urgent attention.

Finally, given the multitude of challenges, UNAMA
will remain an essential partner of the Government
of Afghanistan in ensuring the success of the
transformation process, maintaining the progress that
has been made and supporting much needed reforms.
Afghanistan has Lithuania's full support in its further
efforts.

