Mr. Allam-Mi (spoke in French): I am honoured
to participate via video-teleconference in today's
important meeting to consider the fourteenth report of
the Secretary-General on Central Africa (S/2018/521).
Allow me to thank the Russian presidency of the
Security Council for inviting me to speak.

I should like to recall that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) is one
of the eight regional economic communities that make
up the pillars of African integration. Founded in 1983,
ECCAS is a geographical space covering 6.6 million
square kilometres, where more than 160 million people
live. Its goal is to promote and strengthen harmonious
cooperation and balanced development across all
socioeconomic areas in its 11 member States. Its
members are Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea,
Rwanda and S510 Tome and Principe. That is a major
goal with many challenges, which we sincerely hope to
overcome with the support of our international partners,
in particular the United Nations. Our main priorities
are infrastructure, the environment and peace and
security-related issues, which did not feature as part of
the goals of ECCAS at the time of its establishment.
ECCAS was forced to address issues relating to peace
and security as it emerged from a period of inertia
between 1992 and 1998 because of the violent wars in
seven of its 10 member States during that time. ECCAS
goals were strengthened in February 1999 with the
aim of preventing and resolving conflict through the
establishment of the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa and with the support of the United
Nations, within the framework of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Issues in
Central Africa.

In addition to Council for Peace and Security
protocols, other legal instruments and normative
frameworks were established to provide ECCAS with
a robust, diversified and operational peace and security
architecture. The Central African Convention for the
Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons, Their
Ammunition and All Parts and Components That Can
Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and Assembly
is the most recent of those instruments. It was adopted
on 30 April 2010 in Kinshasa and entered into force
in March 2017. The peace and security architecture of
ECCAS works, of course, in line with the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture; the results could be
improved upon, but they are already encouraging.

Thanks to this architecture, ECCAS has been able
to take concrete steps on the ground. It deployed its
first peace missions in the Central African Republic,
the first and second Missions for the Consolidation of
Peace in the Central African Republic, between 2008
and 2013, with 2,600 staff in 2013, at the height of the
crisis, before the African Union and the United Nations
took over with the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and then the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA).

Given the continuing threat to the security of the
subregion posed by the situation in the country, ECCAS
remains seized of the situation in the Central African
Republic and continues to express its solidarity with that
Member State. In that regard, it participates fully in the
African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic, which requires multifaceted
support from the international community.

With regard to maritime safety and security, the
Central African subregion now hosts, in Yaounde,
the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime
Security in the Gulf of Guinea, which is entrusted
with implementing the strategy developed by the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, through their regional
institutions: ECCAS, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with, of course, ongoing support from the
United Nations.

The most recent meeting of the high leadership
of the three organizations was held on 5 April 2018
to decide on the budget and fine-tune the process for
organizing a meeting with contributing third parties,
with the technical support of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS).

In the area of combating terrorism in all of its
manifestations, and in harmony with the global strategy
adopted by the United Nations, ECCAS undertook
major initiatives, including the development, with
the support of UNOCA, of a subregional strategy on
combating terrorism. It was endorsed at the ministerial
level and will very soon be submitted to the Heads of
State and Government for their approval.

Along those same lines, the long-awaited joint
ECCAS-ECOWAS summit on the issue of violent
extremism is scheduled to take place on 30 July, with
the technical support of UNOCA and UNOWAS.
A cooperation framework between ECCAS and
ECOWAS is being finalized and should be signed by
the heads of both bodies before the summit. I should
like to point out here that a document on a strategy to
combat transboundary organized crime and mercenary
activities is also being developed by ECCAS, in line
with the request from the Security Council.

In the institutional area, ECCAS began an in-depth
reform, on the basis of a decision by the Heads of State
and Government on 25 May 2015. The process should
lead to new foundational texts, in particular a revised
treaty and other texts. The process is going well; the plan
is for draft texts to be provided to us by a study group
in July. The adoption and signing of the texts by the
Heads of State and Government is likely to take place
during a special summit that we are planning to hold
at the end of 2018 or early 2019. Within the framework
of this reform, it is planned to transform the General

Secretariat into a commission and to create a standing
peace and security council at ECCAS headquarters.
On the overall political, security and humanitarian
situation in Central Africa today, we cannot but
acknowledge that despite the many efforts and real
advances made in recent years, Central Africa remains
a region of crises and armed conflicts, open or latent.
It is also particularly affected by the political crises in
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
by the political, security and humanitarian crisis in the
Central African Republic, as well as by the activities of
terrorist groups in the Lake Chad basin.

In this regard, I would like to welcome the high-
quality report that the Secretary-General presented on
the situation in Central Africa. I also am very pleased to
see that the contribution made by the ECCAS General
Secretariat was largely taken into account in the
drafting ofthe report. Indeed, the excellent cooperation
that exists between UNOCA and the ECCAS General
Secretariat, as well as my excellent relationship with the
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, my brother Fall, whose presence I welcome at
this meeting, have made it possible to carry out jointly
activities and missions on the ground.

We have a framework of cooperation that includes
plans for periodic common activities. The last such plan
was finalized during a common retreat we organized in
May. I will not to go into detail on the fourteenth report
of the Secretary-General, but I should like to note that
certain developments must be taken into account.

In Burundi, President Nkurunziza announced
that he would not run for President in 2020. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the International
Criminal Court acquitted the former Vice-President,
J ean-Pierre Bemba, and in the Central African Republic,
there is, on the one hand, reason to be encouraged by
the involvement of former heads of Central African
States in supporting the African initiative, but, on
the other hand, reason to be concerned because of the
renewed violence in Bangui and within the country.
This is worrying and something that we must act upon,
given the seriousness of the situation. In this regard, I
reiterate ECCAS'S condemnation of all acts of violence,
in particular those perpetrated against MINUSCA.

Lastly, the political, security and humanitarian
situation in the subregion will be at the very heart of
the consultative meeting of the Heads of State and
Government of ECCAS, which President Ali Bongo
Ondimba, President of the Republic of Gabon and
the current Chairman of ECCAS, will convene on the
margins of the African Union summit planned for 1 and
2 July in Nouakchott.

