Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I should like to thank Mr. Staffan de
Mistura for the report he has just given us of the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Iraq for the extremely valuable
information he has conveyed to us.

To begin with a very general observation, we are
encouraged by the positive developments in the
situation in Iraq, which were very well underscored in
the presentations we have just heard. We note in
particular the success of the democratic provincial
elections held on 31 January 2009, which represent a
first in Iraq's political life. In a country facing internal
conflict and violence, the elections were eloquent
testimony to the capacity of the Iraqi forces to
guarantee the security of the people and a reassuring
omen for the upcoming legislative elections. The lack
of any major incident during the entire electoral period
is a clear indication that the Iraqis are gradually
reasserting control over their country and their future.

Another element to be taken into consideration in
the general easing of tensions is the conclusion on
27 November 2008 of the bilateral security agreement
between the United States and Iraq concerning the
progressive withdrawal of United States forces and the
transfer of authorities to the Iraqi Government.

With respect to the activities of UNAMI itself,
we are gratified to note that the Mission continues to
make an important contribution to national
reconstruction efforts in Iraq. In particular, the personal
involvement of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the outstanding role played by
UNAMI were decisive to the organization of
democratic, free and transparent elections and to the
improvement of the political and institutional
processes.

Another achievement to be attributed to UNAMI
is its technical assistance in settling the various internal
border disputes and in the search for consensus on the
status of Kirkuk. Equally deserving of praise are
UNAMI's investment in a regional dialogue through
the strengthening of bilateral relations between Iraq
and its neighbours, as well as its ongoing constitutional
and legislative support in the context of the
development of Iraqi national institutions. We cannot
fail, either, to mention UNAMI's commitment to
humanitarian assistance.

On the economic front, the International Compact
with Iraq is playing an ever more critical role within
the existing mechanisms for the reconstruction of Iraq.
In that regard, we welcome the United Nations
assistance strategy concluded between the Iraqi
Government and the Organization for the period 2008-
2010, which fully satisfies expectations in that respect,
as well as the cancellation of Iraq's debt by the Paris
Club.

However, the United Nations and the entire
international community must extend further support to
the Iraqi Government, which now faces a budgetary
deficit due to the fall in oil prices, and assist it in
meeting the challenge of socio-economic development.
That aspect of development now appears to be more
critical than ever to Iraq, where the positive political
developments on the ground must be reflected in a
reduction of poverty and improved delivery of basic
social services. Furthermore, that improvement should
be extended to the field of human rights, which
remains at the heart of UNAMI's concerns, although
the role of the Iraqi Government and of the
multinational force are also crucial in that regard.

We welcome the progress represented by the
enactment by the Council of Representatives on
16 November 2008 of the law establishing an
Independent High Commission for Human Rights, and
the commitment of the Iraqi authorities to work with
UNAMI to ensure the Commission's proper
functioning.

With the reduced role of the multinational force,
which will lead to an enhanced role for UNAMI,
particularly with respect to security, it would be highly
advisable, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/102), to provide the Mission with a new
operational base endowed with a reliable logistical
infrastructure in order to strengthen its autonomy and
its capacity to discharge its mandate effectively and
fully. We are pleased to note that UNAMI is already at
work on that plan, and it is our hope that it will achieve
concrete results.

We urge the international community to continue
to support the Mission at this critical phase of its
operations. In conclusion, we fully support Iraq and
encourage it in its efforts to achieve national recovery
at every possible level.

