Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for convening this meeting to
discuss the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary DiCarlo for her informative briefing
on the subject.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the representative of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
and by the representative of the United Arab Emirates,
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

It is with great regret and concern that we are
following the deteriorating situation in Palestine, due to
the occupying Power's policies against the Palestinian
people, namely, the Judaization of the territory of
Jerusalem and the continued building of settlements,
demolition of houses and repression of unarmed
civilians. These policies are complicating the situation
even further, exacerbating tensions and reinforcing all
the obstacles to the onset of a peace process that has
been moribund for years. We are therefore witnessing
the demise of the two-State solution.

The ongoing settlement activities, in flagrant
violation of Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016), undermine peace efforts and
nullify all attempts to revitalize the political process.
Worse still, they represent a continued provocation of
the Palestinian people and the international community.
Moreover, the deterioration of the living conditions of
the Palestinians and the lack of basic requirements for
a dignified life prevent the lost climate of confidence
from being re-established. It is also detrimental to
the State-building process and to the creation of the
framework and conditions necessary to revive peace
talks for a two-State solution along the borders of
4 June 1976.

Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains at the heart
of this conflict. It is the centre of the Middle East and
the essence of a political solution for Palestinians and
Israelis alike. Indeed, Jerusalem/Al-Quds Al-Sharif
occupies a special place in the hearts of all followers
of the three monotheistic religions. It is the first Qibla
and the third of the holy shrines, which gives the city
a special legal status that cannot be undermined, as
guaranteed by Security Council resolutions.

His Majesty King Mohammed VI, President of the
Al-Quds Committee, has attached great importance
to the city by consistently emphasizing the need to
preserve its historical, legal and political status. He has
called on the United Nations and permanent members
of the Council to shoulder their responsibilities in
order to prevent its status from being undermined and
efforts to resolve the conflict from being delayed. His
Majesty has also, on more than one occasion and by
various means, be it at bilateral meetings or in various
international forums, called for an end to Israeli
settlement activities and the Judaization of Jerusalem.
He has urged the occupying Power to discard all plans
to change the legal status of the city and its spiritual
sites of worship by drawing attention to the serious
repercussions of adopting its project to Judaize
Jerusalem. He has also called for Israel to avoid any
measures that would undermine the political status, as
the question ofJerusalem lies at the heart of final-status
issues under resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980).

Based on this beliefwith regard to the special status
of Jerusalem for members of the three monotheistic
religions, the Emir of the Believers, His Majesty
Mohammed VI, President of the Al-Quds Committee,
along with the Pope, issued a joint appeal in Rabat, on
30 March, calling for respect for the sanctity, spiritual
dimension and exceptional position of Jerusalem as a
city of peace. This appeal was enshrined in a unique
document calling for the preservation of the unique
nature and identity of the city.

In addition, the communique that followed the
historic visit of His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al
Hussein to the Kingdom of Morocco, at the invitation
of his brother, His Majesty Mohammed VI, reaffirmed
their full support for the Palestinian people in the
recovery ofall their legitimate rights and for the creation
of an independent Palestinian State along the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital and on
the basis of relevant international resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the two-State solution.

This was reaffirmed at the first round of political
consultations between the Kingdoms of Morocco
and Jordan, held last week in Amman. Mr. Nasser
Bourita, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Morocco, demonstrated that our two
countries share the same position of advancing a two-
State solution under international law and preserving
Jerusalem and its Islamic heritage. In that context, His
Majesty sent Moroccan architects and craftspeople to
preserve the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in collaboration with the
Jordanian Waqf.

In conclusion, our position remains consistent. It
is based on the Arab Peace Initiative and all terms of
reference for the creation of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital within the
4 June 1967 borders, coexisting in peace, harmony and
security with Israel.

