Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The Committee
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1267 (1999) is an extremely effective tool in the fight
against the Taliban and Al Qaeda and groups associated
with them, and we are very grateful for its activities. I
regret to note, however, that there seems to be no end
to the terrorist incidents suspected of having been
committed by Al Qaeda in certain countries. In
Afghanistan, their former stronghold, the remnants of
the Taliban and Al Qaeda are still active. These groups
thus continue to threaten international peace and
security.

Japan is cooperating in the activities of the
coalition force that is fighting against them in
Afghanistan by engaging its maritime self-defence
force vessels in the replenishment activities in the
Indian Ocean. We must overcome the challenges posed
by the Taliban and Al Qaeda through an integrated
approach, including resolute action in the field and
strict application by the international community as a
whole of the sanctions that have been imposed and
capacity-building to enable developing countries to
implement those measures.

The recently released report of the Monitoring
Group established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1363 (2001) is a detailed and extremely
interesting document, and we greatly appreciate it.
However, we are deeply concerned about the following
three issues pointed out in the report.

First, although the efforts to find and detain key
Al Qaeda leaders have made progress, there are still
some leaders who have managed to escape the
international pursuit. Furthermore, the monitoring
group has pointed out that a new generation of Al
Qaeda members who have been trained outside of
Afghanistan has emerged, and that members of the
network have retained a dangerously high degree of
mobility around the world. These facts highlight the
seriousness of the matter. It is urgent that we take
effective travel-ban measures by strengthening
information sharing and cooperation among law
enforcement authorities and enhancing the consolidated
list of the Committee, and thereby close in on the
Taliban and Al Qaeda.

Secondly, while substantial progress has been
made in promoting new legislation and regulations in
Member States through the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the Financial Action Task Force and
the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism, which has resulted in the
freezing of many Taliban- and Al Qaeda-related funds
and assets, it is important to note that substantial funds
are still available to Al Qaeda from the illicit drug
trade and through charities, and that they are still able
to distribute funds through mechanisms such as hawala.
We need to make further efforts in order to completely
suppress all resources available to them and render
them powerless to carry out their activities. It is in this
regard that further cooperation between the CTC and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), through strengthening of the relations between
CTC experts and the Monitoring Group, will be useful.

Thirdly, an environment that enables access to
illicit arms enhances the threat posed by Al Qaeda.
Implementation of strict measures to address arms
trafficking is therefore essential. Above all, the
international community must absolutely prevent
terrorists from gaining access to weapons of mass
destruction. Japan therefore supports the
recommendation of the Group to urge Member States
to join the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material, including States that have no
domestic nuclear programme. It is also important for
Member States to address the problem of small arms
and light weapons.

The consolidated list of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) has been
constantly enhanced, but sometimes insufficient
information in the list still presents difficulties for
Member States in identifying the individuals or entities
listed. We urge all States, including those that
originally submitted the names of the individuals or
entities included, to make a greater effort to put
supplemental information on the list.

It is also important for all Members to incorporate
without delay any update of the list in their domestic
regulations. In this connection, we would consider it
helpful for the Committee to establish guidelines on the
timing of domestic implementation of the update,
indicating that any update should be domestically
implemented within a certain period of time after the
press release or official notification to the Member
States by the Committee.

In closing, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation of the dedication of Ambassadors Valdes
and Munoz, the former and present Chairmen of the
Committee, and their outstanding staff, as well as the
Secretariat and the Monitoring Group experts. We trust
that the Committee will continue to function effectively
under the leadership of Ambassador Mufioz.

