Ms. Graham (New Zealand): Peacebuilding is
one of the most complex and important challenges we
collectively face. Its effectiveness helps to determine
whether post-conflict societies achieve sustainable
peace and development or descend once again into
bloody conflict. It also strongly influences prospects
for preserving and building upon the gains achieved
through the considerable investments made in post-
conflict countries by the international community. With
peacebuilding tasks increasingly forming an important
and sometimes central element of Council-mandated
missions, it is important that there be a shared
understanding of what is required for their effective
implementation and that lessons learned be applied
system-wide.

New Zealand has been a key contributor to
numerous peacebuilding operations, including United
Nations missions in Timor-Leste and United Nations-
mandated operations in Bougainville, Afghanistan and
Solomon Islands. We have also provided significant
bilateral peacebuilding assistance within our region
and beyond. Our experiences have taught us much
about both the very real impact such programmes can
make on the ground and the practical challenges in
their effective implementation. Our views on this topic
are set out more fully in the written statement we have
distributed, and I will focus my comments on a number
of key messages we would like to convey to the
Council, based on our peacekeeping experiences.

First, while the crucial importance of meaningful
national leadership, ownership and engagement, and of
the need for this to inform every stage of planning and
implementation are widely acknowledged, all too often
this awareness is not adequately reflected in practice.
Early attention to mechanisms for building and
sustaining national ownership is essential.

The partnership framework agreed last year
between the Solomon Islands Government and the
Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands
(RAMSI) is one example of how this can be achieved
in practice. In addition to facilitating national
ownership and aligning national and mission priorities
and expectations, it has provided a mechanism for
establishing agreed benchmarks for monitoring
progress. Moreover, it is also a living document that
can be adjusted to meet changing circumstances.

Secondly, national capacity-development lies at
the heart of peacebuilding and must be a central
consideration in the formulation and implementation of
peacebuilding mandates from day one. To be effective,
capacity-building programmes must be based on
coherent strategies developed in cooperation with local
partners. These strategies should be drawn from robust
needs assessments to ensure that they are guided both
by realities and by requirements on the ground and that
they can effectively identify and further develop
existing national capacities, rather than automatically
substitute international personnel.

These issues must be fully addressed before
significant investments are made in capacity-building
activities with long-term implications. The availability
of effective analytical tools has the potential to assist
with this. We welcome in this regard the Secretariat's
current efforts to develop a more strategic approach to
identifying, prioritizing and sequencing critical early
peacebuilding tasks.

Thirdly, national capacity-building requires
specialized skills and experiences beyond those
required for traditional peacekeeping operations. But it
is clear that our current ability to identify, recruit and
deploy sufficient numbers of personnel who possess
these skills is inadequate. The completion of the review
currently under way of civilian personnel required for
peacebuilding operations is therefore a priority of the
utmost importance. We hope the review will also
include suggestions on how to achieve appropriate
balance between the technical knowledge and
development expertise required for effective
peacebuilders.

Given the central importance of rule of law
capacities in many post-conflict situations, New
Zealand supports in principle the Secretary-General's
call for enhanced police standing capacity and the
establishment of a limited standing capacity for justice
and corrections expertise, provided they are based on a
clear needs assessment and undertaken in the context
of a broader framework for generating civilian
capacities.

We also hope that the review will consider the
full range of other possible options for sourcing
civilian expertise, including better use of United
Nations Volunteers, standby arrangements, regional
pools of expertise and, potentially, partnerships with
the private sector. We will also look to the Secretary-
General's proposed staff mobility policy to provide
options for better leveraging existing peacebuilding
expertise from within the United Nations system when
it is presented to the Fifth Committee later this year.

Fourthly, effective leadership is a potentially
decisive factor in the success of peacebuilding
operations. We welcome the steps taken by the
Secretariat to enhance the selection and preparation of
appropriately skilled, experienced and balanced
leadership teams and to provide these teams with
sufficient in-country support. These efforts must be
intensified.

Finally, effective coordination and synergies
among the broad range of actors on the ground are
essential to preventing gaps or duplication of effort and
to providing an environment with the agility to respond
effectively to crises and to rapidly changing
circumstances.

New Zealand welcomes improvements made to
the coordination of humanitarian response in recent
years as a result of the introduction of the cluster
approach. Likewise, the strengthening of United
Nations efforts to deliver as one is also important
throughout the life of a peacebuilding mission to
enable the most efficient and effective application of
peacebuilding resources across the United Nations
system.

Providing missions with coordinated and
coherent support is also important. New Zealand has
welcomed the recent steps to implement more
integrated planning and operational management
processes at United Nations Headquarters, and we
encourage the Secretariat to keep this work under
continuous review.

New Zealand is proud of its contribution to
peacebuilding operations to date, but we are also very
aware of the complex challenges such missions pose
and of how much we and the international community
have yet to learn about how best to tackle these in
practice. I hope that today's open debate can take us
another step closer towards such an understanding.

