Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Mr. President, we
congratulate you on the work you have done in your
capacity as Chair of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Matters and for
all your efforts in preparing and facilitating the note
of the President of the Security Council contained in
document S/2016/619.

My country aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We do not want to repeat some of the points that
have already been raised, but we would like to fully
endorse the statement that was made by the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay. However, we would like to
add a few comments of our own.

The note of the President of the Security Council
that we have adopted under your presidency, Sir, is
helping us to move forward in democratizing the
election of the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council and in making the process fairer and
more transparent. Although we would have liked to
go much further in that regard, we know too well how
difficult it is to move forward along those lines. We
continue to call for a balanced, transparent and inclusive
appointment of the Chairpersons of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council. In that connection,
we welcome the progress made by appointing such
Chairpersons as soon as possible after the election
of the Council's non-permanent members. We must
help the elected members to better prepare for, and
participate in, chairing the subsidiary bodies, as it is
we who will need to deal with the administrative tasks
and the attendant frustrations.

As we make progress in the democratization of the
election process of the Chairpersons for the Council's
subsidiary bodies, we must also move to make the
work of those groups more transparent. Transparency
in the working methods of the sanctions committees is
particularly important.

With 16 active sanctions regimes, sanctions have
become an essential tool of the Security Council.
Sanctions are temporary tools and should not be seen
as an end in and of themselves. The Council should
therefore not prolong the mandate of those committees
indefinitely. In that connection, it would be necessary
to pinpoint the objectives behind the establishment of
each committee and to conduct regular evaluations to
determine if those goals are being achieved.

We need to consider and address the issue of the
duration of sanctions regimes. A country entering a
sanctions regime has no way of knowing how to exit
it. Often, the reasons for which a sanctions committee
was created disappear, and are then immediately
replaced by new reasons, making it apparent that,
frequently, the sanctions imposed by the Security
Council, under pressure from some of its permanent
members, are simply a means to punish some countries
and not others. In that way, some sanctions regimes
are extended indefinitely, although their reason for
existing is unclear. The issue of sanctions requires
much attention. There is much that we can do to make
sanctions regimes much more fair, clear, transparent
and adapted to international law.

In conclusion, we would like to draw attention to
the obstacles preventing some agenda items that affect
international peace and security from being dealt
with in open meetings, with Western Sahara being a
case in point. The limited consideration given to that
protracted conflict reveals the existence of double
standards, since the same issue is addressed behind
closed doors, without the other members having access
to the views expressed by the members of the Security
Council. Since the Security Council acts on behalf of
the Members of the Organization, in accordance with
Article 25 of the Charter of the United Nations, we would
hope the Council would seek to be more transparent
and inclusive by presenting the Secretary-General's
report on the Western Sahara in an open or public
format, with the participation of the representative of
the African Union, bearing in mind that that regional
organization is a strategic partner of the United Nations
in the peaceful resolution of conflicts afflicting the
African continent, including the Western Sahara.

