Mr. Woldeyes (Ethiopia): We thank cote d'Ivoire
for putting this important item on the agenda of the
Security Council. We also wish thank Mr. Ibrahim
Thiaw, Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
for the Sahel; Ambassador Ion Jinga, Permanent
Representative of Romania, in his capacity as Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission; Mr. Hafez Ghanem, the
World Bank's Vice-President for Africa; and Mr. Remy
Rioux, on behalf of the Alliance for the Sahel, for their
respective briefings.
This meeting is taking place after the African
Union Peace and Security Council held an open meeting
on international and regional initiatives in the Sahel
region a few days ago. We hope that our discussion
here today will reinforce the important meeting that
took place at the level of the African Union. We share
the view that there is no shortage of strategies for the
Sahel region. Numerous initiatives have been taken
with the objective of overcoming peace, security and
socioeconomic development challenges in the region.
What emerged loud and clear during the African Union
Peace and Security Council meeting was the need to
ensure better coherence and political ownership by
countries of the region and Africa in the stabilization
efforts of the Sahel.

The United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel is a widely accepted and comprehensive strategy
for the promotion of long-lasting peace and security,
reinforced by development for the people of the Sahel
region. We therefore believe that the commitment by
the international community within the framework of
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel should be fulfilled.
The need to strengthen support for achieving peace and
development in the Sahel region remains a priority. We
strongly believe that renewing the call for sustaining
the flow of resources is important.

There is a worrisome trend that the problem of
peace and security in the Sahel is expanding to the Lake
Chad basin, which in turn is affected by multiple other
challenges. Accordingly, a coordinated response to the
problems of security and development of the Sahel will
have a positive impact on mitigating that risk. In that
regard, there is a need to build synergies at the national,
regional and international levels, including with
regard to the ongoing implementation of the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, the review of the
African Union Strategy for the Sahel Region and the
implementation of the Priority Investment Programme
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

The restoration and expansion of State authority in
northern Mali and remote areas of Sahelian countries,
especially the G-5 Sahel countries, is absolutely
critical. The absence of viable State structures has
been a major obstacle to stability and development in
the region. The threat and frequent attacks in recent
months against security forces and other personnel
serving in State institutions, including the destruction
of public facilities, must be addressed with the
requisite seriousness.
The recent series of terrorist attacks are clear
indications of the growing threat of terrorism and
violent extremism, including those on the Libyan-
Chadian border. Operationalizing the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel is part of addressing that tremendous
challenge. However, without sustainable and stronger
support to the Joint Force, and without strengthening
the national security forces of countries of the region,
not much progress can be made in defeating terrorism
and organized crime. In that connection, reviving
the Nouakchott process was underscored during
the recent meeting of the African Union Peace and
Security Council.

We appreciate the commitments of the African
Union, the European Union and bilateral partners in
the context of addressing structural and operational
gaps for implementation of the Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel. Continuing partnerships on development
aspects, especially in the implementation of the
Priority Investment Plan for countries like Mali,
remains strategic.

Finally, coordination among the United Nations
agencies operating in the region, the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union will be vital for the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in the Sahel and the long-term
development trajectory in the region. In that regard,
it is important that access to basic services and job
opportunities in the border areas be scaled up in the
context of implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its Support Plan.
The private sector should also have a role to play in
ensuring tangible progress in the socioeconomic
development endeavours of the region.

