Mr. Misie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the duties of
President of the Security Council for the current month and
to wish you all success. I should also like to recognize the
valuable contribution of your predecessor, Mr. Martinez
Blanco, and the entire delegation of Honduras in guiding
the work of the Council last month.
There are two draft resolutions before the Council
today. These focus on the greatest consequence of the
adventurism of Serbia's nationalist leadership and the
international community's lack of preparedness and ability
to halt aggression, terrorism and genocide in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia.

Of course, the highest priority right now is to alleviate
human suffering and ensure safety and humanitarian
assistance for the flood of refugees and their
accommodation at the destinations of their choice, and not
of the despotic strategists who tailor new borders and
demographic changes of tectonic power.

This should lead to a more serious and more far-
reaching engagement by the international community -
primarily the Security Council - in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and other parts of the former Yugoslavia,
particularly Sandzak and Kosovo, where hundreds of
thousands of Bosniac Muslims and 2 million Albanians
suffer systematic deprivation and terror at the hands of the
ruling regime in Belgrade.

Above all, it will be necessary and only natural after
their total collapse to examine the strategy and concepts for
resolving the tragedy brought upon the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Moreover, it will be absolutely logical,
putting egos aside, to give critical consideration to the
failure of, and serious loss of confidence in, the key
mediators whom the United Nations and the European
Union have entrusted with promoting and implementing
established principles. Not to go into all the serious faults
and misconceived premises of the current strategy in
finding a resolution to the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and to retain the same plans and the same "contractors"
even after their total failure, would be as illogical as it
would be deadly for the prospects of peace and stability in
this part of the world.

The mediators who salve their egos and compensate
for their professional failures by inventing ethnogenetic
theories on the Serbian roots of both Croats and Bosniac
Muslims, by intervening in the work of the International
war crimes Tribunal or by persistently equating the
terrorists and the terrorized cannot contribute anything
much more than complications, larger failures and more
suffering by innocent people.

Croatia's action in defence of its territories and its
rights, and in promotion of peace and stability within its
borders, has turned to ashes several of the cardinal
fallacies espoused by some key factors to promote their
own agendas. The Croatian action has preserved the
Bihac safe area, which the international community had
given up on following its surrender of the Zepa and
Srebrenica safe areas to The Hague invitees, Mladic and
Karadzic, and has destroyed the myth of the invincibility
and commitment of armed Serbian gangs.

It has destroyed the premise of those who ignorantly
bleated to Bosnia and Herzegovina, to Croatia and to a
world demanding justice that any action against the
aggressor in Bosnia and Herzegovina would require a
mighty force like that used in the Gulf.

It has dashed the selfish arguments of those who
spare no effort to convince both Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia to accept military defeat and to accept the
tailoring of their borders not only according to plans
offered to Pale and Knin - offered and each time
refused - but according to plans conforming to the
dictates of the ever more arrogant Karadzic, Mladic and
Martic.

It has prevented the international community from
rewarding the Yugoslav aggression in Croatia, which
would have led to irreparable damage and suffering to the
quality of life in the territories of former Yugoslavia for
decades to come.

The Croatian action of extinguishing the fire in its
own house and subduing the arsonist has shown that some
in the international community have practically begun to
struggle to maintain occupation rather than peace and
stability.

The neutralization of the terrorist centre in Croatia
should also halt the financial waste levied on the world's
taxpayers for a peace force and a grossly bureaucratic
apparatus intended to maintain the status quo in Croatia.
This burden is mostly borne by the taxpayers of the

 

country which is host to the United Nations and whose
wisdom helped create and realize the ideas of the League
of Nations and the United Nations.

The Croatian victory has concurrently disclosed the
real nature of the terrorists and the dangerous
misconceptions of the international community, which,
instead of quickly identifying the criminals, has promoted
them to negotiators and has almost legalized them as
Government officials and statesmen. It has uncovered the
very logic, the very mechanism and the very perpetrators of
the aggression and terror in Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It has shown that the leaders of terrorism do
not care even for the lives of their own nationals, their own
people. Martic and his commanders, not the Croatian Army
and police, expelled Serbs from Krajina and forced innocent
civilians to leave their homes for the exile of Serbia, whose
leaders have many times in the past manipulated Serbs
from other parts of the Balkans and used them as cannon
fodder, and are doing so once again.

The quarrel between the leaders of Serb Krajina
reported by a Serbian news agency and by international
media reveals that their goal was to start this huge exodus
of the population in order to provoke the international
community to retaliate against Croatia and to draw Serbia
once again into open war adventurism.

The innocent Serb civilians are again being
manipulated by their self-serving leaders, black marketeers
and war profiteers, amateur statesmen but certainly
professional war criminals. Let us hope that this is the last
time - never again - the world will watch these sad
pictures, directed for us by those who for more than three
years pulled the leg of very cooperative and acquiescent
representatives of the international community by rejecting
all initiatives for solving the crisis in Croatia and for the
peaceful reintegration of Krajina into the sovereign and
independent State of Croatia.

The world could and should also note that this latest
exodus of Serbs from Croatia, though very sad and
unfortunate, and though absolutely excessive and
unnecessary, is at its core somewhat different from the
expulsions and extermination of peoples over the past four
years from the territories of Croatia and of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Serbs of formerly occupied Croatia are
leaving in vehicles - tractors, cars, buses - and are able
to take a significant portion of their belongings. Muslims
and Croats have had to leave everything and start on foot
into the uncertain, very often across mine fields and
through front lines, and most frequently after having been
humiliated, raped, tortured, beaten - while some 200,000
were killed, massacred, so that they would reach nowhere.

Fortunately, with this latest exodus of innocent Serb
civilians, the standards of conduct and care by the
international community, in particular of humanitarian
organizations, have risen, in order to alleviate the plight
of these people and to ensure their safety. We have
increasingly seen pictures of leading members of
international humanitarian organizations and the highest
representatives of the United Nations who had not been
even close to Vukovar, Prijedor, Foca or Srebrenica, not
to mention the concentration camps in Bosnia and
Herzegovina where tens of thousands of innocent Bosniac
Muslims have perished. We hope that these improved
standards will remain in place in the future and will be
extended to all regions, but let us also hope for - and
first and foremost let us take all measures necessary
towards creating - a situation where the need for
humanitarian assistance and rescue actions in these
regions will cease to exist.

After all, Croatia has not endangered peace or
stability with its latest action. It has, by utilizing its
sovereign and inherent rights, made a most significant
contribution to peace and created conditions under which
the Pale Serbs can learn a lesson from the defeat of their
Knin friends. The world should not search in Croatia for
those guilty of causing the exodus of these tens of
thousands of civilians - camouflaged and intermingled
among them armed thugs who for four years terrorized
not only Croatia and western Bosnia but their own
compatriots. Those guilty of causing this latest exodus
have already escaped to Belgrade and they should be
looked for there, together with their bosses who now
denounce them and who are beginning to realize all the
limitations and the unreliability of the militarily
aggressive actions which were intended only to further
their own political goals.

This is not the defeat of the Serbian people in
Croatia, though, unfortunately, it is the Serbian people
who are succumbing to the manipulation and propaganda
machinery of armed criminals and of Milosevic's Serbia
and who are now paying the price. This is a victory of
the Croatian army over the terrorists and criminals among
the Serbians, who wanted to carry out violence against
history and against innocent civilians on both sides. When
justice is done, I am confident that both the Serbian and
the Croatian peoples will find the way to rehabilitate
themselves from the injustices perpetrated on them and to

 

heal their wounds, no matter how deep they may be.
Therefore it is high time that justice was done.

