Mrs. Kazragiene (Lithuania): We warmly welcome
Mr. Valentine Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to the Security Council, thank him
for his report (S/2014/3l4, annex) and reiterate our
support to him.

Lithuania associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.

Almost 20 years ago, the Dayton Agreement ended
the three-and-a-half-year-long Bosnian war. At the
time, we had a vision of a united, stable, prosperous,
multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today Bosnia and
Herzegovina is lagging behind its neighbours and other
countries in the region. The political will of the leaders
of the country to find consensus on compelling issues
is crucial. Sound political will is already evidenced in
the region, such as Croatia's recent accession to the
European Union and the ongoing Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue stipulating the progressive steps of Serbia and
Kosovo towards the European Union. We commend
neighbouring countries for their political support to
Bosnia and Herzegovina and for their readiness to
engage in regional cooperation, including, and most
importantly, on economic cooperation.

In April, the European Union sent a strong message
to the political allies of Bosnia and Herzegovina calling
for collective responsibility. The European Union also
reassured it of its engagement and support. Broadening
the European Union agenda clearly indicates that the
European Union does not intend to retreat or reduce
its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the
future of the country is in the hands of its people and
its political leaders. Like the representative of Jordan,
we have not heard of the universal human value of
ethnicity either.

We commend the decision of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's Central Election Commission to
announce the holding of general elections in October.
We urge the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
actively participate in the elections and to choose
leadership that will take on the responsibility of
charting a path towards irreversible progress in the
country. There should be no place for disrespectful or
divisive rhetoric throughout the electoral campaign and
in general.

We are concerned about increasing statements from
a number of Republika Srpska officials challenging
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as stated in the report under discussion
today. Lithuania reaffirms its commitment to the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country.

Much remains to be done to foster economic
development in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as the country
has the highest rate of youth unemployment - 59 per
cent - the lowest rate of economic activity, the highest
level of social assistance and the lowest foreign direct
investment per capita in the region. The socioeconomic
protests that started in February are a reflection of that
frustration. The lack of economic growth is detrimental
to restoring confidence between political leaders and
society. Without the rule of law, good governance
and anti-corruption measures, economic growth will
be inconclusive and stagnate further. We urge the
competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to launch reforms to strengthen the legislative and
regulatory framework.

There is also an urgent need to create a functioning
State structure that would enable Bosnia and
Herzegovina to be a credible partner. The Dayton Peace
Agreement was a necessary tool to end the worst war in
Europe since the Second World War. The fact that the
country has proven capable of determining its future in
a safe and secure environment is a major achievement
for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The international community, with its substantial
political and financial commitment, has played an
important role in supporting reforms in the country.
The achievements should be sustained and built upon.
Again, all responsibility lies with the political leaders
of the country.

I wish to recall here resolution 2123 (2013), which
calls on Bosnia and Herzegovina's political leaders
to refrain from divisive rhetoric and make further
concrete and tangible progress towards European Union
integration, including by implementing the European
Court of Human Rights ruling in the Sejdie-Finci case.

We support the Office of the High Representative
in fostering initiatives for more inclusive dialogue
among all ethnic communities, including at the local
level. We believe that the new leadership will be
committed to translating the legitimate concerns of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina into legislative and
fully implemented initiatives to launch structural and
institutional reforms, including the strengthening of the
rule of law, anti-corruption and financial accountability
measures and protecting human rights. It is critical
that the international community remain committed to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The interests of States - not
individuals - must prevail in the decision-making
process, which will lead the country to political stability
and economic welfare.

Finally we reiterate that, as long as the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina fail to implement the
standing requirements necessary for the closure of the
Office of the High Representative, the Office has an
important to play.Lithuania also stands ready to engage
in discussions, together with regional and international
partners, on a possible recalibration of the approach
towards the mandate of the Office.

