Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is once again participating
in this semi-annual debate on the question of Haiti as
proof and in recognition of Spain's commitment with
this country in the Latin American and Caribbean
region, which is therefore so close to us. Haiti is a
friend nation and we are friends of Haiti. For that
reason, while I associate myself with the statement to
be delivered shortly by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, I would like to make some additional
considerations in my national capacity.

Spain has decisively supported the reconstruction
of Haiti since the terrible earthquake that devastated the
country in January 2010. However, Haiti's institutional
weakness has impeded to date the achievement of
desirable levels of implementation. That is why the aid
disbursed has not yet reached its full potential. Our
Secretary of State for International Cooperation and
for Iberoamerica conveyed this message to both His
Excellency President Martelly and to His Excellency
Prime Minister Lamothe on the occasion of his visit to
Haiti in February.

The Government of President Martelly has been
working with determination to reduce the endemic
problems of the Haitian political system. However, he
has not yet entirely managed to get Haitian institutions
working more efficiently. Local elections and the
election of a third of the Senate are still pending as
a result of the inability of Haitian political actors to
establish a permanent electoral council, as provided for
in the 1987 Constitution and which to date has not been
able to be formally established. Partial improvements
have been made in recent days, as mentioned by the
representative of Haiti, and we very much welcome
them. However, the process is still unfinished at the
present time.

Spain wishes to make a clear and convincing
appeal to all Haitian political actors to assume their
responsibilities and to work in order to achieve a smooth
and predictable operation of the institutions. As the
Security Council has already stated, the outstanding
elections should be held in the course of this year.

Strong political institutions will make it possible to
move forward in the reconstruction process in a much
more efficient way than what has been the case thus
far. It will also make it possible to shape the image of
Haiti abroad of a country that is moving forward in
its transformation into a secure, stable and socially
equitable country.

Finally, I would like to express my delegation's
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his semi-annual
report (S/2013/139) on the activities of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as for
the consolidation plan of the Mission for 2013-2016
included in the report.

Despite some improvements, there are still many
challenges in Haiti. In order to successfully tackle those
challenges and fulfil the expectations of its people, it
is essential that Haiti's political leaders redouble their
efforts and renew their commitment to the country's
reconstruction and stabilization process.

