Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana: I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this meeting and for giving us the
opportunity to brief the Council on the situation in
Somalia, which is indeed of widely shared concern.

As members of the Security Council may be
aware, the Assembly of the African Union, during its
most recent summit in Addis Ababa, endorsed the
2

proposals put forward by the Peace and Security
Council in its communique of 18 January 2008. A
meeting of the International Contact Group on Somalia
was also organized at the margins of the summit, and
other meetings were held between the African Union
stakeholders and various groups and personalities.

I would first like to provide some information
about the situation of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). As part of its mandate and in
spite of the constraints facing the Mission, AMISOM
has continued to conduct various activities, including
providing medical services to people and providing
water to the population residing within the immediate
surroundings of the Mission's headquarters in
Mogadishu. The Mission has also continued to receive
weapons surrendered by various armed elements for
storage and destruction.

The budget for AMISOM. amounts to about
$622 million per year. So far, a little more than
$32 million has been contributed, mainly from the
European Union, Italy, Sweden, China and the League
of Arab States. The United Kingdom has pledged
£85 million for the deployment of AMISOM. and has
provided assistance for the establishment of
AMISOM's support management planning unit, and the
EU has also pledged €5 million for that unit and
another €500,000 to cover insurance costs, in addition
to technical assistance for budget-related materials. In
terms of extrabudgetary contributions to African Union
peace efforts, Italy has just announced a grant of
€40 million.

Furthermore, the United States continues to
provide significant logistical support to the Ugandan
contingent, as well as communications equipment for
the Mission's strategic headquarters in Addis Ababa,
and has pledged to facilitate transportation to Somalia
for troop-contributing countries. Various pledges were
also received from NATO, Algeria, Kenya and Nigeria.

Out of the 8,000 troops authorized by the Council
in January 2007, only two Ugandan battalions and an
advance team of 192 Burundian soldiers, which were
deployed on 23 and 24 December 2007, are now on the
ground in Mogadishu. Steps are under way to deploy
the main body of the first of the two battalions pledged
by Burundi. It is also instructive to note that at the
African Union Summit, the Ugandan head of State
decided to pledge more troops for the Mission.
08-24087
I would next like to provide some information
regarding the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission. In
October 2007, the Chairperson of the African Union
appointed a new Special Representative for Somalia,
Mr. Nicolas Bwakira. In December 2007, he visited
Somalia, Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda to establish
initial contacts with the national authorities concerned.
He has also established contacts with members of the
international community, including the United Nations,
the European Union, the African Union's bilateral
partners and representatives of regional and
international non-governmental organizations. He took
the opportunity to stress the need for renewed and
concerted efforts to overcome the current difficulties in
Somalia and to reiterate the determination of the AU to
do whatever it can to contribute to the early restoration
of peace and stability in Somalia.

(spoke in French)

I wish next to inform Council members of
proposals made by the AU Peace and Security Council
in its communique of 18 January 2008 and endorsed by
the Assembly of the African Union. The African Union
is convinced that, notwithstanding the complexity of
the problem, the situation in Somalia can still be
improved with the assistance of all Somali parties and
the entire international community.

Regarding the reconciliation process, the
communique of the Peace and Security Council, which
was endorsed by the Assembly of the African Union,
stressed the need for the Transitional Federal
Government to adopt specific measures to implement
the conclusions of the National Reconciliation
Congress. The communique also stressed that acts of
violence must cease and that peaceful solutions must
be sought in order to achieve true national
reconciliation. The communique also stressed the need
for the international community and countries of the
region to fully support the ongoing reconciliation
process and to coordinate their initiatives. The African
Union Commission will soon convene a high-level
international meeting in order to refocus international
attention on Somalia and to mobilize necessary support
for the ongoing process.

With regard to strengthening the capacities of the
Transitional Federal Institutions, the African Union
Assembly, through the Peace and Security Council
communique, again stressed its appeal to all member
08-24087

States and to the entire international community to lend
adequate support in order to strengthen the capacities
of Somali institutions, including the Transitional
Federal Government and its defence and security
forces in order to enable them to fully shoulder their
responsibilities. For its part, the African Union
Commission will hold consultations with the Economic
Commission for Africa, the African Development Bank
and other competent African institutions in order to
dispatch a needs assessment mission for Somalia.

Concerning tension in the Somali regions of S001
and Sanaag, the parties concerned were urged to take
urgent steps to deal with the tension now prevailing
there in order to reduce the resulting consequences.
Furthermore, the need was noted to strengthen
cohesion among the countries of the region and to
create an environment conducive to meeting security
challenges in Somalia. The Commission, in close
cooperation with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and stakeholder countries, will also take
appropriate steps to support efforts to increase regional
cohesion.

Concerning the United Nations arms embargo and
action against the "spoilers", an appeal was made to all
member States and partners of the African Union to
strongly support the legitimate Somali institutions in
their efforts to combat violence. The Security Council
is thus called upon to reconsider the arms embargo
imposed by resolution 733 (1992) in order to enable
the Transitional Federal Government to establish and
equip its security and defence forces, while
maintaining and strengthening the provisions of the
embargo against anyone seeking to jeopardize the
peace and reconciliation process in Somalia.

The Security Council is also urged to take proper
actions against those who are hampering the political
peace process or who might threaten by force the
Transitional Federal Institutions or AMISOM.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, an
appeal is made to the entire international community to
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to the
population, and to make financial contributions to
address needs that are not covered by the 2008
consolidated appeals process for Somalia. It is also
requested that all necessary steps be taken to create
conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian
aid, including unhindered access to populations in
need, and to provide security for humanitarian workers
3
and humanitarian organizations. Member States that
have the resources are also encouraged to contribute
towards escorting and protecting ships transporting
humanitarian aid for the World Food Programme to
Somalia, pursuant to resolution 1772 (2007), adopted
by the Security Council on 20 August 2007.

It was also decided to extend the mandate of
AMISOM. for six months from the date of the decision
in order to carry out the same tasks and responsibilities
as those defined in its current mandate. It was also
decided to appeal once again to African Union member
States to provide the troops and personnel required to
enable AMISOM. to reach the authorized strength, as
well as the financial and logistical support necessary to
facilitate the Mission's deployment and the
continuation of operations. Lastly, an appeal was also
made to the African Union's partners to provide
AMISOM. with increased logistical and financial
support, given that, by deploying an operation in
Somalia, the AU had also acted on behalf of the
international community as a whole.

Finally, with regard to the deployment of a
United Nations operation, the Assembly of the African
Union, on the basis of the communique that had been
proposed by the AU Peace and Security Council,
stressed the need for the deployment of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia, which
would replace AMISOM. and would support long-term
stabilization and post-conflict reconstruction in the
country. A solemn appeal is made to the Security
Council to take urgent measures for the swift
deployment of such an operation, in keeping with its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In the meantime, the
Council is requested to ensure that all the necessary
action is taken so that the United Nations can provide
AMISOM. with a package of assistance measures, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

In the light of the foregoing, we are aware of the
breadth and scale of the challenges, which require
African responsibility as well as international
solidarity. We are confident that the Council will be
able to take appropriate decisions that are in keeping
with the aspirations of all Somalis to peace.

