Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leila Zerrougui for her highly informative
update. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Mansour Alotaibi, Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and Ms. Bihamba, civil-society representative,
for their insightful briefings.

Regarding the political situation, the delegation
of Kazakhstan agrees on the importance of the
presidential and legislative elections scheduled for
23 December being held in a timely, free and credible
manner. Although commendable efforts have been
made by the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to reach key electoral milestones, challenges
remain to be addressed. We commend the International
Organization of la Francophonie (IOF) on having
conducting an independent audit of the voter register
and note the importance of the implementation by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo of
the relevant recommendations.

We must support all confidence-building measures
provided in the 31 December 2016 agreement among
all political actors. It is critical to ensure an inclusive
political transition of power that is based on respect
for fundamental rights, including the full participation
of women. We note the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), the African
Union and IOF in supporting the vital electoral process.

The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is deteriorating in some parts of the
country owing to the increasing activities of armed
groups in North and South Kivu, which have resulted
in a high death toll among innocent civilians and
selfless peacekeepers. We support the reconfiguration
of MONUSCO so as to enable it to better address
security issues as well as ensure greater local
community outreach and expanded measures under
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, together with a comprehensive approach
to the protection of civilians.

We agree with previous speakers that the
increasing number of documented cases of conflict-
related sexual violence committed against women
and children requires immediate attention and action.
An increase in State authority and reliable security
and law-enforcement systems throughout the country
are crucial in order to reinforce the capabilities of
the Forces armees de la Republique Democratique du
Congo and of MONUSCO.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we
express concern at the humanitarian crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is cause
for alarm given that the number of people in need of
assistance and protection is the highest thus far. We
welcome the results of the donor conference held in
Geneva and call on donors to fulfil their pledges to
effectively address the dire humanitarian situation.

As the recent Ebola outbreak has exacerbated
the suffering of the people, we commend the swift
and coordinated response by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with support from
MONUSCO and the United Nations system, to save
lives and contain the spread of this lethal and highly
contagious virus.

Finally, we welcome the outcome of the twelfth
annual joint consultative meeting held in New York
on 19 July, at which the members of the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council stepped up cooperation between the two
sides. This fresh momentum for enhanced cooperation
must continue in order to collectively address existing
complexities together with regional and international
partners. This will enable us to consolidate the gains
achieved and move forward towards the key goals of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
AU's Agenda 2063. We will therefore have many best
practices for the Silencing the Guns by 2020 strategy
that can be shared with others in the region.

Kazakhstan stands ready to work with others to
bring stability to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which will have a positive impact on the wider region.
