The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of New Zealand.

New Zealand has convened today's high-level
meeting on the situation in the Middle East for one
simple reason - no other issue more urgently demands
the attention of world leaders. The Syrian civil war is the
most devastating conflict of the twenty-first century.
We see a country shattered, terrorism and extremism
rampant, and the daily horrors of the deliberate
displacement, starving and killing of civilians. We join
the Secretary-General in condemning Monday's attack
on a humanitarian convoy. There is no justification
for attacking those who are trying to save lives.
Longer term, we will need to hold to account those
most responsible for the appalling atrocities we have
witnessed. This includes those responsible for chemical
weapons attacks.

The scale of the Syrian refugee crisis has shocked
the world. It has impacted millions of people in the
region and beyond. The conflict has created security
threats that reach well beyond Syria's borders. After
more than five years of violence, Syria has become a
byword for failure - failure of the parties and their
supporters to put peace and the lives ofinnocent people
ahead of self-interest and zero-sum politics; failure to
respond to the crisis early to prevent this tragedy; and
a collective political failure, including on the part of
the Security Council, to do what must be done to end
the conflict.

Today's meeting is a chance for an open and honest
discussion on how peace can be achieved. It is critical
that we rewrite this narrative of failure and help set
Syria on a path to peace. Let me be clear. No one will
benefit from a continuation of this conflict. The Syrian
Government, which bears responsibility for starting
this war, cannot win, nor can the many others whose
support is allowing the conflict to continue. Ultimately,
Syrians must reach an agreement on their future
Government, but at this point it is clear that Syrians by
themselves cannot end this war.

The problem is not a lack of direction. The pathway
for ending this conflict was set out by the Security
Council in resolution 2254 (2015) in December
2015. The resolution identified the steps required:
a nationwide ceasefire, negotiations on a political
transition and a united front for fighting the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other terrorist groups.
It also established a timetable for implementing them,
but that timetable itself was never implemented. Today,
we all need to commit to restoring the cessation of
hostilities, delivering aid to those who need it, and
restarting political talks. Last week's arrangement
between United States Secretary of State Kerry and
Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov represents the best
hope we have seen in some time. We encourage Russia
and the United States to show sustained leadership and
not let this opportunity slip away.

The next few days will be critical in restoring the
cessation of hostilities and getting humanitarian aid
flowing. We urge the Syrian parties to abide by the
arrangement. The Council should unite to back those
efforts. A political solution needs to address the causes
of the conflict and establish a new form of inclusive
Government. It must provide more than just cosmetic
change with regard to the central question of President
Bashar Al-Assad's future. A political solution will
involve unpalatable choices for both sides. It will take
courage and, most of all, pragmatism. Anyone who
insists on political red lines that block the necessary
compromises will have to measure the delay they cause
in terms of more lives lost, more refugees and more
suffering. Those with influence must reinforce the
message to the parties and to the Syrian Government
that a political solution is the only way out of this
conflict, and they must back these words with their
actions. This means encouraging the parties to seek
outcomes around the negotiating table, rather than on
the battlefield. It also means not using the fight against
terrorism as an excuse to shift our focus from achieving
a political solution. Terrorism is a major consequence
of the Syrian war, but it did not cause it.

Those countries with greatest ability to influence
events have a particular responsibility in this regard.
I speak in particular of those the Secretary-General
identified in his General Assembly address last year (see A/70/PV.13) as being key to resolving this conflict: the
United States, Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia and Turkey.
We call on those countries to work together to restore
the cessation of hostilities over the next few days.
Advancing a political solution must be the priority in
the weeks ahead. The people of Syria deserve this much.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.

