Mr. Chikvaidze (Georgia): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
functions of President of the Security Council for this
month. We believe that under your skilful guidance the
Security Council will successfully continue its difficult
work.

On behalf of the Head of State, Mr. Eduard
Shevardnadze, and the people of the Republic of Georgia,
I should like to extend my warmest words of appreciation
to the United Nations and its Security Council and,
personally, to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, as well as to his Special Envoy,
Ambassador Brunner, for the attention and goodwill they
have accorded the dramatic processes in Georgia.

I should like to express my gratitude to the
members of the group of countries known as "Friends of
Georgia" and the Russian Federation as facilitator for
their tireless efforts to bring about a comprehensive
political settlement of the protracted conflict in my
country.

Allow me also to commend the joint activities being
carried out by the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG) and the peace-keeping forces of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) for
monitoring the cease-fire.

During my visit to New York I have had the
opportunity to meet with representatives of the States
members of the Security Council and wish to thank all of
them for their sincere concern and understanding of our
problems.

In its efforts to achieve political and economic
reforms, Georgia faces a multitude of problems. While
public opinion on how our society and different political
leaders should handle them may vary, there is clear

 

unanimity and resolve when it comes to threats to the
territorial integrity of the country and the continuing
anguish and ordeal of the thousands of people expelled
from their homeland. Indeed, nothing can change our
resolve to achieve the unconditional and timely return of
the refugees to their homes, to reach a fair, negotiated
settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia and thereby define its
political status within the borders of a unified Georgia as
recognized by the international community.

The Abkhaz leadership, however, constantly seeks to
evade, ignore and negotiate away its obligations, Security
Council resolutions calling for the unconditional return of
refugees notwithstanding. Unfortunately, that is a
characteristic trait of the phenomenon known as "aggressive
separatism", which emerged from the debris of the
communist system and is being nurtured by its die-hard
followers. It does not consider compromise a moral
category, and tends to ignore fundamental principles of
international law.

Obsessed with that ideology, the Abkhaz leadership
has blatantly violated all the peace agreements that were
expected to bring about a cease-fire and a constructive
dialogue between parties. Despite the bitter experience of
treachery, the Georgian Government has always remained
committed to a peaceful resolution of the conflict based on
the self-respect and honour of all parties involved. We have
never turned our backs on the peace process, nor have we
attempted to resort to military force. However, it is not easy
to carry on peaceful negotiations with a party that resorts to
"ethnic cleansing" and genocide as a means of
consolidating its ill-gotten gains.

As members are aware, about 300,000 refugees and
displaced persons are now scattered throughout Georgia,
further draining its devastated economy and posing a
serious threat to nascent market reforms. In light of this
situation, it was sheer cynicism on the part of Ardzinba to
write a letter to the High Commissioner for Refugees
requesting financial support for the return of just 200
refugees per week. If we proceed according to his
timetable, instead of an unconditional and orderly return the
refugees would have to queue up for decades in
humiliation, ignorant of their own fates.

Ardzinba's regime has always sought to thwart the
peace process. His no-compromise policy is bringing our
peaceful efforts to naught and could ultimately damage the
peace talks beyond repair. However, past experience would
suggest that by acting irresponsibly he is seeking to gain
time. The question of the settlement of the conflict in
Abkhazia has undoubtedly reached a crucial point as a
result of the new turn of events. From the outset,
Ardzinba has demanded that the political status of
Abkhazia should be defined, as a precondition for the
return of the refugees. Now, when we have finally
worked out a document reflecting the political status of
the autonomous republic and obtained concurrence on it
from the representatives of the United Nations and the
Russian Federation; now, when the prospect of a
federative arrangement for Georgia has taken on a
practical dimension; and now, when the Abkhaz
representatives have been invited to work with us to draft
a new constitution - Ardzinba comes up with a new
proposal.

Contrary to the resolutions of the Security Council,
which reaffirms Georgia's territorial integrity, while
formally agreeing to a federative order for our State, he
offers to sign an agreement between two subjects of
international law, thereby dragging out the negotiations
and threatening not only Georgia's integrity, but also
setting a pattern for the endless fragmentation of States.

We strongly believe that the Security Council should
voice its concern on this matter and clearly condemn the
attempts by the Abkhaz side to reach their secessionist
goals through sophistries and the rape of international
law. My people have always counted on the help of the
United Nations, and have repeatedly expressed their
confidence in the Organization and in the international
community as a whole. Regrettably, with the passage of
time, that attitude is showing signs of changing. There is
a reason for that tendency: the Security Council has
already adopted 12 resolutions and 6 presidential
statements on Abkhazia; while those documents gave
moral support, they were less effective in terms of
yielding tangible, practical results.

The 300,000 people displaced by the conflict have
become refugees in their own homeland. The Secretary-
General and the Permanent Representative of the United
States to the United Nations have had the opportunity to
see their plight first hand. For the world today, caught up
in the flames of numerous ethnic conflicts, 300,000 may
not be a large number. However, the hardships of the
refugees are shared by all Georgians, who see the
refugees' repatriation as the foremost objective. In other
words, we have 300,000 refugees who have the
wholehearted support of 5 million Georgians. When they
witness the helplessness of the international community's
peace efforts, people's confidence in the effectiveness of

 

international mechanisms is eroded and this could
precipitate a disastrous outbreak of uncontrollable actions.

I am accompanied here by Mr. Tamaz Nadareishvili,
Chairman of the Supreme Council of Abkhazia. No one is
in a better position to relate what has happened in Gagra
and Sukhumi, what is going on in Gali and in Abkhazia as
a whole.

The present situation compels me to repeat myself:
people's patience is wearing thin. They are ready to cross
the Inguri river in large groups, with or without the consent
of the Abkhaz side. Though they are unarmed, it is not hard
to imagine the welcome they will be given by the
separatists. In January, we managed to prevent a dangerous
sortie by several hundred armed people who had set out for
Abkhazia. In future, the number of such actions may well
increase and turn into a nationwide, uncontrollable march
to Abkhazia. The Head of State of Georgia, Mr.
Shevardnadze, is doing everything in his power to defuse
the intensity of popular dissatisfaction and keep
uncontrollable emotions in check. But believe me, as time
goes on, it is becoming more and more difficult.

We realize that individual Member States, as well as
the United Nations, are constrained in their actions, but, if
combined, their joint efforts may yield positive results. We
strongly believe that the Security Council must be more
outspoken and clear on this matter. Taking into account the
present realities, namely the intransigence of the Abkhaz
authorities over the organized repatriation of refugees and
displaced persons to Abkhazia, the Government of the
Republic of Georgia deems that the following actions need
to be taken.

The foremost issue is the repatriation of refugees. If
this problem is not solved, it will put the whole peace
process in jeopardy. The return of the refugees must start
from the Gali region under a strict timetable and continue
in stages to other regions of Abkhazia.

The present turn of events undoubtedly puts the
question of the expansion of the mandates of both
UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping forces back on the
agenda, for we can no longer afford for them merely to be
extended.

In the light of the forthcoming CIS summit in Minsk,
which will, inter alia, consider the extension of the mandate
of the CIS peace-keeping forces and the means to improve
their effectiveness, we would welcome the Security
Council's broadening of the UNOMIG mandate.

In order to step up the process of repatriation,
observers must be charged with additional responsibilities,
especially in monitoring and recording human rights
violations. This step will carry both practical and
psychological implications. The returnees must know that
when they are back home they are going to be taken care
of.

We believe that the impartial recording of violations
and repression may serve as a deterrent to potential
perpetrators. This will also provide the international
community with first-hand, reliable information and will
offer means to prevent unlawful actions.

The 1994 CSCE summit in Budapest expressed its
deep concern over "ethnic cleansing" and the massive
expulsion of people, predominantly Georgians, from the
areas where they lived. In this regard, we commend the
Security Council for noting these findings of the CSCE
final Document.

The world community strongly condemns the
practice of genocide and "ethnic cleansing" and seeks to
find effective measures for their prevention. As the
Secretary-General has said, genocide is plotted and
carried out by cynical leaders who think that their crimes
will go unpunished; moreover, they believe that their
deeds will prevail.

We possess more than enough evidence to prove that
similar atrocities have been perpetrated by the Abkhaz
separatists. Governments, as well as non-governmental
organizations, are welcome to dispatch their
representatives to Georgia for an impartial and fair
examination of materials at our disposal.

Aggressive separatism, which routinely entails these
atrocities, is proving to be one of the most severe
challenges on the eve of the twenty-first century. There is
hardly a country today that does not have the potential for
a conflict similar to the one in Georgia. Indeed, many
Member States are currently embroiled in a struggle with
their own secessionist movements. The particular
relevance of the Georgian case for the rest of the world
lies in the danger of the Abkhazian separatists'
consolidating and legalizing their ill-gotten gains. This
would set a most unwanted precedent for all Member
States, a precedent of "victorious separatism" that would
serve as an inspiration for every separatist movement
worldwide.

 

This is hardly the signal the United Nations wants to
send on the eve of its fiftieth anniversary. All available
means at the disposal of the United Nations should be
brought to bear to resolve this problem so that it can enter
its second half-century with a landmark achievement.

Future political adventurers must know that their deeds
will not go unpunished, that any attempt to infringe on the
territorial integrity of States or threaten the lives of
innocent people will be severely prosecuted and the
perpetrators brought to justice. In this context, we would
welcome the establishment of an international criminal
court, a permanent juridical body capable of addressing the
most serious crimes posing a threat to the international
community. We look forward to concluding a convention
on the establishment of this critically needed body in the
near future and are ready to cooperate closely with other
Governments on this important issue.

In closing, allow me to welcome the Security
Council's intention to extend the mandate of UNOMIG, for
we believe that the United Nations presence in the region
is essential to its stability and to the peace process as a
whole.

