Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten for their briefings on the
most recent developments in Myanmar as a follow-
up to presidential statement S/PRST/20l7/22, adopted
last month.

The situation in Myanmar's Rakhine state and the
movement of hundreds of thousands of refugees from
Myanmar to Bangladesh remain a source of concern.
Unless the situation is resolved, the implications
for the worsening of the humanitarian situation and
for regional peace and stability will continue to be
horrendous. It is critical that the humanitarian crisis
remain humanitarian and not be transformed into a
political one that entails violence - a development of
which we should be aware given that the situation has
begun to deteriorate.

We believe that the presidential statement I
mentioned provides a useful framework for addressing
the situation in Myanmar. The right to a safe, voluntary
and dignified return to their place of origin for those
who fled is one of the issues particularly underscored
in the presidential statement. We note the steps taken
by the Myanmar Government to end the violence and
to ensure the safe and dignified return of refugees
and displaced persons, as well as safe and secure
humanitarian access.

Clearly, much remains to be done to address the
suffering and frustration of the people of Rakhine state.
While recognizing the critical need to investigate the
allegations of sexual violence committed in Rakhine
state, we welcome the planned visit by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten to Myanmar to undertake consultations with
the Government. We welcome the agreement on
the return of persons displaced from Rakhine state,
signed by Bangladesh and Myanmar on 23 November,
which includes detailed guidelines for the smooth
and voluntary return of those displaced persons. It is
important that it be translated into meaningful action.

Drawing on the experience of our own region, we
attach great importance to the cooperation between
Bangladesh and Myanmar. They hold the key, with
the genuine and effective support of the international
community. We support the efforts of regional
organizations, such as the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), in providing humanitarian aid
to northern Rakhine.

We also take note of the outcome of the ninth
ASEAN-United Nations summit, which underscored
the importance of addressing the root causes of the
crisis by implementing the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State. We also
commend the donors and the international community
for the generous support delivered during the pledging
conference of 23 October, which seeks to enhance
critical humanitarian assistance for the refugees and
host communities in Bangladesh. It is critical that we
continue to pay attention to the crisis and to mobilize
resources for the response in order to enable the
humanitarian community to do more in assisting and
protecting those extremely vulnerable groups.

