Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for having organized
this debate.

In 2005, the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA) enabled the Sudan to emerge from a deadly
20-year civil war. Today, we must implement the Peace
Agreement in order to avoid a return to violence and
civil war. The Peace Agreement must be implemented
comprehensively, which means that the referendum on
self-determination for Southern Sudan must, as all
have said before me, be conducted in appropriate
conditions on the planned date - 9 January 2011. To
that end, certain actions and initiatives are necessary.
For the Government of the Sudan, the establishment of
the Southern Sudan Referendum Commission this
summer was a first step. Today, the Sudanese
Government's contribution to the budget of the
Commission must be paid. Respect for the freedom of
expression must be ensured.

Preparing for the referendum also means
preparing for the post-referendum process to ensure
that, irrespective of the referendum's outcome, the
Southern Sudanese will be able to live in peace with
the northern Sudanese. In this respect, we welcome the
advance in discussions between the North and the
South conducted under the aegis of Mr. Mbeki. We
encourage the parties to continue in their constructive
efforts and to make concessions where necessary in
order to come to an agreement as soon as possible. It
must be kept in mind that the cost of any such
concessions will be dwarfed by the incomparable gains
represented by the possibility of lasting peace in the
Sudan. The issue of Abyei in particular needs to be
resolved as soon as possible.

It is also incumbent upon the United Nations to
play its full role in the referendum process and to

support the efforts of the parties. We welcome the work
carried out by Special Representative Haile Menkerios
and the United Nations Mission in the Sudan
(UNMIS). The expertise and logistical support
provided will be crucial over the coming months.

We also welcome the establishment of the panel
chaired by President Mkapa, which will be able to give
us, in coordination with the other observation missions
deployed in the Sudan, feedback on the conditions of
the preparations for and the holding of the
referendums.

For its part, the European Union began deploying
its first personnel to the field yesterday to participate in
the observation of voter registration. We must also
ensure that the military aspect of the UNMIS mandate
can be fulfilled under the appropriate conditions. We
took note that there has already been some
redeployment, as well as of the additional needs
described by Mr. Menkerios to allow for better
coverage of the territory, especially those areas where
tensions may arise. Because the stakes are considerable
and the United Nations cannot afford to fail, France
supports the reinforcement requested by the
Secretariat.

In the current context, we must continue to
devote our full attention to Darfur. The war between
the Sudanese armed forces and the rebel groups is
continuing, as the deadly fighting with the Justice and
Equality Movement at the beginning of the month
showed. A political solution is indispensable. In this
context, we need to continue to provide our support to
the Doha joint mediation efforts. It is unacceptable that
the two main rebel groups continue to remain outside
of this process. We call on them to join the discussions
without delay and without preconditions. To refuse to
do so is to refuse peace and to encourage war; it is
criminal.

The United Nations, for its part, needs to
continue its efforts to protect civilians, as its mandate
demands. We are concerned that the military contingent
is not meeting the targets set, as the Secretary-General
recalled in his last report (S/2010/543). We therefore
encourage the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to strengthen its
posture and implement its protection-of-civilians
strategy in all circumstances and at all levels with
renewed determination. This means that all limitations
on the freedom of movement of UNAMID need to
cease completely. This also means that the attacks that
the Force continues to be subject to, which constitute
war crimes, need to end. It is unacceptable that
peacekeepers and civilian personnel of UNAMID
continue to be taken hostage on a regular basis.

I should like to conclude by recalling, as
underscored in President Mbeki's report a year ago,
that there can be no peace without justice in Darfur.
The crimes that have been committed there cannot go
unpunished. We therefore call on all States to cooperate
with the International Criminal Court pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005).

