Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The candidate
countries Croatia, Turkey and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Armenia, Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine align themselves
with this statement.

First of all, may I congratulate you, Sir, on the
assumption of your duties as President of this Council
and on the organization of this timely debate on a
subject of deep interest to the European Union.

The European Union recognizes that the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security lies with the United Nations. The
European Union aims at supporting the United Nations,
in particular the Security Council, in carrying out its
responsibilities and addressing the challenges of
conflict prevention, management and resolution as a
way to strengthen effective multilateralism.

Pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter, regional
and subregional organizations play a central role in the
promotion of peace and security, in accordance with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Their preventive diplomacy capabilities and good
offices may be used to avoid the occurrence or
recurrence of violent conflicts, at both the national and
the international levels. They are closer to the realities
of the countries and regions and usually have the
motivation and willingness to act quickly and
effectively, helping to solve conflicts and mitigate their
spill-over effects. They are also in a privileged position
to support and enhance peacebuilding efforts.

We believe that the long-standing experience of
the European Union and its unique nature, multiple
instruments and considerable resources can be used in
the context of a deeper and broader cooperation with
the United Nations, as expressed in resolution 1631
(2005), in areas such as conflict prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding, security
sector reform, combating terrorism, disarmament and
non-proliferation.

The European Union is particularly pleased with
the substantive progress in the cooperation between the
United Nations and the European Union in crisis
management, in particular the signing, in June 2007, of
the Joint Statement on United Nations-European Union
Cooperation in Crisis Management. Building on the
previous Joint Declaration, of September 2003, the
new document identifies four concrete areas for further
cooperation between the two organizations: planning,
training, communication and best practices. The
European Union is actively engaged and fully
committed to the implementation of the Joint
Statement, through specific measures aimed at
developing dialogue and the exchange of experience,
on a regular basis and at different levels, as well as
ensuring coherence between the policies pursued by
the United Nations and the European Union. A similar
cooperation in conflict prevention has been built in
recent years with the Secretariat.

Allow me to refer to a few examples of how the
European Union mobilizes its full scope of policies and
instruments in a mutually supportive way to reinforce
its cooperation with the United Nations and regional
organizations in the peace and security continuum,
from conflict prevention to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding.

In the framework of the European Security and
Defence Policy, two operations in 2003 were real and
successful tests for the European Union-United Nations
relationship: the European Union Police Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the European Union-led
Operation Artemis, carried out in accordance with
resolution 1484 (2003), which succeeded in stabilizing
the security conditions, improving the humanitarian
situation and protecting the civilian population in
Bunia, in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In 2006, the European Union-led peacekeeping
force in the Democratic Republic of the Congo assisted
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) during
the electoral process. That military support has been
complemented, since 2005, by two long-term civilian
missions to support security sector reform in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The launching of the European Union-led
Chad/Central African Republic bridging military
operation in support of the United Nations police force
in eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic represents a new step in our cooperation and
a concrete example of how to maximize synergies and
define responsibilities through a clear division of
labour. By addressing the regional dimension of the
Darfur crisis, the deployment of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad in
parallel with the deployment in the Sudan of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur is a necessary step to facilitate a long-lasting
solution to violence in the region.

In the Balkans, the European Union's military
operations enjoy support from NATO structures in a
unique cooperation agreement between the two
organizations. In Kosovo, a European team is carrying
out preparatory activities, in close cooperation with the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, for the launch, when the conditions have been
met, of a European mission in the rule of law sector.

European Union development assistance is
equally mobilized. In Darfur, the African Union's
peacekeeping force, the African Union Mission in the
Sudan, has been financially supported from the start
through the African Peace Facility, an original
commitment of €250 million, now raised to €385
million, to support African-led peace support
operations and to enhance the institutional capacities of
the African Union and subregional organizations in
relation to peacekeeping and conflict prevention.
Besides Darfur, the Facility has supported African
peacekeeping efforts through the Multinational Force
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the African Union Mission in Somalia and
the African Union Mission for Support to the Elections
in the Comoros. The sum of €27 million has been
committed so far for capacity-building.

The new Instrument for Stability now also
contributes to peace and security efforts, with first
support being granted to the trust fund for the
AU-United Nations Joint Mediation Support Team for
Darfur, to the establishment of a United Nations-
trained Chadian police component in the context of the
aforementioned combined United Nations-EU
intervention, as well as, in the case of Somalia, for the
planning capacities of the AU Commission. National
and regional envelopes of the European Development
Fund likewise contribute to the African Peace and
Security Architecture at country and subregional levels.
Tripartite capacity programmes in association with the
United Nations are being considered, notably in West
Africa, involving the Economic Community of West
African States. European Union development funds are
also used worldwide for peacebuilding actions in post-
conflict countries.

Support to the African Peace and Security
Architecture is a key priority for the European Union
and its member States, within the new strategic
partnership that the European Union is establishing
with the African Union. The European Reinforcement
of African Peacekeeping Capacities (EURO-RECAMP)
programme and the training of military and police
forces involved in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, through the programme's contribution to
peacekeeping schools in Africa and Europe, also fit
within this strategic partnership.

As is widely recognized, the European Union is
itself a structure for peace and security in its region,
based upon common values of peace, prosperity, good
governance, human rights protection and the rule of
law. We emphasize these same values in broader
international relations.

The European Union takes an active role in
enhancing regional cooperation throughout the
European continent and its neighbouring regions,
making use of mechanisms and policies such as the
European Neighbourhood Policy, the Stabilization and
Association process and the Euro-Mediterranean
Partnership - which, by the way, has been holding
meetings yesterday and today in Lisbon, bringing
together 27 European countries and 10 countries of the
eastern and southern Mediterranean area.

The European Union advocates a pragmatic and
action-oriented approach, both for EU-United Nations
cooperation and in the broader context of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations. In that regard, we would like to present
some suggestions on strengthening cooperation
between the European Union and the United Nations,
such as ensuring a more frequent dialogue between the
United Nations and the EU on the maintenance of
international peace and security, using the structure of
the United Nations Secretariat and the Security
Council; enhancing cooperation on aspects of
multidimensional peacekeeping, including police, the
rule of law and security sector reform; pursuing the
establishment of specific coordination and cooperation
mechanisms for crisis situations where the United
Nations and the European Union are jointly engaged;
organizing systematic United Nations-European Union
joint lessons-learned exercises following cases ofjoint
operational cooperation; and reinforcing the European
Union's participation in the Peacebuilding
Commission, drawing on our experience as a leading
global player and a major provider of funds for
peacebuilding activities.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the European
Union will continue to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in every way possible,
in cooperation with the United Nations and with other
regional and subregional organizations.

