Switzerland thanks Indonesia for organizing this open debate. We welcome the first report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/754) on the linkages between terrorism and organized crime. Terrorist organizations and transnational criminal networks exploit and benefit from a lack of good governance and the rule of law, porous borders, high levels of corruption and weak and ineffective democratic institutions and law enforcement. These conditions contribute to the exacerbation of armed conflict and other situations of violence, with terrorism and transnational organized crime flourishing and reinforcing each other. While the linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime are widely recognized, they are undeniably complex and diverse. We welcome the fact that this important issue is now on the agenda of the Security Council. However, global efforts to understand and combat these phenomena and their connections need to be strengthened. To that end, Switzerland would like to highlight three priorities. First, all efforts to combat terrorism and transnational organized crime must fully respect international law, including international human rights law and international humanitarian law. They must comply with the principles of legality, necessity, proportionality and non-discrimination. Given the growing convergence between terrorism and organized crime, criminal justice responses must take this linkage into account and use operational methods and legal instruments that have proven to be effective. Switzerland reiterates the Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to adopt human rights-based approaches to combat these crimes. Secondly, the Global Counterterrorism Forum is an important platform on this subject. Together with Nigeria, Switzerland co-chairs the Forum's Criminal Justice and the Rule of Law Working Group. It is also leading an initiative on the criminal justice response to the linkages between terrorism, transnational organized crime and international crime. An addendum to The Hague Good Practices on the Nexus between Transnational Organized Crime and Terrorism is expected to be adopted by the GCTF next September. It will provide guidance and recommendations on how to strengthen criminal justice approaches and improve the capacity of law enforcement officials and prosecutors to detect, investigate and prosecute crimes committed at the nexus of terrorism and transnational organized crime, while respecting international law and in particular human rights obligations. Thirdly, corruption and terrorism must be addressed in a more coherent manner. Resolution 2482 (2019) is explicit that counter-terrorism must include the fight against corruption. We call on the Security Council to dedicate more attention to this. More research is also needed on the linkage between the two phenomena in order to properly address the risks. That is why Switzerland worked with the Royal United Services Institute to analyse the nexus between corruption, terrorism and the financing for terrorism. One of the conclusions of this work underlines the importance of strengthening criminal justice and law enforcement approaches in this area, as corruption facilitates the financing of terrorism by exploiting connections with organized crime groups. When terrorism and transnational organized crime intersect, armed conflict and other situations of violence often escalate. That has a clear negative impact on international peace and security. Breaking this cycle requires the commitment of the entire international community, and we call on all Member States and the United Nations to intensify their efforts.
