Mr. Webson (Antigua and Barbuda): Let me begin
by first congratulating you, Mr. President, on your
leadership of this organ during the month of January.
My country, Antigua and Barbuda, is extremely proud
of your exemplary leadership as a small State in the
Security Council for this month.

We cannot, and no one, can describe the situation in
Venezuela in any other term but serious. The situation
of the Government and the people of Venezuela is of
great importance to my region and country. We do not,
and will not, stand to see the promise of the zone of
peace in our region break.

Our world is littered with examples by which
external interference in other countries in an attempt
to bring about or impose peace has resulted in those
countries and societies remaining in a state of
uncertainty, disorganization and chaos, and they have
yet to find peace. The Charter of the United Nations
is clear with regard to the promotion of international
peace and respect for sovereignty. The Charter also
makes clear that Member States should refrain from
the threat or use of force. Any unilateral declaration
of support for one side or the other and undue and
uninvited influence in the internal affairs of the
Bolivian Republic of Venezuela do nothing other than
undermine the peacebuilding process, which requires
our full attention, urgency and focus.

My Government therefore rejects any external
force that interferes with the internal matters of the
Government of the Bolivian Republic of Venezuela,
and furthermore rejects any attempt by any political
unit within the country to take power in a manner
other than by the constitutional process, through which
they are all allowed. My region and Government in
the Caribbean experience relative peace. We continue
to emphasize our zone of peace. In our region we
promote brotherhood and sisterhood, and therefore the
Government and the people of Antigua and Barbuda,
together with the Governments of the other Heads
of the Caribbean Community - as was stated here
earlier - continue to avail themselves of facilitating
dialogue and a peace process that will return the
Government of Venezuela to its continued operations
and functions legitimately conferred upon it by the May
2018 elections.

