Mr. Quinlan (Australia): As we now recognize,
almost too late, the Ebola outbreak in West Africa is
unprecedented in its scale, its geographic reach and its
impact. We have heard that the already high numbers
of infections and deaths are multiplying exponentially,
doubling every three weeks. Health systems in affected
countries have been stretched to the point of collapse.
Sick, infected people - "begging for life", as Jackson
Niamah ofMedecins Sans Frontieres hasjust said - are
being turned away from overflowing treatment centres
to die. That is clearly appalling in itself, but it is also
worsening the spread of the disease. Health systems
cannot cope with other endemic disease or even simple
treatments. We have heard again today the dire forecasts
if Ebola is left to continue its alarming spread.
I welcome the United States leadership in
convening today's historic emergency session, and
we are particularly indebted to President Obama for
his announcement this week of unprecedented United
States efforts to help stop the epidemic.

We know that the Ebola outbreak has been
transformed into much more than a health crisis; it has
grave humanitarian, economic and social consequences
that could spread far beyond the affected countries.
Women are disproportionately affected, as always,
accounting for as much as 70 per cent of Ebola cases.
Female nurses represent the majority of medical
personnel killed. Ebola risks rolling back peacebuilding
and development gains. Economic growth forecasts
are already being slashed, and it is already having an
impact on stability in a region emerging from conflict
and grappling with chronic conflict risks, such as high
youth unemployment. It is self-evident that the crisis is
a threat to international peace and security.

We have much catching up to do ifwe are to succeed
in bending down the epidemiological curve from its
current explosive trajectory. The effects of the outbreak
are still reversible, but only if the response - and
particularly isolation and treatment capacity - is
scaled up massively, quickly. There is no time to waste.

It is absolutely vital that there is an urgent,
coordinated response. Australia strongly supports the
Secretary-General's efforts, through Dr. Nabarro, and
working closely with Ms. Chan and the World Health
Organisation (WHO), to ensure that the United Nations
system makes an immediate, effective and coordinated
contribution to the global effort to control the outbreak.
We recognize that we are faced with an unprecedented
challenge that requires an equally unprecedented
response. Australia therefore welcomes and supports
the Secretary-General's initiative to immediately
establish the first-ever United Nations international
public health mission, the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response.

United Nations peacekeeping missions, in particular
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), can
also support efforts to combat the outbreak, as far as
their capacities and mandates allow. We know that
peacekeepers cannot be transformed into front-line
health care workers, but as UNMIL is demonstrating,
they can play a crucial role to communicate Ebola
preventive measures to the public, and importantly,
to dispel fear and misinformation. United Nations
missions support the maintenance oflaw and order, and
they also have logistical and organizational capabilities,
which are desperately needed.

The blanket border and travel restrictions being
imposed across the region to contain the outbreak are,
as we have heard, having a paradoxical effect, making
it more difficult to fly in medical staff and supplies and
restricting trade and transportation links. We thank
Ghana for retaining the crucial UNMIL air bridge into
Monrovia. We can and indeed must maintain open
borders prudently, while at the same time heightening
our vigilance to stop Ebola's spread.

Australia is committed to supporting the international
response. Our Foreign Minister announced this week
that Australia would immediately provide a further
$7 million, including for the WHO consolidated
regional response and to support the provision of
front-line medical services. We have heard today that
the international response must increase by 20 times
if we are to get ahead of the epidemic. Australia will
continue to assess very quickly areas where we can best
contribute.

Let me conclude by paying tribute to the health
care workers, 90 per cent of whom are national staff,
who were at the coalface of the response to this
terrible, but still beatable, disease. They are working
tirelessly at great personal risk to save lives and reduce
suffering. Many have died. All urgently need our full
and unwavering support.

