Mr. Heinbecker (Canada) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, for having taken up the presidency, and I
wish to welcome you to the Council once again. The
Netherlands has contributed greatly to the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and
continues to do so. It is therefore fitting that you, Mr.
Minister, should preside over today's debate. We
appreciate your first-hand account of conditions on the
ground following your recent visit to the region.

(spoke in English)

We are greatly encouraged that Ethiopia and
Eritrea continue to honour the Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities they signed on 18 June. We once again
applaud the Organization of African Unity (OAU) for
its key role in making it happen, as well as the work of
President Bouteflika of Algeria and Special Envoy
Lake. We believe both Ethiopia and Eritrea have
demonstrated a serious commitment to reaching a
lasting solution to their dispute. We commend them for
returning to the path of peace. We are pleased that the
Security Council was able to encourage the parties
along that path by promptly authorizing the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) to
help consolidate the peace that had been reached.

We, in Canada, are pleased to have been part of
this endeavour from the outset. Our increased
involvement, which recently received the full backing
of our Parliament, reflects our commitment, not only to
United Nations peacekeeping, but to promoting peace
in Africa. This mission is also an important first step
for the Standby High Readiness Brigade (SHIRBRIG).
We have participated in SHIRBRIG also from its
inception as a way of trying to realize our common
objective of enhancing the United Nations capacity to
act more quickly.

Canada has therefore welcomed the chance to
augment our UNMEE contribution with a reinforced
mechanised infantry company, which will work as part
of the Netherlands SHIRBRIG battalion.

We endorse the confidence-building measures
that you, Mr. President, specified in your paper. We
had recently participated with our Dutch colleagues in
the strategic reconnaissance of the region and it was
apparent from that visit that there are numerous
challenges that the United Nations will face, whether it
is the threat posed by landmines - as highlighted by
the Secretary-General - the urgent need to open air
corridors to facilitate the movement of UNMEE, or the
early conclusion of a Status of Forces Agreement.
None of these challenges is insurmountable, if the
parties demonstrate continued goodwill and
cooperation.

For the two countries and for UNMEE, some of
the most difficult work still lies ahead: consolidating
peace, promoting reconciliation and healing the
wounds inflicted by two years of fighting that has left
so many dead and so many more displaced. Ethiopians
and Eritreans alike must now move from the discourse
of war to the vocabulary of peace. Words, as the
Secretary-General reminded us in another context
recently, can also cause harm and must not now be
allowed to become new weapons, now that the guns
have been silenced. We urge both sides to take
advantage of the presence of UNMEE to give impetus
to the OAU-sponsored proximity talks and to resolve
the outstanding issues. To further improve the chances
for a sustainable peace, we call on both parties to
promote and protect human rights and humanitarian
needs on the part of both their populations.

(spoke in French)

The time has come to rededicate resources
previously wasted on war and apply them to the human
security and reconstruction needs of the people of
Ethiopia and Eritrea.

