Mr. Choat (South Sudan): On behalf of the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan, I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/ZOll/678). I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, as well as
Ms. Hilde Johnson, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her role on the ground in the
successful establishment of the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS). Lastly, I
wish to thank all members that have contributed
military and police personnel to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We are grateful for their
support of the Mission.

As noted by the Secretary-General in his report,
the Government of the Republic of South Sudan has
made progress on the lOO-day programme established
by President Kiir following the appointment of his
Cabinet in early September. In particular, President
11-59366
Kiir has committed to enacting legislation on
transparency and accountability. The Government is
also forging ahead with its plan to establish the
national constitutional review commission in early
2012. Those actions will contribute to the
establishment of a fully functioning democracy, in
which the Government is accountable to the people and
acts in the people's interests.

The security situation in Jonglei and Upper Nile
states is of course a concern to my Government. We
underline that, on 9 July, President Kiir once again
extended an amnesty to all militia groups. Since then,
my Government has worked successfully to reach
agreements with several groups, resulting in their
integration into the South Sudan armed forces. Certain
groups have, however, chosen not to accept the
amnesty offer or to negotiate the terms of their
integration into the South Sudan armed forces. We will
redouble our efforts in that regard. In the meantime, the
Government takes very seriously its primary
responsibility for the protection of civilians and, as
noted by the Secretary-General, has mobilized
additional troops to the areas of greatest concern.

Recently, the Republic of the Sudan accused the
Republic of South Sudan of facilitating and hosting
two meetings, in Juba and Yei, for the purpose of
uniting rebel factions to overthrow the Government in
Khartoum. That allegation is baseless. We stress
categorically that there is no element of truth to the
claims of accusations brought forth by Khartoum, nor
any sponsorship by the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan for any hostile activities to topple the
Government in Khartoum, militarily or otherwise.
Moreover, as a matter of policy, we are not providing
military assistance to the opposition forces operating in
the Sudan.

The Republic of South Sudan encourages both the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
opposition forces to engage in mutually beneficial
discussions that will enable a peaceful resolution of
hostilities and improve the current humanitarian crisis
in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

In conclusion, the Republic of South Sudan will
continue to enhance its security and the delivery of
services to its citizens. We welcome the support of the
international community and that of United Nations
agencies.
5
