Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you most sincerely on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month, a month that has seen
continuous Council activity under your wise
leadership.

Behind the item before the Council today - the
situation between Iraq and Kuwait - lies the genuine
tragedy that affected Kuwait for a certain time. But
Iraq continues to suffer from its impact. To this day, the
people of Iraq - women, children and old people -
continue to suffer hardship and pain. They continue to
suffer the repercussions of a painful calamity and to
pay an exorbitant price for it.

It is true that the Gulf crisis that has blighted our
region inflicted a deep wound on the Arab body politic;
it will not heal until we overcome the crisis in all its
dimensions. This must include an appropriate solution
of the question of Kuwaiti prisoners and property.

But it is also true that continuing the blockade
against Iraq will pose a threat to peace and stability in
the region for many years to come. How could it be
otherwise when an entire generation of Iraqis live a life
of misery, which breeds indignation and hatred and
sows the seeds of future crisis?

Today, Kuwait has been liberated. It has regained
its sovereignty and has secured its borders. Today, the
Gulf crisis is history, but Iraq continues to this day to
live that tragedy. The comprehensive embargo imposed
on Iraq 10 years ago continues ceaselessly to crush the
Iraqi people. For Iraq and the Iraqis, time has stood
still. Building has ceased; development has halted.
Indeed, life has come to an end for hundreds of
thousands of children felled by disease and epidemic in
the wake of a comprehensive blockade imposed by
military force. A whole generation of Iraqis have
become victims of the embargo, whose effects exceed
those of the war in their scope, harmfulness, damage
and seriousness. All sectors of the State and of society
have been affected; the infrastructure has withered;
health care and education have deteriorated, leaving
behind permanent disabilities.

The embargo's effects on Iraq are not confined to
the Iraqi people; the impact has been directly felt by
neighbouring countries and indirectly by other
countries, such as my own country, Yemen, which has
experienced great economic, trade and financial
problems. Suffice it to say that eight huge Iraqi ships
have been moored in Aden harbour for more than 10
years, constituting a real environmental hazard there.

We call for an end to the embargo, an end to the
suffering of the Iraqi people so that they will have the
opportunity to rebuild anew, to repair the damage,
tragedy and pain caused by the embargo. The embargo
imposed on Iraq, whether smart or stupid, today has no
political or ethical justification. This is my country's
position. Arab public opinion feels that the Iraqis are
the victims of collective punishment that was meted
out to that people, who has suffered enough.

