Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The situation in the Middle East continues to be
very complex and to be marked by instability and
insecurity. The Palestinian people continue to suffer
the illegal foreign occupation of Israel and suffer under
Israeli policies and practices, in serious violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights.

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2334
(2016), in accordance with the Security Council's
primary role in the maintaining international peace and
security, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. That resolution reaffirmed, inter alia, the
illegality of Israeli settlement activities and reiterated
the call for Israel to immediately and fully cease from
all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in accordance with
international law.

However, while the resolution is a step in the right
direction, it is still not enough. This year is the fiftieth
anniversary of the Israeli occupation of Palestine, which
marks 50 years of systematic abuses, acts of aggression,
killings and human rights violations. As an international
community we owe a debt to the Palestinian people. It

is time to break the silence and the stalemate that have
led to the suffering of the Palestinian people of abuse
and to put an end to the impunity of Israel's criminal
actions against Palestine.

We call once again on the Security Council to
adopt the necessary decisions and demand that Israel
put an immediate end to the Israeli occupation of
Palestinian territory and other Arab territories; an end
to the blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has gone on for
more than 10 years and where 2 million Palestinians are
being collectively punished and besieged, threatened
and exposed to extreme deprivation and isolation,
which has resulted in a serious humanitarian crisis; an
end to the building and expansion of Israeli settlements
and the separation wall in occupied Palestinian
territory; an end to the destruction and confiscation
of Palestinian lands and property; and an end to the
forced displacement and the transfer of settlers to
occupied Palestinian territory, among other violations
of international law, international humanitarian law,
human rights, the rights of the Palestinian people and
United Nations resolutions.

Until the Security Council takes on its responsibility
and implements not only resolution 2334 (2016) but
also additional concrete actions that contribute to the
search for effective solutions to the conflict, Israel
will continue to entrench the occupation, making the
two-State solution inviable and preventing a fair and
peaceful solution to it.

We call again on the international community to
take a firm and principled stand that will address all the
illegal actions of Israel against the Palestinian people
and its property, before it is too late.

We reiterate that the only possible solution to the
question of Palestine is the peaceful coexistence of
two independent States, with the establishment of an
independent, sovereign and viable State of Palestine,
with its capital in East Jerusalem and respecting the
pre-1967 borders. We also support the admission of
Palestine as a full-fledged Member of the Organization.
We reiterate our call to the Security Council to take
action to that end. That would undoubtedly be another
step on the right path. If it is not done, the General
Assembly should act with full determination to decide
on the case.

As on other occasions, we reiterate our
condemnation of the politicization of the Syrian crisis
and the manipulation of the humanitarian situation and
of the suffering of the Syrian people, which suits the
dominating geopolitical interests of countries thatpursue

the declared objective of imposing a regime change in
Syria. We also condemn the double standard. It cannot
be repeated often enough that those who speak against
Syria all too often forget the major humanitarian needs
of the besieged Gaza Strip. It cannot be overlooked that
those who urge the General Assembly to pronounce
itself on alleged and unrecognized crimes committed in
Syria do not urge the Assembly to rule on the inclusion
of the State of Palestine as a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations or to review the crimes committed
against the Palestinian people.

Those who have fuelled the conflict in Syria - by
providing weapons and financing and sponsorship to
terrorist groups from the outside - are responsible for
the thousands of civilians who have fallen victim to the
conflict and the humanitarian situation. We reject the
promotion of an interventionist agenda as a means of
solving the crisis in Syria. Cuba deeply deplores and
mourns the loss of innocent lives as a consequence of
the situation. We condemn all of the acts of Violence
against the civilian population in Syria. We call for
a halt to the violations of Syrian sovereignty and the
foreign military presence that are not subject to the
consent of and coordination of operations by the Syrian
Government, the only legitimately elected authority in
Syria. A political solution - reached through dialogue
and negotiations and without preconditions - is the
only Viable way out of the conflict in Syria. In that vein,
we welcome the adoption by the Security Council on
31 December 2016 ofresolution 2336 (2016), negotiated
by Russia and Turkey, which supports the ceasefire
in Syria, as well as the re-opening of direct political
negotiations between the Syrian Government and the
armed opposition, which will take place at the end of
January in Astana. Peace in Syria can be achieved only
through respect for the right of the Syrian people to
decide their own fate without foreign interference and
impositions. We support the Syrian people and their
aspirations to live in peace and choose their own destiny.

To conclude, we reiterate our support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the conflicts
in the Middle East, which will make it possible to
safeguard the sovereignty, security and territorial
integrity of all States in the region.

