Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): Sir, allow me first of all, on behalf of the
delegation of the United Arab Emirates, to take this
opportunity to congratulate you on your election to the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. It is
also my pleasure to express our sincere thanks to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Argentina,
for his work as President of the Council last month.

Despite the rather positive developments in the
question of Palestine - developments that are embodied
in the Declaration of Principles and subsequent
agreements between the PLO and Israel - we and the
international community must admit that the process that
began in Madrid is going through a very rough patch as
a result of the pretexts and other excuses advanced by
Israel in order to avoid implementing its commitments
and abiding by them. Indeed, Israel is continuing its
practices of violence and terrorism, and is imposing
famine on the population by besieging their territory,
annexing their land and destroying their homes.
Furthermore, the Israeli Government has recently begun
work again on building new settlements and expanding
existing ones, particularly in the holy city of Jerusalem

 

and its suburbs. This must be considered a flagrant
violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and of the
relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
465 (1980).

The Israeli cabinet recently adopted a decision giving
the go-ahead to the construction of 4,500 units in East
Jerusalem, its eastern suburbs and on part of the Golan
Heights. This is above and beyond the recent plan to build
15,000 new units in certain areas of Jerusalem as homes for
approximately 80,000 settlers by end 1997, on the pretext
of ensuring those settlers' security and stability. Israel's
security pretexts should not become the principal factor in
the peace process because otherwise, unless Israel follows
through on its commitments and lays all its cards on the
negotiating table, the peace process could stumble over
pitfalls of every sort.

The Israeli settlement schemes reveal once again that
the Israeli Government has no sincere or serious intentions
regarding the ongoing Middle East peace process. They also
show that Israel is following a policy of imposing a fait
accompli and causing material, historical, cultural and
demographic changes to the city of Jerusalem by attempting
to Judaize it before the final stage of the negotiations on
Jerusalem with the Palestinian party. Israeli practices, in
fact, are in flagrant violation - and threaten the
credibility - of the agreements between the Palestinians
and the Israelis, and they are an obstacle to the achievement
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

We should like once again to state that we totally
reject these activities by Israeli settlers, and lay the
responsibility for these practices, that cannot but hinder the
ongoing peace process, at the door of the Israeli
Government. Our delegation wishes to express its full
support for the position of the Palestinian people, who day
in, day out reject the activities by the Israeli settlers in their
territories as they reject other practices that are in
contravention of international legitimacy and law. We look
forward with impatience to seeing the Council take into
account all its previous resolutions, particularly resolution
465 (1980), which calls for an immediate end to the
building and expansion of such settlements for the existing
settlements to be dismantled and any plans to building any
further settlements in the occupied Arab territories,
including the holy city of Jerusalem, to be halted. The
Council must deal with this matter and all its political
dimensions in a constructive fashion that will enable the
peace process to continue.

 

Given the international changes now prevailing, it
has become very important to keep up the responsibility
of the international organizations and that of the Security
Council in particular, with respect to all aspects of the
Palestinian question, so that we can achieve real peace.

In conclusion, our delegation wishes once again to
state that the achievement of a peaceful, just and lasting
settlement of the Palestinian question and the Arab-Israeli
conflict must be based on the principles of the Madrid
Conference, on the principle of land for peace, and
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978). All those resolutions call for the legitimate
rights of the Palestinian people to be safeguarded and for
a total Israeli withdrawal from all the occupied Arab
territories, including the holy city of Jerusalem, the Golan
Heights and southern Lebanon. Unless Israel respects
those principles and those foundations for peace, there
will be no progress on any other negotiating tracks of the
peace process, for the peace process is a whole that
includes the implementation of rules of strategic security
in the region.

Of course, to this very day Israel refuses to
implement such measures, as is seen in its aggression
against and siege of areas of Lebanon, including attacks
on the Lebanese coast, its refusal to respond to requests
to accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and to make the Middle East a zone
free of weapons of mass destruction. It must do all those
things it now refuses to do so that the Palestinian people
can realize their aspirations for a dignified and free life
on an equal footing with all the peoples of the world and
so that we can move the peace process forward and
strategic security returns to the Middle East.

