Mrs. Ukonga: It is indeed an honour for me
personally, and for the Gulf of Guinea Commission
(GGC), to have been invited to participate in this very
important debate on transnational organized crime at
sea as a threat to international peace and security.

The whole world knows that the primary
responsibility of the Security Council is the maintenance
of international peace and security, and therefore to
deal with any situation or incident in the world that
may constitute a threat to world peace and security.
That threat can come by way of war among or within
nations, but it can also be caused by religious, tribal,
economic or political differences among antagonists. It
can also be caused by criminal activities carried out
across national boundaries, threatening the economic
well-being and sustainable development of the Victims
of such acts. As my contribution to this very important
debate, I would like to focus on transnational organized
crime at sea in the Gulf of Guinea region as a threat to
world peace and security.

Several countries of the region established the
GGC on 3 July 2001 to ensure that such threats to the
economic well-being, peace and security of the region
are reduced to the barest minimum, if not completely
eliminated. The region's rich endowment in hydrocarbon
and living marine resources, along with its importance
as a key route for maritime transport between America,
Europe and Africa and onwards to Asia, also makes it a
very attractive environment for criminals who want to
engage in their nefarious activities. A Gulf of Guinea
that is well patrolled and supervised, as well as better
served socially, would reduce incidents of criminal
activities in its maritime domain.
However, this, unfortunately, is not yet the case.
We in the region are therefore faced with a situation of
increasing criminality in the maritime domain of the
Gulf of Guinea, which is destabilizing the whole region
and constitutes a threat to international peace and
security. The Gulf of Guinea region comprises some 13
countries, from Liberia to Angola, in an area with some
6,000 kilometres of coastline. It is a wide expanse of
land and water that no single country of the region can
successfully patrol. None of the countries of the region
has either the capacity or the capability to even attempt
to undertake that important assignment.

Hence, the countries of the region came together
to form the Gulf of Guinea Commission as a forum to
identify the common problems, compare notes, solve
these problems, adopt best practices and encourage each
member State to take on the primary responsibility for
securing its maritime borders and, in case of need, to
assist neighbours in doing the same by pooling resources
through the establishment of maritime operations
centres in each member State and multinational
coordination centres with neighbouring States. We
now have working multinational coordination centres
in Douala and Cotonou, and regional maritime security
coordination centres in two economic communities of
the Gulf of Guinea region: the Economic Community
of Central African States, with its Regional Center
for African Maritime Security, in Pointe Noire; and
the Economic Community of West African States,
with its West Africa Maritime Regional Safety Center
in Abidjan.

The Gulf of Guinea Commission has pursued
the objectives of its establishment by organizing
specialized committees to deal collectively with
common issues of the region. In that vein, in 2018 the
GGC organized two seminars to bring together experts
of international organizations and member States to
inform and brainstorm on happenings in the region and
member States with a view to adopting best practices.
The two seminars were organized on the following
themes: "The governance of the Atlantic Ocean in the
interest of peace, security and sustainable development
in the Gulf of Guinea" and "The blue economy in the
interest of food security in the Gulf of Guinea region".
Our next seminar will be on regional maritime strategy
and unregulated migration in the Gulf of Guinea region.
It is scheduled to be held in March in Accra.

Transnational organized crime at sea, as a threat
to international peace and security, is not peculiar to
the Gulf of Guinea region. Other regions are equally
being plagued by that scourge. While an international
naval intervention from outside the Gulf of Aden has
succeeded in reducing such incidents in that region,
that may not be feasible in West and Central Africa, the
main reason being that no country in West or Central
Africa is a failed State, as was the case with Somalia.
Also, the States of the region have taken and are taking
measures to patrol their waters. From our own studies
and analyses, we know that transnational organized
crime at sea in our Gulf oquinea region can be reduced
with a better and more coordinated intervention at the
national, regional and international levels.

At the national level, we must resolve national
disagreements to discourage cooperation with
perpetrators of transnational crime at sea; restore
degraded environment caused by the exploitation of
hydrocarbon resources at sea; and create social, political
and economic conditions that can encourage youth
employment and curb youth restiveness, especially in
those countries engaged in the exploitation of natural
resources such as hydrocarbons and living marine
resources. In multiracial and multitribal societies, we
must ensure the political inclusion of the population,
especially in the coastal parts of the country. The
Governments of the States of the region must commit
to a serious, aggressive and sustained campaign to
create real jobs at home instead of perpetuating illegal
immigration abroad, as the grass is not always greener
on the other side. We must improve the capacity and
capability of national navies to undertake effective
patrolling of the maritime domain. We must ensure
the domestication and implementation of agreements
signed on the suppression of criminal activities at sea
in the Gulf of Guinea region, such as the Yaounde
Code of Conduct on the prevention and repression of
acts ofpiracy, armed robbery against vessels, and illicit
activities in the West and Central African maritime
domain, of 25 June 2013.

At the regional level, we must promote cooperation
with neighbouring States to share information on
suspicious movements in the maritime domain;
undertake joint patrols and surveillance of the maritime
domain; collaborate in the operationalization of
agreed maritime strategy; mutualize maritime assets
for better coordination and implementation of agreed
strategies and policies; ensure the effective functioning
of the multinational coordination centres in Douala
and Cotonou and of the Regional Center for African
Maritime Security, in Pointe Noire, and the West Africa
Maritime Regional Safety Center, in Abidjan; ensure the
effective functioning of the Interregional Coordination
Center in Yaounde, established subsequent to the
adoption of resolution 2018 (2011), of 31 October 2011,
and resolution 2039 (2012), of 29 February 2012.

At the international level, we must promote the
assistance and collaboration of international parties and
other stakeholders with countries of the region in order
to enable them to carry out their agreed programmes
and projects for the reduction and eradication of
poverty; encourage direct investment in facilities and
infrastructure to benefit the population; take action to
discourage illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
in the region and to compel transnational companies to
use best practices in their exploitation activities in order
to avoid sea pollution and environmental degradation in
the region; move to establish mechanisms to criminalize
the purchase of stolen crude oil and to discourage the
commission of such crimes by entities outside the
region; ensure that the proceeds of such crimes are
forfeited to the Governments of the States from which
such resources are stolen; and establish international
mechanisms to control the dumping of toxic residues
in the territorial waters of the region and international
waters adjacent to the region.

With this three-pronged approach, the threat of
transnational organized crime at sea to international
peace and security will be greatly reduced, if not
completely eradicated, in the Gulf of Guinea region.

