Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, and the other members of the Security
Council for organizing this meeting. I also especially
thank Under-Secretary-General Alain Le Roy and the
force commanders who are participating in this
meeting.
As we have mentioned elsewhere, United Nations
peacekeeping operations are a unique flagship activity
of the Organization that entail risking human lives for
the cause of international peace and security. I take my
hat off to those who have made the supreme sacrifice
to maintain peace and stability in the world.

The success of peacekeeping in recent years has
led to high expectations and to a surge in demand. An
assessment of future conflict trends suggests that the
need for peacekeeping will increase, not decrease, and
that the nature of peacekeeping will be
multidimensional and more complex, not simple.
Historical experience in conflict zones and current
political dynamics substantiate the notion that
upcoming demand will fall on the shoulders of United
Nations peacekeeping. The onus is therefore on us to
lead the process through effective cooperation, with
clearly stipulated mandates backed by sufficient
resources and specific policy and implementation
guidelines. This warrants effectively forging an
inclusive partnership among the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries, as well as ensuring the capability of
peacekeepers to achieve their mandated objectives.

The success of a peacekeeping mission largely
depends on the political support it receives and on the
adequate and timely provision of financial, logistical
and human resources. In that regard, we reiterate the
importance of closer and more active involvement with
troop- and police-contributing countries when deciding
on new peacekeeping missions or extending or
amending the mandates of current missions. In that
regard, we would like to emphasize the following
specific measures. There must be broader political
partnership between the United Nations and host
Governments. There must be effective consultation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
and police-contributing countries. The views of troop-
contributing countries must be reflected in deciding
mission start-ups and making any changes in the
mandate of existing missions. Initial mandates must be
crafted carefully while giving a full picture to potential
TCCs. Specific timelines must be stipulated, in
consultation with TCCs, in the course of finalizing
memorandums of understanding. Any change in
operations must accord with the views of those
working in the field. And we must ensure fair
representation for TCCs in the Secretariat's decision-
making process and in the process of implementation.
At the operational level, a partnership must be
forged with all relevant stakeholders. In our view, the
following specific actions are imperative in that regard.
There must be sufficient political partnership between
the United Nations and host authorities. There must be
necessary coordination with the host Government or
authority to allow peacekeepers to operate. General and
specific coordination needs to be ensured among all
parties, including regional organizations. And
concerted efforts need to be made by United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and the Bretton
Woods institutions working in the field.

We also believe that the following elements must
be reflected in the process of start-up, operation and
expansion for successful peacekeeping operations:
First, mandates must be clear, specific and well
defined. Secondly, mandates must be supported by
sufficient resources, both financial and human. Thirdly,
necessary political support must be ensured. Fourthly,
sufficient measures must be taken to ensure the safety
and security of the peacekeepers. Fifthly, the United
Nations must take the necessary measures to ensure
sufficient training in all areas of activities included in
the mandate.

I would like to reiterate Bangladesh's principled
position that gender sensitivity and the involvement of
women in peacekeeping operations, in line with
resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent follow-up
resolutions, should be adhered to. We are pleased that
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support are working together in
this context and have recently launched gender
guidelines in United Nations military peacekeeping.

Bangladesh, for its part, has played a cardinal
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Since 1988, Bangladesh has been involved in
36 United Nations peacekeeping operations, with
approximately 90,000 personnel. Today, Bangladesh is
ranked first in the field. We take pride in our modest
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. Through the years, nearly 100 of our
valiant peacekeepers have laid down their lives for the
cause of United Nations-sponsored peacekeeping
missions. We reiterate our commitment to continuing to
work with the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

