Ms. Poroli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, through you, Mr. President, I would like to
begin by thanking Ambassador Quinlan for presenting
the quarterly report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and, as
we always do, for his dedicated work at the head of that
subsidiary body.

As noted by Ambassador Quinlan in his report and
in the previous report in March, the sanctions imposed
by the Security Council on Iran remain in force and
must be applied by member States. In that regard, on
behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank the Panel
of Experts for its final report (S/2014/394, annex). We
hope that the Committee will continue to consider the
recommendations made by the Panel of Experts and
will be able to reach an agreement in that regard.

As we do each time the Security Council considers
the quarterly report on the work of the Committee, we
have received the most recent report of the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) on the implementation of the safeguards
agreement under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in Iran.

In this case, we believe it is pertinent to note that the

report recognizes that Iran has implemented the seven
measures agreed with the Agency in February with
regard to the cooperation framework with the IAEA,
which is currently analyzing the information it has
received. We also find it encouraging that the Agency
and Iran have agreed on the five follow-on measures, to
be implemented before 25 August. In addition, we also
think it encouraging that the report acknowledges that
Iran has complied with the measures of the joint action
plan agreed with the P5 + 1. Like the other members
of the international community, we follow very closely
the development of the negotiations. Therefore, while
we are encouraged by the willingness shown by all
the parties, we hope a final agreement can be reached
within the time frame that has been set.

As we said here in the Council in March (see S/PV.7146) and in other forums, we are pleased that
the IAEA continues carrying out activities related
to monitoring and verification of nuclear energy in
relation to the implementation of the joint action plan.
We remain convinced of the importance of the Agency
being able to count on the facilities and resources
necessary to carry out its work effectively.

As we said, we welcome the progress in the
negotiations and we note the conclusion in the report
of the IAEA Director General that Iran's cooperation is
helping the Agency to better understand the country's
nuclear programme. In that regard, we continue to
believe that it is essential that Iran cooperate actively
with the Agency on all outstanding issues and that it
meets its obligations, including under the Council's
resolutions.
