Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We welcome Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch and thank him for his informative briefing on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We commend
his excellent work in implementing the Dayton-Paris
Agreement, as outlined in his most recent report.

We welcome also Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, and we
pay tribute to the work of the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the International
Police Task Force (IPTF). Its achievements in
reforming and restructuring the law enforcement
agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly the
police, are impressive indeed.

Mr. Klein's report on progress in the Mission's
overall work programme is heartening. However, we
note carefully his concerns in some areas, including
inadequate support for the police force.
As Ireland subscribes fully to the statement which
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union, I will highlight a few points of particular
national interest.

Since the signing of the Peace Agreement,
considerable progress has been achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Mr. Petritsch's corroboration today in
this regard is very encouraging. Problems continue in
some areas, however, and it is important that all
relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina push
ahead with serious political, human rights and rule of
law reform in order to improve the conditions of all the
people of the country.

Economic reform is particularly important to
redress the difficulties with economic revitalization,
industrial production and unemployment, and with
discrepancies between the two entities. Such reform
will strengthen the capacity of the country for self-
sustainability and help it to fulfil the conditions
outlined in the European Union Road Map for moving
towards full European integration.

In this regard, the adoption of the electoral law
and the signing of a memorandum of understanding
with countries of the region were very positive
developments.

We recognize that significant progress has been
made regarding refugees and internally displaced
persons, and we welcome the recent initiatives that
have been taken in this regard. However, further work
is necessary on this issue and on implementing
property rights law, both of which are central to the
normalization and stability of the region.

Similarly, although we are heartened by progress
in relation to human trafficking and illegal migration,
we are concerned about residual problems, which have
obvious implications for stability, not just in Bosnia
and Herzegovina itself, but in the wider region.

Finally, Ireland is convinced that the
democratization and development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is essential to overall stability in the
Balkans. The successful achievement of a multi-ethnic
society there will encourage multi-ethnicity elsewhere.

We believe it is essential to continue with a
regional approach, and we urge all those concerned to
contribute to the strengthening of inter-State relations.

I agree very much with Mr. Petritsch that Bosnia
and Herzegovina must not for any reason be allowed to
become a weak link in the regional chain. At the same
time, we believe that the international community
should continue to be involved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is essential that we intensify our focus
on the nature and shape of that future involvement. We
need to look forward - 5, IO, 20 years from now -
and decide, in a coordinated manner, what role the
various bodies of the international community can, and
should, play. In that regard, we welcome the work of
Mr. Petritsch with the Bosnian authorities, the Peace
Implementation Council and international
organizations; as well as the very telling comments
about streamlining made today by Mr. Klein, which are
very much in line with our own thinking.

I fully agree with Mr. Petritsch that we are not in
search of an exit strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are indeed working toward an entry strategy in the
context of the wider European dynamic. Ireland
believes that the integration process with the European
Union is of vital importance in that regard. As a
member of the European Union, we will remain fully
involved in that process.

