Liechtenstein conveys its gratitude to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Retno L.P. Marsudi, for having convened this second open debate on the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Council thereby has set a basis for a hopefully regular engagement on the primary security topic worldwide. Sooner rather than later, that engagement should also yield tangible results, building on resolution 2532 (2020). In addressing the pandemic, the Council is taking an important but insufficient step to revise the paradigm of peace and security, which has been proved inadequate to deliver on the expectation of the membership that the Council act comprehensively and preventively against all threats to international peace and security. The Council should prioritize upholding human security and analyse how threats to it can be best prevented or resolved, an imperative given the increasing evidence that crises of a similar nature are likely to recur. With its peace operations, the Security Council has a powerful tool at its disposal to foster sustainable peace and comprehensive security. Unfortunately, the use of that tool diverges greatly in terms of political aspirations and technical quality. In some contexts, such as in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the Council has been able to articulate a more comprehensive approach to security in its peacekeeping mandates. But its handling of peacekeeping mandates remains inconsistent and is dominated by a militarized approach. The ongoing pandemic offers an obvious opportunity to review that approach. Many States already stated the obvious in the Security Council in July (see S/2020/663): never in the history of the United Nations have more people felt more insecure as a result of not only the virus itself but of its devastating knock-on impacts. The world has seen wide-ranging human rights restrictions and increased risks of mass poverty and hunger, a massive negative impact on education, increased inequality and heightened social tensions. For that reason, Liechtenstein appreciates the fact that the Council has chosen to look at COVID-19 through the lens of sustaining peace. In this way, the Council has an opportunity to embrace and build on the work of other organs and agencies of the United Nations. The exceptionalism often displayed by the Security Council is as much outdated as its restrictive agenda setting. Both need to change if the Council is to retain relevance and legitimacy in the light of the present security threats. Formats for cooperation across the United Nations system should be expanded; some already exist, most notably the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The Security Council could contribute constructively to the work of the Commission in helping to reassess the criteria to establish configurations. It should also have an interest in introducing a clear justice component into the PBC's work - an omission that has prevented the Commission since its inception from maximizing its potential and that should be rectified also in the light of the parameters for sustainable peace given in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the international community has agreed on the most ambitious and most comprehensive human development programme, and indeed human security programme, ever devised. They include a clear acknowledgement of the need to sustain peace based on international law, in particular human rights, cooperation, solidarity and multilateralism. They would indeed have provided a model to significantly limit the pandemic's impact had there been better progress towards their achievement before the outbreak of COVID-19. But the SDGs are also the blueprint for how to build back better in a way that remedies vulnerabilities in our current system. The Security Council and its peace operations can play a key role in that regard. Human rights and the rule-of-law components of peace operations can help lay the foundations for more accountable institutions, enhancing inclusion and strengthening democratic processes and the fight against corruption, in accordance with SDG 16. Accordingly, the mandates of all United Nations peace operations should systematically include strong and effective human rights and rule-of-law components. While standards in this respect vary significantly within the various peace operations, Liechtenstein sees room for improvement across the board. Moreover, Liechtenstein is concerned at the sustained efforts being made by certain States to weaken this dimension of peace operations, including regularly during budget negotiations. Where the Security Council takes a broader and deeper look at security, it can have positive impact, such as with its current thematic agendas. The Council should draw the right conclusions from that and ensure that it contributes to system- wide discussions on the negative security impacts of the pandemic, including but not limited to the areas of climate and biodiversity, poverty and hunger, health, education, gender, freedom of expression and information and privacy. The Council has laid a foundation on a limited number of these issues, including through its women and peace and security as well as climate and security agendas. These should be expanded and complemented by a similar engagement in all other security- relevant areas. A more open attitude on the part of the Council towards the work and expertise of the rest of the United Nations system is a necessary first step in this regard and would be a welcome sign that the Security Council understands itself to be an integral part of the United Nations that contributes to the overall goals and purposes that the international community has committed to through the Charter and the countless important agreements developed on its basis.
