Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French): It
will be recalled that before 24 March 1999, the Security
Council, the Contact Group - consisting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, the United States of America,
the Russian Federation, France, Italy and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland - and the
Permanent Council of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe had to strive unceasingly to bring
about a lasting political solution to the Kosovo crisis.

For its part, the Security Council adopted resolutions
1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998, 1199 (1998) of 23
September 1998 and 1203 (1998) of 24 October 1998. All
of them called, inter alia, for the cessation of hostilities in
Kosovo, in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and for the
beginning of constructive dialogue with a view to arriving
at a political settlement to the Kosovo situation.

Neither the peaceful measures that were advocated nor
the condemnation repeatedly expressed by the international
community succeeded in curbing the violence in Kosovo.
Villages have been destroyed, causing thousands of
casualties and displacing hundreds of thousands of people.
The confrontations in February and March 1998 in the
Drenica region, in the centre of Kosovo, are a vivid
illustration of this dramatic situation. Should this tragedy
have been allowed to continue? The answer is clearly no.

It is therefore understandable that the regional Powers
had to resort to the means they deemed best suited to the
situation. The resolution that we have just adopted not only
offers fresh prospects for a resolution of the Kosovo
conflict and for peace in the Balkan region, it also bolsters
the key role of the United Nations, in particular that of the
Security Council, in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

Indeed, the first preambular paragraph recalls the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Paragraphs 6, 10 and 20 clearly spell out the
mission entrusted to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in the implementation of this resolution.
Likewise, the resolution reaffirms the principles of
dialogue, negotiation and peace, which Gabon holds very
dear.

For all of those reasons, we co-sponsored the
resolution and voted in favour of it.

