Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, let me thank
Deputy State Representative Zenenga and Special
Representative Madeira for their briefings.

We share the view expressed by the Secretary-

General in his report (S/2017/408) that in the past month
we have witnessed remarkable events that have restored
significant hope for the future of Somalia. It is crucial
for us to build on these results and move towards a
different and more positive narrative of the situation
in the country. We take today's opportunity to support
President Farmajo and the Somali authorities' efforts in
the institution-building process.

Italy is actively committed, together with Somalia
itself, the United Nations, the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and other
relevant partners to the full empowerment of Somali
institutions. We firmly believe that Somali ownership
is key to this process. We have always adhered to this
principle and will continue to do so.

Turning to security, we welcome the results of the
London Conference of 11 May and the launch of the
new partnership for Somalia, which will be vital to the
implementation of the national development plan.

The threat posed by Al-Shabaab remains very
serious, especially in terms of its impact on the
population. This is where the work of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is still crucial to
the success of the Somali security forces entry strategy.

Italy supports the efforts made by the United
Nations and the African Union to lay out the framework
for AMISOM. operations and looks with confidence
to the outcome of the joint review of the United
Nations-African Union cooperation on AMISOM
currently under way. We share the view expressed
by Special Representative Madeira that this review
must be conducted in very close consultation with the
Somali authorities.

Italy will continue to support Somali ownership in
the security sector via bilateral training for the Somali
police and also by leading the European Union training
mission in Somalia, to which we provide half of the
force and the Force Commander.

Bearing in mind the central challenge posed by
terrorism, it is also clear that the security dimension
is not the only issue we must tackle. Somalia, together
with its partners, can do more to tackle what are also the
root causes of radicalization, such as poverty, lack of
education, lack of job opportunities and the prevention
of violent extremism.

As for the United Nations, in the coming months
UNSOM. should work to advance major efforts in
consolidating the rule of law, financial accountability
and administrative capacities, at both the national
and federal levels, starting with basic social services.
As recalled in the Secretary-General's recent review
of operations, the core mission of UNSOM. remains
strategic advice on peacebuilding and State-building,
the coordination of international support and capacity-
building of Somali federal and State institutions.

The humanitarian situation is very, very worrisome.
Italy has so far committed $4.5 million to the drought
emergency, and will continue to do its part to alleviate
suffering and strengthen resilience for the most
vulnerable categories of the civilian population.

Lastly, we commend the Federal Government
of Somalia for the priority given to rebuilding the
economy and restoring key financial institutions.
We warmly welcome the road map agreed between
the Federal Government and international financial
institutions, and we strongly encourage Somalia's
aspirations towards debt relief, which will be the final
goal of the implementation of both the road map and
the conditions required by the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative. Italy reiterates its commitment
to fulfilling this aspiration as soon as the relevant
requirements are met.

