Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his substantial
briefing on the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.

Unfortunately, our discussion is taking place at a
time when the direct talks relaunched on 1 September
in Washington, D.C., between Palestinians and Israelis
is once again at an impasse. Indeed, during the Council
debate of 17 September (see S/PV.6388), we all
unanimously welcomed the resumption of dialogue
between the main parties concerned in order to find a
negotiated solution ultimately leading to the creation of
a Palestinian State. We believed then in the parties'
commitment to overcoming their difficulties, which
were numerous, and to pursuing uninterrupted talks
until a peace agreement was signed. Unfortunately, we
must recognize the fact that the peace process is once
again deadlocked.
Regardless of the reasons, the impasse is no
alternative to peace, and my delegation therefore urges
both parties to resume their dialogue, which is a sine
qua non for arriving at a final settlement of the long-
standing conflict between them. We therefore invite
them to arrive at a compromise on the remaining
obstacles as soon as possible.

The Israeli-Palestinian crisis will find a lasting
solution only in the context of comprehensive peace
throughout the region. In that regard, we fully support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General aimed at
a comprehensive and negotiated settlement of the
various crises prevailing in this region. We are
convinced that the effective involvement of Syria and
Lebanon in peace talks is absolutely essential for
achieving the objective of comprehensive and lasting
peace in the region.

My delegation recalls the obligation to respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States of
the region, including Lebanon. We therefore call for an
end to the persistent violations of Lebanon's airspace.

We cannot speak of Lebanon without renewing
our full support for the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon. We insist on the freedom of movement that it
must enjoy throughout its area of operations so that it
can effectively carry out the mandate entrusted to it by
the Security Council.

Recurrent violence in the region will not,
unfortunately, promote the establishment of a climate
of trust between the parties, without which neither
dialogue, peace nor reconciliation is possible. The
language of violence and hatred is the enemy of peace
and brotherhood. We therefore invite the parties to
refrain from engaging in actions likely to compromise
the possibility of a lasting peace not only between the
Palestinians and Israelis, but also, in particular,
throughout that strategic region.

The pursuit of peace in the region necessarily
involves relieving the suffering of the people of Gaza.
In that regard, we must underscore once again the need
for broad access to the crossing points to Gaza in order
to supply the Palestinians with essential commodities
and building materials. However, we should not lose
sight of the fact that the State of Israel's security is also
an essential guarantee of peace in the region. Israeli
security concerns must therefore be taken into account
in the peace talks. It cannot be otherwise.
Destined to live together and to contribute to the
flourishing of the Middle East, Israelis and Palestinians
have no choice but to pursue the path of peace together.
My delegation would therefore like to reiterate its
support for the establishment of a viable Palestinian
State living side by side with the State of Israel within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
