Ms. Dlamini Zuma (South Africa): We would
first like to congratulate Burkina Faso on organizing
this debate on mediation and settlement of disputes. Of
course, we are pleased to see President Compaore
presiding over this meeting. We also thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Brahimi for their
informative remarks.

When the African Union was founded a few years
ago, there were three broad objectives our leaders had
in mind. One of them was the prevention, resolution
and management of conflicts that have scarred the
African continent for many decades, and thus the
establishment of the Peace and Security Council. The
second, of course, was the acceleration of political and
economic integration, and the third was to reverse the
legacy of poverty and underdevelopment that continue
to be the biggest challenge of the twenty-first century.

Our subregional organizations were mandated to
develop local mediation processes that would help
resolve conflicts at the neighbourhood level.
Subregional organizations like the Southern African
Development Community, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development have played and continue to
play a major role in the resolution of conflicts in such
countries as the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Burundi, the Sudan,
Liberia, eastern Uganda and Zimbabwe, to mention a
few.

All of our efforts were anchored in the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly Article 33 of Chapter
VI, which provides for mediation as one of a number
of diplomatic methods for the pacific settlement of
disputes. Due to the changing profile of global
conflicts, wherein more conflicts have become intra-

State rather than inter-State, mediation has become an
indispensable tool in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. As a result, mediation has become more
important than ever before. The Secretary-General,
through his good offices, has been engaged in a
number of mediation processes internationally. In this
regard, the creation of a Mediation Support Unit within
the Department of Political Affairs to provide support
for these activities is a significant development. Of
course, we hope that it will be well resourced.

We acknowledge that there are general principles
guiding and underpinning mediation. However, the root
causes of the problem, the specificities of the parties in
dispute and socio-cultural factors need to be taken into
consideration. It is for that reason that the link between
peace and development should be central in all efforts
towards conflict resolution, prevention and
management.

We now wish to share a few lessons learned
during mediation in countries, some of which I have
mentioned, and also to focus on the important
challenges of ownership of the mediation process by
the various parties in conflict and on the role of
support mechanisms.

One of the questions posed in the concept paper
is how mediation can be made effective. In our View,
the roles of the interested parties in a mediation
process should be clearly defined. Once mediation has
been started, it is important that all other parties should
play a supportive and constructive role in the process.

Fundamentally, mediation must keep the parties
focused on resolving the dispute by arriving at a
compromise acceptable to all parties. The role of the
mediator is not to impose a solution in the parties but
to help them arrive at the solution to end the conflict
by themselves. It is crucial that mediators and other
interested parties should dispense with what others
have called "the rescuer syndrome", referring to a lack
of belief that people have neither the ability to resolve
disputes themselves nor the expectation that they
should do so.

In mediation, those involved in a dispute should
be considered to have ownership and responsibility for
resolving it. Only through communicating with one
another and acknowledging their ownership of their
situation will they be able to effectively resolve it.
In the process of mediation, the mediator receives
and deals with confidential information and proposals
from the disputing parties. It is important for mediation
not to be unduly pressured, either to unnecessarily
reveal confidential information or to move the process
towards already identified conclusions. Furthermore,
direct intervention by others taking sides or influencing
the parties in dispute can be a major obstacle to the
resolution of the dispute. Also, mediation should not
take place in the glare of the media.

The test of the success of the mediation should be
the durability of the agreements signed or entered into.
Therefore, it is important that it be understood that at
times the success of a mediation effort cannot be
measured in the short term. This process of allowing
the parties to find their own solutions tends to be long
and painstaking and requires a lot of patience.

It is also important that we address the role of the
Security Council in this context. In this regard, we
believe that once mediators have been appointed, in
particular by regional organizations, the Council's role
should be to support the process. As the Council, we
should avoid the temptation to pre-empt the outcome of
mediation efforts through the use of coercive tools that
are at the Council's disposal. Our experience is that,
when the Council interferes in the mediation efforts of
either the Secretary-General or regional organizations,
the results have not always been positive.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that
regional and subregional organizations have a crucial
role to play in mediation and have a comparative
advantage, mostly due to proximity. In this regard, we
support the strengthening of the Mediation Support
Office of the Department of Political Affairs, as that
Office will provide much-needed technical support for
regional efforts, in particular, but of course not
exclusively, on the African continent.

