Mr. Quinlan (Australia): The threat posed by
Al-Qaida to international peace and security remains a
pressing aspect of a number of issues on the Council's
agenda, not only in its deliberations on international
terrorism, but also across country situations, including
Somalia, Mali and Yemen. Since the most recent
report (see S/PV.6862) of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011),
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities, Al-Qaida affiliates in the Maghreb have waged
a vicious insurgency in Mali, threatening the viability
of that State and security in the region. Al-Qaida in
the Arabian Peninsula continued to be a strong factor
affecting the ongoing security situation in Yemen, and
Al-Shabaab remained an ongoing threat to the security
environment in Somalia.

In today's briefing I will focus on the principal
areas of work of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee
since the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012), last
December. The first is about effectively addressing
the evolving threat to international peace and security
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates, with a particular
focus on the Committee's work in addressing recent
challenges posed in Mali and the Sahel region by
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, the Mouvement pour
l'unification et le jihad en Afrique de l'Ouest and the
Ansar Eddine. The second area concerns ensuring that
regimes' application remains relevant and effective,
and the third that the sanctions regime has clear and
effective procedures.

A more detailed version of this statement will be
distributed in hard copy today and made available on
the Committee's website.

Since my predecessor's last briefing, in December,
the threat to international peace and security from
Al-Qaida has continued to evolve as Al-Qaida affiliates
have exploited local grievances in order to further
Al-Qaida's global agenda. In accordance with its
mandate under resolution 2083 (2012), the Committee
has been working to ensure that the regime remains
relevant and effective in response to that evolving
threat. In particular, since its most recent report to
the Council, the Committee has sought to improve
the application of 1267 sanctions to address the threat
posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates in Mali and the
Sahel.

In resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2085 (2012), the
Council reiterated its readiness to sanction further
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities who do
not cut off all ties to Al-Qaida and associated groups.
In response, the Committee has applied the sanctions to
the Mouvement pour l'unification et le jihad en Afrique
de l'Ouest and to Ansar Eddine, entities closely linked
to the organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
as well as to the leaders of, and other individuals
associated with, those groups. The Committee's efforts
to ensure that the Al-Qaida sanctions list reflects the
nature of the threat posed by Al-Qaida and its affiliates
in Mali and the Sahel are part of a sustained drive to
make full use of the tools available in the context of
the Al-Qaida sanctions regime to counter the evolving
threat.

To that end, as directed by the Council in paragraph
62 of resolution 2083 (2012), the Committee held a
special meeting on 9 April to consider ways by which
the 1267 regime could improve its response to the
latest developments of Al-Qaida in the Sahel and Mali,
including outreach and technical-support activities to
the region on implementing and applying the sanctions
measures. The meeting brought together the Monitoring
Team, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, as well as other
relevant departments and offices of the United Nations.
It highlighted the need for continued monitoring of
the role of those groups in Mali and the Sahel, with
a more central role for capacity-building efforts in the
counter-terrorism realm. In that regard, the Committee
and the Monitoring Team look forward to constructive
engagement and cooperation with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, as requested by the Council in paragraph 31 of
resolution 2100 (2013).

The Committee is making every effort to ensure
that the sanctions framework is as effective a tool as
possible in preventing Al-Qaida and its affiliates from
threatening international peace and security. Part of
that effort requires that the Al-Qaida sanctions list
be as up-to-date and accurate as possible, to facilitate
the implementation of the measures. The Committee
considers it extremely important that individuals
confirmedtobedeceasedareremovedfromthelist,while
ensuring that any assets forming part of the deceased's
estate, if unfrozen, are not used in connection with
activities threatening international peace and security.
In that regard, the Committee de-listed Osama Bin
Laden on 21 February. In accordance with paragraph
32 ofresolution 2083 (2012), the Committee will ensure
that assets frozen as a result of Osama Bin Laden's
listing will not be transferred to listed individuals or
entities, or otherwise used for terrorist purposes, in line
with resolution 1373 (2001).

The Committee is pleased to inform the Council
that it has begun to implement the special agreement it
concluded with INTERPOL facilitating the exchange of
information between the Committee and INTERPOL
and streamlining the maintenance of joint United
Nations-INTERPOL special notices. That can be
expected to improve the quality of information on the
Al-Qaida sanctions list and enhance the implementation
of the measures via INTERPOL'S special-notice
distribution system.

The Committee has also continued its periodic
review of the sanctions list, focusing particular attention
on entries that lack identifiers necessary to ensure
effective implementation of the measures, entries of
entities that are reported or confirmed to have ceased to
exist, and entries that have not been reviewed in three
or more years. The responsiveness of Member States
remains crucial for the successful implementation of
those reviews.

Through the adoption of resolution 2083 (2012),
the Security Council has further enhanced the fairness
of the sanctions framework through the introduction
of provisions giving individuals and entities on
the sanctions list the ability to submit requests for
exemptions to the assets-freeze and travel-ban measures,
through the focal-point mechanism established in
resolution 1730 (2006), for the consideration of the
Sanctions Committee. The Council has also authorized
the Ombudsperson to request that the Committee
consider exemptions to the travel ban for the purpose
of allowing petitioners to travel to another State to be
interviewed by the Ombudsperson. The Committee has
introduced these changes into the guidelines for the
conduct of its work, setting forth clear procedures to be
followed by listed individuals and entities wishing to
avail themselves of those new provisions.

Furthermore, the Committee has implemented the
provisions of paragraph 12 of resolution 2083 (2012),
which reverse the assumption that a State proposing an
individual or entity for listing wishes to have its status
as a designating State kept confidential, by dispatching
letters to all designating States on file to solicit their
views as to whether the Committee or Ombudsperson
may make their status as a designating State known.

The Office of the Ombudsperson continues to
fulfil a key role in supporting the Committee's efforts
to ensure that the application of sanctions continues
to reflect the current threat posed by Al-Qaida and its
affiliates. Since the most recent briefing to the Council,
the Committee has delisted five individuals and
retained two listings on the basis of reports submitted
by the Ombudsperson. In addition, as of 9 May,
three comprehensive reports of the Ombudsperson
were under consideration by the Committee, and the
Ombudsperson had one case in the dialogue phase and
11 cases in the information gathering phase.

Since the most recent briefing to the Security
Council (see S/PV.6862), the Committee has also
provided reasons to petitioners, both in cases where
the Committee has acceded to or rejected delisting
requests, through the Ombudsperson. The provision of
reasoned decisions to the Ombudsperson for onward
transmittal to the petitioner is a significant indicator
that fair and clear procedures exist within the Al-Qaida
sanctions framework. The Committee will continue to
pay heed to due process principles to ensure that the
listing and delisting process is imbued with fairness
and transparency.

I now turn to my concluding observations. The
events of the past few months in Mali and the Sahel region
have illustrated the continued threat to international
peace and security posed by Al-Qaida and affiliated
groups. The Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee's efforts
to comprehensively address that issue included, for the
first time, a special meeting held pursuant to paragraph
62 of resolution 2083 (2012). That is a valuable forum,
which the Committee will use, as appropriate, in other
relevant contexts.

We should not forget, however, that the Al-Qaida
sanctions regime can only be as effective as the sum
of its parts, and a key element of that framework is the
application of the measures. The Committee endeavours
to keep the list as updated and accurate as possible
through specialized reviews, the success of which to
a large part depends upon Member State engagement.
I therefore call on all Member States to continue their
positive engagement with the Committee.

In concluding, I would also like to recognize the
efforts of the Monitoring Team, without which the
Committee simply would not be able to do its work.

