Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Mr. Minister,
and, through you, the sister Republic of Colombia on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. Costa
Rica appreciates the leadership that your delegation has
shown under the skilful guidance of Ambassador
Valdivieso in this body, while at the same time
recognizing your great endeavours in promoting the
interests and positions of Latin American countries.

The presence of small arms is a catalyst in armed
conflict. It is quite evident from every standpoint that
such conflicts would be impossible without weapons.
For this reason, it is not only right for the Security
Council to consider this matter; it is indispensable for
this body to take strong measures to prevent the threat
posed by this kind of weaponry.

The spread of small arms stokes the fires of
violence, heightens hatred and struggle, exacerbates
crime and terrorism and favours political and social
instability. The presence of light weapons facilitates
and encourages violations of fundamental human
rights. Arsenals of small weapons prolong armed
conflicts and impede the peace processes. Their
availability fuels common crime and feeds organized
crime. Their indiscriminate sale enriches a few while
ignoring the interests and needs of the majority.
Military budgets voraciously consume meagre national
resources, while our peoples suffer from the most
abject poverty.

In the hands of national armies, small arms are a
threat to international peace and security. In the hands
of extremist groups or despotic regimes, light weapons
become a threat to internal peace and security. In the
hands of private individuals, such weapons lead to
social breakdown and erode the security of our
citizens. The Security Council cannot continue to
ignore the suffering caused by the 500 million existing
small arms. This body cannot turn a deaf ear to the
cries of millions of innocent victims.

Just two weeks ago, we saw in this city the
conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons. Quite
candidly, I must say, that as far as my delegation was
concerned, the result of the Conference was
discouraging.

We are dismayed that the Programme of Action
adopted there does not explicitly prohibit the transfer
of arms to rebel groups. We are indignant that the
document does not condemn the dispatch of arms to
governments that commit mass or systematic violations
of human rights. We are alarmed that no strong
measures have been adopted to regulate the possession
of light weapons among civilians. We deplore the fact
that there has been no agreement on the immediate
preparation of a legally binding code of conduct on the
transfer of arms. We are concerned that the Programme
of Action does not include any explicit reference to
human rights, which should constantly guide our
struggle to combat this kind of weaponry. Moreover,
we regret that these very grave shortcomings have been
the result of inflexibility on the part of just a few
delegations that around this table profess to defend
peace and security.

The Security Council, fully and faithfully
discharging its primary responsibility for international
peace and security, must today take the lead in
combating the spread of small arms.

First of all, with respect to all the disputes under
its jurisdiction, the Council should adopt or strengthen
embargoes designed to prevent, combat and eliminate
the inflow of weapons. Such measures need to go hand
in hand with effective verification machinery and with
the full cooperation both of neighbouring countries and
arms producers.

Secondly, the Council must condemn and prohibit
the transfer of military material and personnel or
financial and logistic support to those countries whose
military units or security forces take part in human
rights violations. We believe that that ban should also
be extended to those States that do not respect
democratic principles or that have not ratified the main
human rights instruments and instruments of
international humanitarian law. The same ban should
apply to the transfer of arms to non-State actors, rebel
groups and extremist movements.

Thirdly, the Security Council, with the assistance
of the Secretary-General, should investigate and find
illicit supply routes for small arms and light weapons
to various areas in conflict and impose appropriate
sanctions on the nations, entities or individuals
involved in such activities. We believe that setting up
panels of experts similar to those investigating the
diamond trade would be a use model to follow.

At the same time, when circumstances in the field
so warrant, it would be appropriate to include in the
mandate of peacekeeping operations the task of
monitoring implementation of arms embargoes and
investigating breaches thereof. As part of their
mandate, missions should, moreover, be capable of
collecting, confiscating and destroying surplus small
arms and of promoting the reconversion of the arms
industry.

In the medium and long term, the quest for
international peace and security requires a substantial
reduction in the number of small arms available.
Combating the use, misuse and spread of these
weapons demands demilitarization in our societies and
the creation of a genuine culture of peace and life
grounded in greater economic and social equity, the
rule of law, democracy, representative government and
human rights.

In this context, the Security Council should
support disarmament efforts while at the same
promoting reduction in military expenditure. Would it
perhaps not be better for the $191 billion that the
developing countries currently squander on their armed
forces to be devoted to health? Would it not be
preferable to devote to education the $22 billion spent
on arms transfers to the Third World? Would this
perhaps not be the best way of guaranteeing peace for
future generations?

For more than 50 years now, Costa Rica has had
no arms expenditure. We are a disarmed country
without an army, which devotes its public budget to
education, preventive health and infrastructure
investment. In our land, you will find schools, not
barracks. Our children have never seen a helicopter
gunship, an armoured car or a warship.

Our experience has taught us that peace is not
simply the absence of armed conflict. Genuine peace is
the fruit of harmony among the various sectors of
society, respectful relationships among peoples and
individuals and the rejection of violence and hatred.
Peace demands active brotherhood among all people.
For this reason, peace can only exist when we
recognize that as human beings we are members of the
same family. The elimination of small arms is just a
first step in that direction.

