Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Kuwait for the initiative of holding
this emergency meeting on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question. I congratulate
Mr. Mladenov for the quality of his briefing.

C6te d'Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
the serious events on the border between Israel and
the Gaza Strip in the context of the March of Return.
The Violence, which began on 30 March, culminated
yesterday, 14 May, with the transfer of the American
Embassy to Jerusalem. In the face of this new outbreak
of violence, which has reportedly caused the deaths of
nearly a 100 Palestinians and injured nearly 8,000 since
30 March, my country calls on the parties to exercise
restraint and refrain from unilateral actions that could
exacerbate the situation and defer the prospects for a
peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis to a
for a long time to come.

cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that there is no
alternative to the search for peace other than through
dialogue. It therefore urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table and engage in constructive dialogue
on the basis of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. In that regard, my
country reaffirms its principled position in favour of
a negotiated settlement leading to the solution of two
States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace
and security.

As for the final status of the city of Jerusalem,
Cote d'Ivoire believes that it must be negotiated
within the framework of a concerted solution between
the two parties, as stipulated in the relevant United
Nations resolutions. My country therefore calls for the
resumption, without delay, of talks between Israelis and
Palestinians with a view to ending the political impasse
in the peace process.

My delegation unreservedly supports the objective
of comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
and reiterates its readiness to work with all Council
members towards a peaceful solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis.

