Mr. Otto (Palau): We commend and thank Senegal,
President of the Security Council for the month of
November, for convening this meeting about a matter
that is of great importance to all of us. I also thank the
delegation of Senegal for the very useful concept note
(S/2016/969, annex). We express our gratitude also for
the briefings. The information shared by the briefers
is both very important and useful in understanding the
issues around water and the way forward in addressing
relevant problems, especially those related to security
and peace.

In March this year, my President declared a state
of emergency in Palau owing to a drought caused by
El Nifio, impacting the whole population. The potential
negative impacts of the lack of water, many of which
were elaborated this morning, make water a very
important issue for all of us. That is true for practically
all of the small island developing States, as we have
already heard. Allow me to present five ideas for the
Council's consideration.

First, we need more information of the impacts of
the lack of water on our security and peace. We firmly
believe that, in order to ensure sustainable peace, we
must have security first. That is linked to article 3 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, under
which everyone has the right to life, liberty and security
of person. Palau has fought for that basic principle in
the Human Rights Council and will continue to do so.
Regarding the much-needed information, there should
be agreement among Member States on requests for
the updating of the relevant reports of the Secretary-
General, because updated information is key to making
our decisions.
Secondly, access to water is a human right. Our
body is approximately 80 per cent water, and our
health and well-being depend to very large extent on
the availability of this most basic nutrient. Therefore,
water cannot and should never be allowed to become
a business. We recognize that both the innovation and
drive of the private sector, on the one hand, and the
public investment in genuine and durable partnerships,
on the other hand, as expressed in the Samoa Pathway,
are needed, including the 10X20 Initiative mentioned
earlier. But the role of the United Nations is to ensure,
together with national Governments and civil society,
that access to drinkable and safe water is secured
for all, especially the most vulnerable. Palau thanks
non-governmental organizations for their drive on
this point.

Thirdly, water is linked to the impacts of climate
change. Climate change is a threat multiplier that
impacts our security and peace. We therefore think that
the contributions of the Department of Political Affairs
and of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-
General to addressing water challenges will be
enhanced by having well-coordinated staff and experts
serving in the field. That is why we have called also
for the nomination of a Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Climate Change and Security.

Special political missions, both current and future,
have a very important role to play by reducing their
climate footprint and improving their management
of the environment, acting also as catalysts to bring
partners to act together in addressing the challenge of
climate change and water. Local populations should
never have to compete with United Nations personnel
for local resources, or suffer negative impacts caused
by their presence. With its partners, Palau has pushed
in the General Assembly's Fourth and Fifth Committees
for the greening of the special political missions.

Fourthly, actions on water in the Security Council
and the General Assembly have to be aligned. We believe
that the delivery by the Security Council on the issues
of water and climate change has to be significantly
improved, not just as part of conflict prevention but also
as part of the recipe for successful conflict resolution.
During the debate on the Sahel and terrorism in this
Chamber earlier this year (see S/PV. 7699), relevant
questions were raised as to how can women stop their
men from joining armed terrorists for cash if they are

away from home searching for water, or how can girls
be empowered through education if they cannot study
either because they their basic needs - including
water - are not met, or because they are out looking
for or fetching water.

Finally, it is urgent to take decisive action. The time
period we have to transform the world as envisioned in
the 2030 Agenda is very short. We cannot attain much
without security and peace. We therefore believe that we
should work together during the seventy-first session of
the General Assembly on two parallel draft resolutions
in the General Assembly and the Security Council on
the impacts of water and climate change on security
and peace, following the successful example of the
review the United Nations peacebuilding architecture.

We are hopeful that the Security Council and all
Member States, working with the good offices of the
new Secretary-General, will find success in taking
action in the field on climate and water so that all of the
"we the peoples" whom we serve will have their basic
human rights, such as the rights to water, life, liberty
and security, fulfilled.

Once again, we thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal for bringing this very important
issue to the fore by convening today's meeting.

