Mr. Tolbert: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity and the invitation to
participate in this open debate. I am very honoured to
speak alongside Herve Ladsous and Anthony Lake. I am
also very honoured to meet Leila Zerrougui today and
to hear her remarks as the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict. The International Center for Transitional
Justice (ICTJ) looks forward to working together with
her office to bring an end to impunity for violations
against children in armed conflict.

The Council itself is seized with a number of
situations that highlight the importance of that issue,
perhaps most urgently the situation in Syria.

The Council has already achieved many important
advances on the protection of children in armed
conflict. Over the past five years, 20 action plans
have been concluded by the United Nations with
armed forces and armed groups, as part of the broader
framework developed by the Security Council over the
past decade. The action plans are a crucial first step
in ending violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. However, more needs to be done to end
impunity for those crimes. I will therefore focus my
remarks today on ways to achieve greater accountability
in contexts where action plans have been signed or are
being negotiated.

There are two critical steps that the Council and its
members can take to advance that aim.

First, the Council should press States to leverage
international resources and expertise to support
national processes. Second, the United Nations should
include a greater focus on an integrated approach to
accountability for violations against children once
action plans are implemented.

Before discussing those two key measures, I
would like to first address our understanding and our
concept of accountability. For many, accountability is
thought to mean criminal prosecutions. Prosecutions
are, after all, essential for accountability. They send
a clear message that certain violations will not be
tolerated by society or by the international community.
However, ICTJ's work over the past decade in over
40 countries has shown that, in isolation, prosecution
is not enough. Accountability for Violations against
children in armed conflict is best achieved through a
comprehensive approach to justice that addresses not
only the responsibility ofperpetrators but also the rights
of victims within a broader process of social change.
A comprehensive approach to justice should include
truth-seeking, reparations and institutional reform, in
addition to criminal prosecutions. Together, those are
the key elements of transitional justice.

If we are to effectively confront violations against
children and their consequences, we must be able to
understand the underlying causes and the patterns of
their occurrence. Truth-seeking mechanisms, such as
truth commissions, can address such factors. Military
and security forces or armed groups that engage in
criminal acts, such as the recruitment of child soldiers,
must be thoroughly restructured as part of a process
of institutional reform, if such unacceptable practices
are to be eradicated. Reparations are crucial if we
are to send a message to child victims that the harms
they have suffered were violations of their rights and
that the State is committed to upholding those rights
in the future. When such approaches are applied in
an integrated and genuine manner, they promote civic
trust and strengthen the rule of law.

The Council has succeeded in raising awareness
of the need to address violations against children
internationally. It should also seek to leverage its position
so as to strengthen and support national processes. In
its first judgment the International Criminal Court
convicted Thomas Lubanga Dyilo for the war crime of
conscripting and enlisting children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. That was a crucial step in the
process of establishing an internationally respected
norm against the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
But the Lubanga trial was never intended to address all
perpetrators.

We have observed in our work that the recruitment
of children continues, and that many perpetrators enjoy
impunity. In that context, the Security Council has the
opportunity to use that step forward in international
justice to leverage the verdict in the Lubanga case in
order to strengthen national processes in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In line with the Rome Statute,
what the Democratic Republic of the Congo needs now
is international support for national judicial processes,
notably for national courts and comprehensive
reparations programmes.

I therefore call on the international community
to support the efforts of victims to enforce existing
national court decisions awarding reparations, as well as
to encourage donors and the Congolese Government to
help the Trust Fund for Victims implement reparations
for communities affected by forced recruitment.

The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict should urge donors to support national
processes that seek to achieve comprehensive
accountability. In terms of expertise, the Working
Group can also draw on the work of non- governmental
organizations working on the ground. In much the same
way that the monitoring and reporting mechanism
brings together the United Nations and partners to
document violations against children, we need to create
synergies to provide remedies to the victims of those
violations once documented.

Recalling measures in its 2006 "tool kit" document,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
should include in its country-specific recommendations

"support to transitional justice and truth-seeking
mechanisms, including support in the development
and implementation of child-sensitive procedures"
(5/2006/724, addendum).

That leads me to my second point, which is to call
for a greater focus on accountability in the context of
action plans. As one example, Myanmar is a country
where we have been actively engaged for several years.
ICTJ welcomes the recent signing of the Security
Council mandated action plan for the release and
reintegration of children associated with state armed
forces. Alongside this, the complaints mechanism of
the International Labour Organization has been an
effective, if limited, accountability mechanism in
Myanmar, in part because it has been able to balance
awareness-raising and engagement with the military,
with concrete consequences for recruiters of child
soldiers.

Currently, within the State armed forces, the
consequences for recruiting children in Myanmar are
less severe than the consequences for not bringing in
enough recruits. That is one example of an incentive
structure that needs to be turned upside down to
guarantee that the recruitment of minors is stopped.

During an interview with an ICTJ staff member, a
formerchildsoldiertoldusthathewants acknowledgment
that he was unable to finish his education because
he was recruited, something that a truth commission
could address. In contexts where action plans have been
signed, as part of a transitional justice approach, truth
commissions could by incorporating a focus on children
reveal the root causes of the child soldier phenomenon.
They could also serve to identify the multiple ways in
which children have been affected and provide a forum
to officially acknowledge the violations that victims
have suffered.

I urge the Council to consider action plans as
a starting point for achieving accountability for
violations against children. I would strongly encourage
the Council to support an integrated approach to
accountability, one that pursues perpetrators and
also provides acknowledgement and remedy for the
violations suffered by victims and initiates a process
of institutional reform. That can be done, in part, by
calling for comprehensive transitional justice measures
to form part of United Nations responses in tandem
with action plans.

Finally, and in closing, as the Council continues the
significantprogressithas alreadymadeonaccountability
for children, it should continue to recognize that the
protection of children - and accountability for serious
crimes and grave violations against them - are part of
the Council's role in upholding peace and security. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict has been instrumental in
advancing that work, alongside with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UNICEF, the International
Labour Organization and other United Nations entities.

Their mandates regarding children and armed conflict
should be supported and strengthened. The challenge
ahead is to translate progress at the international
level into lasting change at the national level. We at
ICTJ strongly believe that an integrated approach to
accountability, through the full range of transitional
justice mechanisms and increased support for national
processes, will assist the Security Council and the
community of nations in our efforts to end crimes
against those most vulnerable among us - the children
caught up in armed conflict.

