Mr. Sovndal (Denmark): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor. Let me, from the outset, fully align
myself with the statement made by the European Union
delegation on behalf of the European Union. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his thoughtful
and thorough report (S/2013/ 133) and for his informative
briefing. Let me also welcome the l2-month extension
of UNAMA's mandate.

Afghanistan has made tremendous leaps forward
since 2001. The security, political and economic
transition processes leading up to 2014 are all well
under way, although the situation remains fragile.
The Afghan national security forces are making good
headway in taking the lead in security operations
across the country. Preparations are under way for the
presidential elections in 2014 and for the parliamentary
elections the year after. And economically, Afghanistan
has seen a steady growth in the past decade, even if
the country is still dependent on international aid.
That progress is due to the determined efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the concerted support
of the international community and the United Nations.
However, there is no room for complacency. We all
have to stay focused. There is a real risk that much of
what has been achieved could be lost, if our efforts are
not sustained.

As for Denmark, I can assure the Council that we
will continue to support the Afghan people on their path
towards a democratic, stable and secure Afghanistan.
Recently, the Danish Government announced a two-
year plan for Danish engagement in Afghanistan for
the period 2013-2014. Within that framework, we have
just decided to withdraw our combat troops six months
earlier than previously foreseen. We remain committed
to assisting the Afghan people beyond 2014 with
training, advice, assistance and financial support to the
Afghan National Security Forces and with development
assistance. I am pleased to inform the Council that
Danish development assistance will actually increase in
the years from 2013 to 2017 to an average of 530 million
Danish kroner per year - approximately $100 million
per year - making Afghanistan the largest recipient
of Danish development assistance. We urge others to
follow that example.

As reflected in the briefing and the other statements
today, there is already a lot of attention focussed on
next year's presidential elections. It is vital that those
elections be inclusive and transparent and that the
result be broadly accepted by the Afghan people. This
is especially important because Afghans clearly have
taken to their hearts the concept of electing their future
leaders. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
the role of UNAMA and of the United Nations system
in assisting the Afghan Government in preparing for
the elections.

We see a strong need for a dynamic UNAMA in
the years to come. UNAMA should continue to use its
good offices and its political outreach in support of
Afghan-led political processes. It should also continue
to promote human rights, including the rights of women
and children, and support the strengthening of the
capacity of Afghan institutions.

To that end, UNAMA needs adequate resources.
We are concerned about the recent cuts in UNAMA's
2013 budget and would like to stress the importance
of providing the Mission with adequate resources. It is
vital that we do not hamper the ability of UNAMA to
fulfil its mandate at this critical time.

As recognized by the Secretary-General in
his report, UNAMA and the other United Nations
organizations present in Afghanistan must adjust
as the security, political and economic transition in
Afghanistan progresses. The role of the United Nations
must, of course, reflect increased Afghan leadership
and ownership. We are therefore looking forward to
a thorough discussion of the future role of the United
Nations and UNAMA in Afghanistan as we approach
the transformation decade.

Only by working together can the Afghan
Government and its international partners realize the
vision of the transformation decade for Afghanistan.
The Afghan Government and people can rest assured
that Denmark will not leave Afghanistan in 2014. Our
cooperation will change as our military presence is
drawn down, but our support of Afghanistan and of the
Afghan people remains steadfast.

