Mr. Rodriguez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
echo the well-deserved, sincere congratulations that
other members of the Council have expressed to
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for his work in that
country. Thanks go also to all of the personnel of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and of the other institutions involved in
rebuilding Afghanistan.
It would be very difficult to appraise the work of
the Transitional Administration when it has barely
begun. The recent assassination of Vice-President Haji
Abdul Qadir - the second violent death of a high
Afghan official in six months - reflects the serious
challenges facing the Administration. We condemn
those attacks and those against humanitarian workers in
Afghanistan.

Mexico considers that the encouraging outcome
of the Emergency Loya Jirga and the hopes the Afghan
people have invested in that process need to be
matched by the international community. Major
challenges lie ahead, such as the demobilization and
reintegration of ex-combatants; the protection and
enforcement of human rights, especially for women;
the reconstruction and reconfiguration of the economy,
especially the agricultural sector; and, especially, the
productive integration of hundreds of thousands of
displaced persons and refugees. This huge task will
involve the efforts and resources of the international
community for many years to come.

We consider that the capacity of the United
Nations and the international community to continue
expanding its humanitarian activities in a war zone
such as Afghanistan is reaching its limit. A new
humanitarian crisis, whether from natural disaster or
from military conflict, would undoubtedly exceed the
capacity of international agencies and the international
community itself. Mexico reaffirms its recognition of
the donor countries and all governmental and non-
governmental agencies that are making possible the
international community's great humanitarian
endeavour in Afghanistan. We particularly welcome the
coordination efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan.

