Mr. Tadmoury (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for giving me the floor,
and to congratulate you on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. I wish you every success in
your work. I would also like to pay tribute to your
predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China, for
his efforts during the previous month.

For more than 10 months, the Palestinian cause
has been going through a critical phase that exceeds
our apprehensions. Since the visit of the Israeli Prime
Minister last September to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, Israeli
forces have entered Orient House and other Palestinian
institutions in Jerusalem in a provocative manner.
Much blood of innocent people has been shed. Houses
and civil establishments have been destroyed, and
farms have been razed. All these acts of aggression and
incursions have completed a dark series of historical
humiliations of the Palestinian people that has lasted
more than 50 years.

The occupation of Orient House is fraught with
serious consequences because it cancels a legal status
previously recognized by Israel as part and parcel of
the negotiation process. This is also an alarming step
backwards in the peace process and is a serious
violation of previous commitments. It has also shown
that Israeli leaders are throwing out the basis for peace
negotiations and international legal documents and
relegating them to the past.

The insistence by Israeli leaders that Palestinian
rights be eliminated outright is bound to send Israel
and the whole region into an infernal spiral of violence.
Security cannot be imposed by force, especially when
Israel adopts policies of targeted assassinations that are
organized in specific lists and commits flagrant
violations of international law, particularly
international humanitarian law, even though the
Council has condemned such violations when it has
discussed questions of armed conflict throughout the
world.

Not very long ago, we had the impression that
prospects for peace were around the corner, and we
saw that the players in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
were getting closer to discussing sensitive issues, such
as the status of Jerusalem and the question of
Palestinian refugees. Furthermore, serious negotiations
took place with the Syrian side on the security
provisions after Israel agreed to a total withdrawal
from the Golan, in what was called the Rabin promise
or guarantee.

But any observer of the situation can see that
every time Israel gets closer to peace with the Arabs, it
takes a step backwards and thereby gives rise to
suspicion and shows arrogance and condescension over
the Palestinians and other Arabs, who are entitled to
their rights and would not relinquish them despite
Israel's might and its use of it.

The problem today in Israel is not realizing that
those who are defending their identity, destiny and
independence have passed the barriers of fear and
humiliation. Israeli society and Government should try
to fathom this new reality. A lasting, just and
comprehensive peace in the entire area is in the
interests of all those concerned.

I will not go through all the daily suffering that
has affected all strata of the Palestinian population,
with a minimum of security. This people has begun its
legitimate struggle by using the stones from its own
territory to affirm its identity and its right to a
promising and secure life, like its Israeli neighbours.
But the Israeli occupation forces have answered with
fighter planes, tanks, cannons, with violence
unequalled throughout the world, a world which daily
seeks respect for basic human rights.

Today, more than ever, the Council is called upon
to restore peoples' rights and to shoulder its
responsibilities for maintaining international peace and
security. It must return the Orient House and all the
other Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem to their
owners because this is not simply a question of
buildings or headquarters. These are outstanding
symbols of a just cause, which should be settled justly
and equitably. The time has also come to establish an
international monitoring protection mechanism that
will put an end to Israeli atrocities and that will
establish objective conditions for relaunching the peace
process.

It is also worth noting that a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East is an integral
whole that requires an immediate end to Israel's
violence and the resumption of negotiations by all the
parties to the conflict - Palestinians, Syrians,
Lebanese and Israelis. These negotiations must always
be based on international resolutions, the Madrid terms
of reference and the principle of land for peace. They
should be based on the agreements concluded in
previous negotiations with the Palestinians and the
Syrians.

Real peace will not be established unless
Palestinians are given their right to self-determination
and without ensuring to Palestinian refugees the right
to return to their homes, and to work towards the
creation of an independent State with Jerusalem as its
capital. We must also ensure Israeli withdrawal from
the Syrian Golan to the border of 4 June 1967 and the
completion of Israel's withdrawal from south Lebanon.

