The President: I thank the representative of
Albania for his kind words addressed to me.

I would now like to touch on a few points in my
national capacity.

As the Bangladesh representative, I had the
honour and pleasure of leading the Council mission to
Kosovo and Belgrade. Bangladesh agrees fully with the
findings of the mission, as contained in paragraphs 29-
39 of the report in document S/2001/600. We expect
that these findings will prompt concrete actions by all
concerned.

My delegation, which also joined the first mission
to Kosovo in April 2000, was impressed by the marked
improvement in overall economic activity in the area,
particularly in Pristina. I will touch on three points: a
multi-ethnic Kosovo, democracy and the role of civil
society in general and women's groups in particular.

On the first point, we believe that a peaceful
future in Kosovo - or, for that matter, in the greater
region - hinges on the greater tolerance and mutual
accommodation of different ethnic entities. Although
some progress has been made in the last two years,
wounds are still open, mistrust is widespread and
ethnically motivated violence active. The only practical
way out of this is to significantly improve the
environment so that all communities feel safe and
secure, which will contribute much to confidence-
building and thereby lay the foundation of a truly
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. In this context,
Bangladesh emphatically reiterates its earlier assertions
that the resolution of the issue of missing persons and
detainees is crucially important for the healing process
to begin.

The Security Council mission to Kosovo last
week very appropriately carried a strong message
urging the communities to do their utmost to create
such a society. Broad participation in the political
process is a crucial step towards the creation of a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. The Kosovars should
not allow the past to pull them back and should look
ahead to the potentials of the future. Promoting a
culture of peace and non-violence, particularly
focusing on the children and young people, is crucial to
the success of these efforts.

My second point is on democracy. The
democratic process in Kosovo had a hesitant, but
positive start with the holding of municipal elections in
Kosovo last year. Some success has been achieved in
the representation of different communities in the
interim institutions, although the political engagement
of the Kosovo Serbs has remained a challenge. The
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
an important role to play in this engagement. The
encouragement by President Kostunica of civil
registration for the Kosovo-wide elections in
November of this year has already had a positive
effect. The difficulties being faced in organizing broad
participation in the upcoming elections must be
pursued with all earnestness. The Council mission last
week left with the impression that it was unacceptable
to continue on the basis of the status quo.

The third point relates to the role of civil society
in general and women's groups in particular.
Bangladesh is very pleased that it was possible for the
mission members to meet with the representatives of
women's non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in
Kosovo. We believe that the international community
should increase its support to enable NGOs and
women's groups to reach across the ethnic divide.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) provides for
greater participation in peace negotiations and in the
political process by women. Such involvement of
women's groups and networks in Kosovo needs to be
ensured by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We hope that UNMIK
will take immediate steps to work closely with these
groups which are committed to the broader objectives
of the United Nations in their work. Bangladesh
strongly believes that civil society in Kosovo has
played a significant role in enhancing the objectives of
a multi-ethnic society and that it will continue to be an
effective ally of UNMIK and its work.
Let me conclude by paying tribute to all those
who are working in Kosovo, with dedication
and enthusiasm, as part of a difficult and complex
United Nations mission. Also, Bangladesh commends
the Secretary-General's Special Representative, Hans
Haekkerup, for his determined leadership as the head
of UNMIK.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at I p.m.
