Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset to express
our satisfaction at seeing you, Mr. President, guide
the work of the Security Council this month. We are
confident that your well-known experience and wisdom
will ensure a successful outcome to the work of the
Council.

We have repeatedly cautioned against the
exploitation of international and regional concerns
with respect to the Arab Spring, the Iranian nuclear
programme, the American presidential elections and
other international and regional issues to impose new
Israeli faits accomplis on the Palestinian occupied
territories, which could undermine the establishment
of a Palestinian State. Therefore, His Majesty King
Abdullah II, in his statement before the General
Assembly on 25 September, emphasized the crux of the
matter, namely, the question of Palestine, as follows:

"As the Arab Spring demanded dignity for all, so
it demanded the end of exceptionalism. No single
issue causes greater anger than to tell an entire
people that when it comes to global justice they
do not count. The Arab Spring cannot bear its full
fruit until the Palestinian-Israeli conflict ends, and
ends with ajust peace and a Palestinian State living
side by side with a secure Israel at peace with the
entire region." (A/67/PV7, p.20)

Our main priority has always been and will remain
the two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living
side by side in peace and security and able to move
forwards on the basis of a fair and comprehensive
settlement. Earlier this year, we worked alongside the
two parties in Amman in an attempt to relaunch a
dialogue. Although that dialogue has ceased, we will not
lose hope and will continue to work for the resumption
of direct negotiations between the two parties.

In that regard, we have repeatedly demanded and
will continue to demand that Israel completely cease its
settlement activities and unilateral actions, since such
measures pose a direct threat to a peaceful settlement.
We therefore noted before the General Assembly that
what is needed now more than ever is for all countries to
use their collective influence, since neither the parties

to the conflict nor the world can endure the ongoing acts
of aggression and insecurity. We hope that, following
the United States election this year, there will be an
exceptional opportunity to achieve our common goal.

We reiterate our ongoing concern over Jerusalem
and its holy Islamic and Christian sites and subsequent
threats. We underscore the significance of the sacred
Al-Haram al-Sharif, which is the third holiest site for
Muslims, who consider Al-Haram al-Sharif as sacred
as the Kaaba itself. The international community
should therefore send a clear message that any attempt
to destroy the Arab, Islamic or Christian character of
Jerusalem is unacceptable.

Despite the urgent need to reach a lasting settlement
to the Palestinian issue, we should not ignore the plight
of our brothers in Syria. The bloodshed there, which we
strongly condemn, cannot be overlooked or condoned.
Members are all aware of Jordan's huge burden as a
result of sheltering refugees, who flee daily for their
lives. That burden will be exacerbated with the onset
of winter, increasing their hardship and suffering.
Also, we cannot ignore the deliberate targeting of
our border troops as they strive to secure the entry of
refugees across our borders. That targeting must stop
immediately.

In that regard, we wish to underscore the fact
that Jordan will never hesitate and will continue to
provide assistance to our brothers in Syria despite the
dangerous and serious bloodshed. At the same time,
we will not allow any violation of our sovereignty
because of our humanitarian role. If our sovereignty is
breached, Jordan reserves the right to resort to all legal
international measures and mechanisms. As a member
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
and a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, Jordan will not hesitate to use such
mechanisms.

