Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We too,
Sir, would like to commend you and your Government
for selecting security sector reform as the topic for
open debate during Slovakia's first presidency of the
Security Council.

The United States is in full agreement that the
multidimensional nature of today's complex
emergencies and peace operations requires a carefully
coordinated and cohesive international response.
Security sector reform is a critical component of that
response. Failing, failed and post-conflict States often
present similar challenges to global security and
prosperity. If left unattended, they can provide
breeding grounds for terrorism, crime, trafficking,
humanitarian catastrophes and other threats to our
common interests.

The United Nations and Member States can play
a critical role in mitigating and responding to these
threats and related crises. But ad hoc responses to
crises, while sometimes necessary, are rarely sufficient.
Individually and collectively, we must continue to
develop integrated approaches to address crises rapidly.
From the very first stages of response to elements
critical to sustainable security in post-conflict
environments. Specific areas that require our attention
include: transitional security and rule of law; good
governance and democratic participation; humanitarian
response; and economic reconstruction.

The United States is prepared to work with other
Member States and to play an active role in this regard.
Already, the United States is one of the largest
contributors of United Nations police to United
Nations peacekeeping. We firmly believe that an
effective United Nations police operation is a major
component of crisis management and post-conflict
reconstruction - one that can help serve as a bridge to
democracy.

In the wake of war, there is often a rise in
criminal activity, particularly in the immediate post-
conflict period. While military peacekeepers can help
stabilize a country, establishing a competent, impartial
and adequately resourced law enforcement system is no
less critical for the continued maintenance of security.
Police are essential in re-establishing local and national
public security institutions and the rule of law.

We must take a comprehensive approach,
however, that incorporates not just policing, but also
the entire public security and justice system. Building
police capacity must be integrated with assistance to
the judicial and penal systems. Without such an
integrated approach, policing becomes nothing more
than an extension of peacekeeping functions, rather
than a vital precursor to peacebuilding. To that end, it
is of paramount importance that the rule of law be
rapidly established throughout the territory of the post-
conflict State. This is essential in order to prevent the
emergence of political corruption, organized crime and
the activities of other criminal and terrorist elements
that wish to obstruct the peace process.

We appreciate the ongoing efforts by various
United Nations departments, agencies and programmes
to address the various dimensions of complex
emergencies and peace operations. In addition, we
must continue to work with regional organizations and
with the international financial institutions, as well as
bilaterally, to improve coordination and
interoperability, build a shared understanding of our
responsibilities and develop means for collaboration
and burden-sharing.

In closing, I wish to state that the United States
will continue to support effective multilateral
cooperation in confronting the challenges of internal
conflict and State collapse. We are convinced that such
coordination and cooperation are central to the success
of any security sector reform effort.

