Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): On the
occasion of this open meeting of the Security Council,
I would like, on behalf of my Government, to thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore and his
Permanent Representative to the United Nations for
having taken this auspicious initiative of organizing a
Security Council debate on Africa. We congratulate all
speakers for their relevant statements, which have
contributed a great deal to our understanding.

Rwanda has just commemorated the eighth
anniversary of the genocide that it suffered in 1994,
which caused incalculable human and material losses.
My country would like to offer our experience to the
international community to make the world aware of
the danger inherent in all philosophies of hatred and
exclusion and to ensure that the principle of "never
again" declared after the Second World War will be
realized as a universal principle for all the peoples of
the world through the philosophy of collective security.

Since we are discussing Africa today, I should
like pay tribute to all freedom fighters - to all those
heroes who died as pioneers in the fight for the
freedom and dignity of their peoples. Africa not only
lost its sons and daughters, but also suffered monstrous
humiliation and immense material damage as a result
of the systematic plunder of its natural resources
without compensation. Africa, therefore, should not
have to bear and suffer alone the consequences of
history and of the passing ofthe colonial era.

Since we are having a substantive debate on
Africa, we might ask ourselves the question: which
Africa are we discussing? There are various Africas,
which constitute facets of the physical Africa depicted
on maps or of the physical Africa that we fly over in
aeroplanes. When we recall the way in which Africa
was carved up, we can discuss the reality of the
multitude of Africas: the Africa of slavery, the Africa
of colonialism and of neocolonialism, the so-called
black Africa and white Africa, the Africa of apartheid,
the Africa of tribes and of ethnicities, the Africa of
hatred and of exclusion, the "Bantu" Africa, the mythic
Africa, the Africa of soldiers and of coups d'etat, the
Africa of militias and mutinies, the Africa of
nationalities and of unbridled nationalism, the Africa of
demons and of evil spirits, the Africa of the illiterate
and the functionally illiterate, the Africa of the poor, of
misery and of the miserable, the Africa of diamonds
and of black and yellow gold - it is all there. But
there is also the Africa of Nkrumah, the Africa of
Lumumba, the Africa of Benbella, the Africa of Nasser,
the Africa of Um Nyobe of Cameroon, the Africa of
Se'kou Toure and the Africa of Mandela. Fortunately,
that Africa too has existed, and it exists today in our
awareness.

The Africa that we are discussing today is
ravaged by ignorance, dire poverty, bad governance,
military coups d'etat, manipulations, struggles and
Western and other foreign influences. What can we do
to pull it back out of the dark pit of slavery and
colonialism into which it sank? How can we say today
that the debate on slavery and colonialism in Africa is
no longer relevant when their disastrous consequences
still exist in Africa - when the damage done then still
afflicts it today? All the harm caused on the African
continent by slavery and colonialism must be told.

The conflicts that ravage Africa have deep causes
related mostly to colonialism and its ravages and also
to the neocolonialism that followed the period of so-
called political independence of African countries of
the 1960s. Since then, each African country that has
attempted to organize and to experience true political
independence has been blocked by neocolonialists and
their allies, either directly or indirectly through the
intermediary of certain international bodies. What is to
be done when neocolonialism remains invisible,
wearing kid gloves, and when sometimes the glove is
the United Nations, which blocks Africa and prevents it
from experiencing a true rebirth, over and above all
slogans?

There was a genocide in Africa for the first time
in our continent's history, and unfortunately that
genocide occurred in Rwanda. The planners and
authors of that genocide fled to the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo in July 1994, under the cover of
the operation involving the so-called Turquoise Zone.
There, they continued to launch attacks on Rwanda and
to massacre innocent people. The Government of
Rwanda shouldered its responsibility and fought them
right into their Congolese sanctuaries. But had it not
been for the military, political, material and financial
support of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its allies for these genocidal forces, the Rwandan army
would long ago have been able to find a solution to the
problem.

What are the underlying causes of the Great
Lakes conflict? Who is pulling the strings? Why does
the conflict persist? Who is behind the curtains? Who
is at the backstage? Why does the spirit of genocide -
of exterminating "the other" - spread through the
whole Great Lakes region before our very eyes, as we
all stand by helplessly?

With regard to the genocide in Rwanda, at the
request of the Security Council, the independent
inquiry led by former Prime Minister Carlsson of
Sweden submitted a report to the Council. That report,
having assigned responsibilities for the African-
Rwandese tragedy, recommended the establishment of
a special post-genocide economic and social assistance
programme for Rwanda. Why has that
recommendation - favourable to a needy Member of
the United Nations - not been implemented?

I should like to take this opportunity to welcome
the recent report of the Security Council mission to the
Great Lakes region, which recognized Rwanda's
security concerns. We recall that the Rwandese troops
who are present in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are there only because of the security problems
of Rwanda and its people. I should also like to reaffirm
my Government's commitment to supporting all
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement, as well as its
commitment to withdraw its troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo once the question of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) is settled. This
morning, the representative of Bangladesh referred to
the withdrawal of Namibian troops from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Namibian
presence was merely symbolic. Namibia has no border
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, has no
security problems with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and therefore is not concerned with the DDRRR
programme, which is one of the sine qua non
conditions for the withdrawal of foreign troops from
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

In conclusion, I should like to congratulate our
brother and friend, Assistant Secretary-General
Ibrahima Fall, on his new duties. We wish him every
success.

