I thank the briefers for their statements. Belgium remains a committed partner of the five countries of the Sahel and of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and its Joint Force. We share their determination to fight insecurity and promote development. Belgium's initiative is also part of the many efforts of the European Union (EU) in the region, as demonstrated by a new edition of the annual meeting of the EU and the G-5 at the level of Foreign Ministers on 12 June, following the EU-G-5 summit in April. We are also partnering in the launch of the Coalition for the Sahel and the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel, and the Belgian defence forces are engaged in several missions in the region, in partnership with the G-5 national forces. Despite the still very worrying security and humanitarian situation, there is good news, such as the increase in security operations under the aegis of the Joint Force in recent months and the revised concept of operations. We also recognize the support role played by France in that regard. The good news includes the inauguration just a few days ago of the Joint Force headquarters in Bamako, built by the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and funded by the EU. We hope it will be used and will contribute to the effectiveness of future operations. The achievements also include the increased capacity and autonomy of the G-5 executive secretariat. More equipment has been delivered and more is on its way. Nevertheless, since we joined the Council last year, we have always encouraged the G-5 not to condition progress on the availability of resources or equipment. For example, the crucial police component is still in its early development, and we believe further operationalization depends little on additional resources or equipment. That said, let me stress that military operations and development projects alone will not defeat terrorism in the Sahel, as they have not done anywhere else in the world. Since the terrorists make political demands, we believe that countering them needs political commitment and ownership at the highest levels to strengthen the democratic institutions of the Sahel, advance political solutions, where possible, and challenge the terrorist narrative. Efforts to fight the stigmatization of particular ethnic groups, provide basic services, including security, and combat impunity, whether financial or criminal, should probably be the highest priority. Another important issue is the allegations of extrajudicial killings by security forces of G-5 countries. These allegations are very serious and warrant a thorough investigation rather than outright rejection. Let me assure the Council that Belgium understands the enormous challenges and fragility of the security forces of our G-5 partners. However, let me be clear that our call for respect for the rule of law and basic human rights is not merely philosophical. In our view, it is an indispensable condition for defeating terrorism. Progress on security and development is of course essential but, if human rights and the rule of law are not respected, such progress will remain transitory and terrorism and insecurity will continue to prosper. To conclude, I would like to encourage both the five countries and the Joint Force to strengthen the implementation of the human rights compliance framework, supported by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), as this is one of the main tools that can help prevent possible violations in the future. In that context, I would like to acknowledge the fact that most G-5 countries have accepted such assistance by opening OHCHR offices in their countries in order to fully benefit from its support. We encourage the countries that have not yet done so to accept OHCHR's offer to open offices in their country.
