Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for convening this
meeting, as well as Under-Secretary-General Izumi
Nakamitsu for her very informative briefing. Today I
will discuss three points - the situation on the ground,
the importance of remaining mobilized in the face of
the re-emergence of chemical weapons and the problem
of Syrian chemical weapons in particular.

On the ground, our priority is maintaining a
long-term ceasefire in Idlib. The Istanbul summit on
27 October resulted in a clear commitment by the four
participants to support the sustainable implementation
of the ceasefire in Idlib. The idea is removing for the
long term the threat of a major offensive that would
have disastrous humanitarian, migratory and security
consequences. The summit's road map is therefore
clear and we will continue to support the ongoing
efforts to stabilize the situation and enable Turkey to
separate terrorists from other groups. We must also do
everything we can to ensure the protection of civilians,
including humanitarian and medical personnel, as
well as to ensure comprehensive, safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout Syria by the most
direct routes and in the most effective way.

The Istanbul communique also outlines our
collective demand that any use of chemical weapons be
banned. To cite its very clear message, the summit's
participants

(spoke in English)

"[r]eaffirmed their strongest opposition to the use
of chemical weapons by any party in Syria and
called for strict compliance by all parties with the
Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction".

(spoke in French)

While the regime has continued its deceitful propaganda
campaign of blaming others for the chemical attacks, I
should emphasize the importance of maintaining our
extreme vigilance with regard to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. Any resort to such weapons will not
go unanswered.

As President Macron hosts a ceremony in France
a few days from now marking the 100th anniversary
of the armistice of 11 November 1918, we must be able
to assume our collective responsibility to history by
ensuring that the barbaric use of chemical weapons that
occurred during the First World War, so deeply etched
in our collective memory, is never repeated. In view
of the re-emergence of chemical weapons in Syria and
elsewhere, a united and mobilized Security Council
is therefore an absolute necessity. The decision of the
States parties to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), adopted in June in
accordance with the rules of the Organization, has
enabled the international community to strengthen
its capabilities, providing it with improved tools for
deterring the use of chemical weapons and in particular
aimed at designating its perpetrators more effectively.
It is now necessary to translate that decision into the
Organization's means, especially with regard to the
upcoming deadlines this month in The Hague.

We should make it clear that failing to invest in
strengthening the existing institutions would jeopardize
the non-proliferation regime, which is at the heart of
our collective security, and at a time when that regime,
with its highly developed chemical-weapon component,
is being put to the test. That is a scenario that we cannot
allow to happen. In particular, we call on everyone to
support all investigative mechanisms established in
The Hague, Geneva and New York in the difficult task
that lies ahead. That is the goal of the initiatives that
we have put forward, from the partnership in the fight
against impunity for the use of chemical weapons to the
establishment of a European Union sanctions regime.
For that reason, we also support strengthening the
OPCW's verification and inspection capabilities.

My third point is that strengthening those
verification measures is all the more necessary in view
of the continuing uncertain state of Syrian stockpiles.
The continued use of chemical weapons in Syria
confirms the existence of chlorine and sarin stockpiles,
and yet there there has been little progress for months
on Syria's initial declaration ofits stocks in 2013, which
is still full of inconsistencies. That a la carte approach
by the Syrian regime is not acceptable and demands
our collective vigilance. It is essential that the regime's
supporters get it to cooperate fully.

In conclusion, with regard to the broader Syrian
conflict, the threat of the use of chemical weapons
and the country's instability will not end as long as
the regime refuses to engage with Staffan de Mistura's
political process, whose framework was established in
resolution 2254 (2015). The Istanbul communique also
establishes a clear goal with regard to that, a meeting
of a constitutional committee by the end of the year.
Together with the members of the small group on
Syria, France will spare no effort in that regard. The
United Nations has established a third list, which it has
reviewed in dialogue with all stakeholders on several
occasions. All conditions have been met so that the
United Nations can convene a constitutional committee
and finally implement the entirety of resolution 2254
(2015), which serves as our common guiding light now
more than ever, in particular with regard to the holding
of free and fair elections under the supervision of the
United Nations in a safe and neutral environment. That
is the only way to reach a lasting solution to the conflict.

