Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Assistant Secretary-
General, Mr. Annabi, for presenting the report and for
his briefing.

The United Nations Mission of Support in East
Timor (UNMISET) completed its work on 20 May,
achieving impressive success. Its contribution to the
establishment and development of Timor-Leste's core
State institutions cannot be overemphasized. By virtue,
to a large extent, of the tireless efforts of United
Nations peacekeepers and of police and civilian
advisers, the capacities of the Timorese Government
and its administrative institutions, armed forces and
police have increased considerably, and many State
Government tasks can now be addressed independently
by Timor-Leste.

We express our sincere appreciation to the
leadership of the United Nations Mission, headed by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Hasegawa, and also to the entire staff - past and
present - of the Mission for their excellent work.

Despite the intensive joint efforts of the
Timorese, the United Nations and other international
partners, Timor-Leste continues to require multifaceted
external assistance in order to ensure its security,
stability and development.

For those specific reasons, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1599 (2005)
authorizing the establishment of a United Nations
special political mission in Timor-Leste. We expect
that, in the coming 12 months, the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste will successfully carry out the
tasks before it and assist in the building of that young
nation.

In that connection, the United Nations system,
working with specialized international bodies, will
need to continue to provide assistance to the Timorese
in order to ensure the sustainable development of the
country.

To ensure lasting stability in Timor-Leste, it is
important to maintain good-neighbourly, mutually
beneficial relations with the countries of the region,
above all with its neighbours. We welcome the steady
improvement that has taken place in Timorese-
Indonesian relations. We hope that the bilateral Truth
and Friendship Commission, which will begin work
soon, will continue further to broaden cooperation
between the two States and contribute to the prompt
addressing of the remaining outstanding issues.

