Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): Let me start by
expressing our deep sympathy to the people and the
Government of Pakistan after the horrendous crime
perpetrated this morning against the schoolchildren in
Peshawar. This is a cruel reminder of how terrorism is
affecting our lives.

I would like to acknowledge this morning the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and African Integration
of the Republic of Chad. His decision to be here with
us this morning to preside over this meeting is an
illustration of the commitment of Chad to the promotion
of a strong partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union (AU) in peace and security matters.
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to Chad for its
tremendous contribution to peace in Africa and in the
world. As Africans, we are proud of Chad's role in the
United Nations.

Algeria attaches particular importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and their
cooperation with the United Nations. We believe that a
principled, consistent and strong cooperation between
the United Nations, on the one hand, and regional and
subregional organizations, on the other, is indispensable
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
Obviously, the African Union and its subregional
organizations are better placed in terms of geographical
proximity, political and cultural familiarity with local
conditions, and shared experience, which are critical to
making a real difference in the prevention or resolution
of armed conflicts.

As a member of the African Union, Algeria has
always commended and supported the AU for its efforts
over the years to strengthen African peacekeeping
capabilities. Today's debate comes at a time of renewed
recognition of the importance of building a strong
partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union in order to enhance our efforts to promote peace,
security and stability in the African continent.

Building peace in Africa means abetting and
supporting African-led efforts for peace in Africa. In
our view, this debate comes at the right time, as the
African Union is making tremendous efforts to address
the peace and security challenges that Africa continues
to face. In that regard, Algeria welcomes the steps
taken for the full operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force - and, in the meantime, the African
Capacity for Immediate Response to a Crisis - and
support the continued United Nations-AU cooperation
on different components of the Architecture, including
on early warning, preventive diplomacy, mediation,
electoral assistance, peacekeeping, conflict prevention
and resolution, and peacebuilding.

The implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in the Sudan, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the African Union
Mission in Somalia, and the operations in the Central
African Republic and Mali are also good examples
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. Furthermore, it should be noted that in
the past five years, the Security Council has held no
less than five meetings devoted to the United Nations-
African Union partnership.

While acknowledging that much progress has been
made in cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union and its subregional organizations,
it should also be recognized that much remains to
be done. Such cooperation has yet to reach its full
potential. We should like to stress the importance of
further strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations Security Council with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, consistent with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to address
common collective security challenges in Africa,
taking African concerns into consideration. This is a
crucial point, in our View. We believe that there is a
need to establish a more effective relationship between
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council, including by ensuring more effective
annual consultative meetings, the holding of timely
consultations and collaborative field missions of the
two Councils. In that regard, we look forward to the
convening of the ninth annual consultative meeting,
scheduled to take place in Addis Ababa next year, to
address the issue of follow-up and implementation of
previous communiques and statements.

The cooperation between the United Nations
Secretariat and the AU Commission has also registered
commendable achievements, as demonstrated by the
regular consultations between senior United Nations
and AU officials on issues of common concern and
the mechanisms put in place to that end. However,
we call for the strengthening of such cooperation and
underscore the importance of developing the follow-
up programme to the 2006 United Nations 10-year
capacity-building programme for the African Union as
an important contribution towards conflict prevention,
management and resolution on the African continent.

In his report of October 2010 on support to AU
peacekeeping operations authorized by the United
Nations, the Secretary-General rightly observed that:

"The complex challenges in the world today
require a revitalized and evolving interpretation of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations"
(S/2010/514, para. 54).

Algeria fully shares that view. Clearly, those challenges
require concerted responses on the part of the United
Nations and the African Union and a much closer
partnership, based on a creative reading of the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter, to allow the
African Union and its regional mechanisms for conflict
prevention, management and resolution to fully play
their role as integral components of collective security.
We should give due consideration to the critical issue of
securing predictable, sustainable and adequate funding
for African Union peacekeeping missions authorized by
the Security Council. We need to understand that AU
actions in the field are conducted for the maintenance
of international peace and security.

We encourage the Security Council to engage
more actively with the African Union Peace and
Security Council. Mutual respect, African ownership,
consultative decision-making, division of labour
and the sharing of responsibilities are the principles
and foundation of any successful and productive
partnership, especially in the area of peacekeeping.
We also look forward to the review of United Nations
peacekeeping operations to be undertaken by a high-
level United Nations panel, which Algeria hopes
will lead to the building and strengthening of a AU/
United Nations partnership, especially in the context of
Chapter VIII of the Charter.

We hope that this discussion will generate proposals
and strategies in order to expand, deepen and improve
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union, with a view to strengthening the capacity of
the international community to respond effectively to
threats to international peace and security.

We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2014/27) adopted earlier by the Security
Council.
