Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). In addition,
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine and Armenia
align themselves with this statement.

Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the
Western hemisphere. While security and stability have
improved significantly since the deployment of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) in 2004, we remain concerned that the
people of Haiti continue to face serious challenges in
the area of socio-economic development. High levels
of unemployment, increasing costs of living, and the
lack of access to basic services are serious risk factors
for stability and could undermine the progress achieved
over the past years. Therefore, with great satisfaction
we welcome Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's
appointment of President Bill Clinton as the United
Nations Special Envoy for Haiti in an effort to refocus
international attention on the country's deep economic
problems and environmental decay.

The priorities laid out by the Haitian Government
at the donors conference in Washington, D.C., last
April represent a challenging road map. We remain
committed to our pledges made at that conference and
welcome the Secretary-General's engagement. The
Special Envoy, in addition to his work in the follow-up
to the donors conference, plays a crucial role in
attracting private investments to Haiti. The improved
security situation has turned Haiti into a more
attractive destination for such investments, and the
creation of urgently needed long-term job opportunities
would further consolidate the achievements reached in
the past years.

Let me also thank Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his strong
leadership of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti.

The focus of European Union's efforts is shifting

from support of democratic reform and rehabilitation to
economic recovery and basic services. The EU indeed
believes that strong socio-economic development is
required to sustain and consolidate the newfound
stability. Furthermore, the capacity of the State to
deliver basic services needs to be enhanced. The EU
cooperation strategy with Haiti for 2008 to 2013 is
based on these elements. The strategy, funded with
€291 million, will primarily focus on infrastructure,
mainly the building of roads, as well as on governance.

Efforts in the socio-economic area must go hand
in hand with efforts to enhance Haiti's institutions. To
that end, the international community must ensure that
its efforts to assist Haiti are based on a coherent

strategy with clearly defined benchmarks. As recently
pointed out by the independent United Nations expert
on human rights in Haiti, the reform of the Haitian
police is proceeding at a fast pace. Ongoing training
and vetting constitute essential elements for the
re-establishment of reliable and trustworthy security
institutions.

On the other hand, the justice system is still
hampered by deprivation and limited resources.
Ensuring access to justice for the rural poor remains a
high priority. The European Union strongly welcomes
the commitment of the Haitian Government to a
gradual takeover of the current nationwide legal aid
system set up jointly by MINUSTAH and the
International Legal Assistance Consortium.
Overcrowded prisons constitute cruel, inhuman and
degrading treatment. The financial difficulties are
enormous and the Haitian Government is encountering
huge problems. Nevertheless, we urge the Haitian
Government to invest more in the corrections system in
order to improve the sometimes life-threatening
conditions of the prisoners.

The European Union shares the view expressed in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/439) that
intensified efforts must be made to review pretrial
detention. National legislation that allows for the
separate detention of juveniles has to be adopted. We
also encourage the Security Council to consider a
separate budget for corrections officers.

When the Security Council reviews the mandate
of MINUSTAH in October, the issue of border
management control remains an area that has to be
carefully monitored. Operational assistance from the
international community will be critical to safeguard
and build upon the gains that have been made.
Another key area in building Haiti's institutions
is the follow-up to the partial elections held in April
and June. The European Commission contributed to
these efforts in the amount of €3.3 million. A number
of electoral exercises lie ahead and the continued
support provided by the international community in
this area will be crucial. However, the Haitian people
will have to take the primary responsibility for
ensuring progress.

Haiti benefits from a generous donor base. It is
essential to improve coordination among donors to
avoid duplication. Also, more could be done within the
United Nations system to increase coordination.

In recent years, there has been growing
recognition of the need to develop political strategies
for managing the transition from peacekeeping to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The Secretary-General's
report outlines the challenges presented and identifies
ways of addressing them. We are committed to
supporting the Secretary-General in meeting these
challenges. The European Union will continue to
engage with Haiti and its people in the crucial period
ahead.

