Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): All protocol observed, Angola is grateful to the delegation of Belgium for promoting and convening this timely debate on such an important and integral component of our common efforts to advance sustainable peace and security. Transitional justice is a central component of advancing sustainable peace in post-conflict States and an important process through which the Security Council has been promoting peace and security in order to achieve global sustainable development. Along with other United Nations peacekeeping processes such as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security-sector reform and the strengthening of the rule of law, transitional justice has significantly evolved, from operating as a standard response to mass atrocity to becoming the core component of peacebuilding programmes. Despite the progress made to date, much still needs to be done, and this open debate demonstrates the Council's renewed commitment to our common efforts to maintain international peace and security. The Angolan civil war raged from 1975 to 2002 and was the longest-lasting conflict in Africa. It destroyed roads, railways and bridges, decimated the agricultural infrastructure and left much of the population with no memory of what life was like in peacetime. Now, in a time of peace and reconciliation, Angola has focused on large infrastructure and _ public-works projects, rebuilding important sectors of the economy, in particular the education and health-care systems. We also acknowledged the importance of building a systemic plan on demobilization and reintegration, as we recognized that these are not discrete activities, nor are they simply adjuncts to demilitarization programmes. Instead, they are part of a seamless web of transition from military to civilian life. The Angolan Government acknowledges the valuable impact of transitional justice in post-conflict situations by promoting human rights, democracy, the rule of law, reconciliation and peacebuilding. Transitioning from war to peace is a difficult task with mounting challenges. We fully recognize that as the process of transitional justice evolved and expanded over the years, it also became increasingly normalized and professionalized, with the same tools and frameworks often used across different contexts without adequate consideration of the everyday needs of the people across the diverse and heterogeneous societies of post-conflict States. That has been a roadblock and one of the key challenges in making transitional justice more effective at rooting out inequality, discrimination, societal divisions and other structural root causes of violence and conflict in post-conflict situations, particularly on the African continent. We believe that those challenges can be overcome by developing tailored transitional mechanisms from a peacebuilding and reconciliation perspective, taking into account the multiple justice needs of the local population and other members of society directly affected by the violence who are intimately involved in reconciliation and peacebuilding. The Angolan Government has made adhering to international human rights standards one of its focus points and has launched a model of transitional justice rooted in the principles of reconciliation, forgiveness and material truth, with an emphasis on attaining long-term sustainable peace. The model encompasses, among others, an interministerial reconciliation commission established to develop a reconciliation plan to honour the victims of political conflict during the civil war that afflicted the country for more than three decades. We firmly believe that such initiatives are a critical step in linking the past and the future as well as a building block for an integrated and comprehensive peacebuilding process that can serve as a model for neighbouring countries and the international community. A comprehensive approach to peacebuilding should allow for the establishment of the security, legal, political, economic, structural, cultural and psychosocial conditions necessary to promote a culture of peace in the place of a culture of violence. In that regard, justice as part of peacebuilding must set up structures, institutions and relationships to promote sustainability. To conclude, please allow me to reaffirm the Angolan Government's commitment to advancing peace, prosperity and human rights in Angola and across the African continent.
