Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, allow me to express my appreciation to you
for convening this orientation debate on Afghanistan.
Afghanistan has experienced 20 years of war, the flight of
millions of refugees to neighbouring countries, the
destruction of its basic social infrastructure and severe and
widespread human rights abuses. While the human rights
situation has been of serious concern for some years, recent
activities by the Taliban have further demonstrated their
lack of respect for the rights of Afghan citizens.

Canada is deeply concerned by reports of the forced
displacement of Afghan civilians by Taliban fighters
towards Kabul, in particular civilians from the Shomali
Valley, and deeply deplores the tactics being used to
prevent these civilians from returning to their homes,
including the use of a scorched earth policy. We are also
disturbed by reports we have received, and that Sir Kieran
has just confirmed, that the Taliban have sought to separate
displaced women and children from their male family
members. The forced displacement of civilians and
destruction of civilian property represents a flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law and an abuse of
human rights. Canada condemns such actions and calls on
the Taliban authorities to cease them immediately.

(spoke in English)

We are dismayed by persistent reports of atrocities and
by the systemic discrimination against women and girls
which prevails in Afghanistan. The rights of Afghan
citizens are protected under the Covenants on political and
civil, economic, social and cultural rights, the Geneva
Conventions and other international instruments to which
Afghanistan is a party, and they must be respected.

Canada urges both sides in this conflict to ensure that
the needs of displaced and other war-affected populations
are fully met. We are concerned by reports of the use of
child soldiers in the current campaign, including those
under the age of 15. We urge all parties to refrain from the
use of child soldiers and to guarantee the safety, security
and unimpeded access of humanitarian workers to
populations in need.

Canada calls on Pakistan to use its good offices to
encourage the Taliban to halt the forced displacement of
civilians and to return to talks with the Northern Alliance.
The Afghan crisis should be resolved through peaceful
means and, to this effect, all countries should refrain from
providing financial or material support to the warring
factions in Afghanistan.

Canada continues to support the work of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy and to endorse the
peaceful settlement of the Afghan civil war on the basis
of the principles contained in Security Council resolution
1214 (1998). We urge the members of the "six plus two"
group to honour the commitments they have made and
redouble their efforts to breathe new life into the Afghan
peace process.

I was distressed to hear Sir Kieran, at the conclusion
of his excellent update, mention that Lakhdar Brahimi had
been hospitalized. Ambassador Brahimi is, in our opinion,
one of this Organization's most eminent and effective
representatives, and I hope, Mr. President, that you will
convey to him our very best wishes for a speedy
recovery.

