Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation is grateful to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for convening today's Security Council
meeting on the critical issue of United Nations
peacekeeping. We listened very closely to the briefings
by Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra,
who introduced the New Horizon non-paper prepared
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. We thank General Agwai
for his valuable comments, which were based on his
practical experience in one of the most complex
peacekeeping operations. We intend to carefully study
the proposals and recommendations set out in the
non-paper, particularly since many of them require
further analysis.

A preliminary look at the New Horizon non-paper
shows that, in general, it contains an adequate
assessment of United Nations peacekeeping. It can
serve in principle as a good basis for the formulation of
practical recommendations to enhance the effectiveness
of peacekeeping activities. All peacekeeping reform
measures must be aimed at enhancing the effectiveness
of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Improving United Nations peacekeeping is a
fundamental challenge. It involves improving the
quality of peacekeeping operation management, more
effectively utilizing the resources of regional
organizations and building the capacities of the United
Nations itself with regard to all key dimensions of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

We should update the practice of conducting
operational consultations among Security Council
members, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on all aspects of peacekeeping operation
activities. In that regard, we wish to draw attention to
the need to implement existing cooperation
mechanisms, as referred to in the note by the President
of the Security Council dated 14 January 2002
(8/2002/56).

Many of the ideas set forth in the New Horizon
document appear to be timely. Undoubtedly, the
Security Council must develop clear and feasible
mandates for its operations. In that regard, it is
important that mechanisms be established for adjusting
them in accordance with developments in the situation
on the ground. We support the idea of formulating
criteria for the alteration of mandates and benchmarks
for the drawdown of peacekeeping operations.

The report rightly highlights the need to expand
the number of United Nations peacekeeping partners
through enhanced dialogue with regional organizations.
Experience has shown that active utilization of the
capacities of regional mechanisms is effective if their
activities are carried out in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and if their relationship with the Organization,
including the Security Council, is guided by the
provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter. There is no
doubt that strict respect for the Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security is essential.

The United Nations should increase its
interaction with other regional structures as well. We
believe that good opportunities in that area lie in
improving the cooperation between the United Nations
and such traditional partners as the African Union and
the European Union, as well as organizations that are
actively gaining experience, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.

Particular attention should be accorded to the
problem of ensuring the level of military expertise
necessary for the implementation of Security Council
decisions. Although the New Horizon non-paper
unfortunately overlooks that issue, there is still room
for further work in this area. We support the idea of
involving military experts from members of the
Council in reviewing and agreeing the mandates of
peacekeeping operations.

At the same time, it is our view that the work of
the Security Council on the military aspects of
peacekeeping should be further systematized. In that
context, we believe that the Russian proposal that the
composition of the Military Staff Committee be
expanded to all 15 Security Council members remains
fully relevant and essential.

We welcome the Secretariat's intention to more
systematically implement the provisions of Security
Council resolutions 1327 (2000) and 1353 (2001),
which concern measures to increase the interaction
among the Security Council, troop-contributing
countries and the Secretariat.

Further study should be devoted to the strategic
vision for United Nations peacekeeping. It is not clear
how, in practice, United Nations partnerships will be
formed; how the division of labour and coordination
will be undertaken; or how the number of troop-
contributing countries and the resource base will be
expanded. The ideas of increasing the staffs of
Secretariat structures and establishing standby and
permanent units have already been discussed
repeatedly but, unfortunately, have yet to be
implemented.

The idea of establishing informal coalitions of
interested actors in support of specific country
missions, referred to today by a number of delegations,
needs further clarification. How will the informal
status of such coalitions relate to their involvement in
addressing the issues of mission budgets and resource
support?

Another issue concerns the designation of
technical assessment missions when planning
specialists are already present on the ground. Further
study should be devoted to the parameters for the new
strategy of field support.

We also need to determine the feasibility of the

concept of robust peacekeeping. That will require the

expansion of peacekeeping mandates, which is not

always warranted, and an even further increase in the
peacekeeping budget, rather than its optimization.

We do not believe that the initiative aimed at
greater flexibility in financial resource management is
fully justified, as we understand that it would involve
the consolidation of peacekeeping operation accounts.
That could lead to an overallocation of funds, which in
turn would undermine the already established financing
system for each specific mission.

We await more detailed information on the
Secretariat's ideas to optimize the system of field
support, specifically with regard to procurement
mechanisms. We would like to emphasize the
responsibilities of the Secretariat in terms of improving
the comprehensive planning of operations and
coordination between Headquarters and the field.

Russia attaches great importance to the role of
United Nations peacekeeping in the maintenance of
international peace and security and is moving to
increase its participation in peacekeeping operations.
Russian peacekeepers are taking part in operations in
the Middle East, several regions of Africa, Haiti and
Kosovo. A Russian helicopter unit is operating in the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan. Another Russian
air group is deployed in the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. The training of
African specialists in Russian specialized training
institutes has proved to be of great utility.

We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for preparing the draft presidential statement
on peacekeeping, which we support. At the same time,
we would draw attention to the fact that the draft
focuses insufficient attention on the role of the General
Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and on the need to intensify the activities of
the Military Staff Committee and implement the
mechanisms of cooperation with the troop-contributing
countries, as provided for in the note of the President
of the Security Council dated 14 January 2002.

