Mr. Perovic' (Serbia and Montenegro): Allow me
to begin by joining previous speakers in expressing my
Government's deepest condemnation of the terrorist
attack in Moscow.

Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the current month and to thank you for convening
this important meeting on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2004/71)
on recent developments in the Kosovo and Metohija
province of my country. Also, I thank Mr. Holkeri for
his comprehensive briefing, to which my delegation
listened with great attention and interest.

What we have learned from the Secretary-
General's report regarding the current state of the
implementation of the original standards for Kosovo
and Metohija raises serious concerns. Allow me to note
just the following examples.

The Provisional Institutions have continued to
adopt declarations and decisions that are clearly
outside their responsibility, prompting the interventions
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to annul such acts. Simultaneously, however, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) is seeking to involve the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in an advisory and
consultative capacity within specific areas reserved for
the Special Representative under chapter 8 of the
Constitutional Framework. We find this difficult to
understand in the light of the aforementioned repeated
infringements by the Provisional Institutions on the
Special Representative's powers. All this is taking
place in an environment where non-Albanian
communities are denied any meaningful participation
in political life, to the extent that not even basic access
to documentation in their mother tongues is ensured.

In the area of the rule of law, according to the
Secretary-General's report, high-profile crimes against
members of the Kosovo Serb community decreased
significantly in the past three months. However, the
report fails to provide information of any of the
perpetrators of previous such crimes having been
apprehended and brought to justice. This inevitably
leads us to the conclusion that the culture of impunity
regarding ethnically motivated crimes against Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija is still intact.

The report states that the rate of minority returns
continues to increase, supporting this finding with the
data that during 2003, 1,487 Kosovo Serbs returned to
communities where they are in the minority.
Comparing this figure with the number of internally
displaced persons still in Serbia proper, which remains
approximately 250,000, it is not difficult to conclude
that it will take many, many years for all displaced
persons to return to Kosovo and Metohija, as required
by Security Council resolution 1244 (1999).

Concerning other original standards, the report
describes progress mainly as a slight improvement or
an improvement with many remaining problems, or
uses similar, ambiguous terms. In the meantime,
incidents continue at various levels with alarming
regularity. The Council is probably aware of the attack
in Djakovica, on 21 January, on a KFOR vehicle
transporting priests and a German television crew that
was filming the remains of the Orthodox temple of the
Holy Trinity there. Following that incident, the
monastery priests have been denied further KFOR
escorts, and their living conditions have considerably
deteriorated in other respects. If the only priests in the
area should be forced to leave as a result, it will be a
heavy blow to the local Serbs and will further
discourage the possibility of returns.

We were interested to hear the recent statement
by the Deputy Special Representative, Mr. Cady, at the
Stockholm international forum on the prevention of
genocide. We share his views, as reported in the media,
that in Kosovo and Metohija the victims became the
perpetrators; that practically all ethnic Albanians went
back in a matter of weeks after the establishment of the
peacekeeping presence, whereas more than four years
later most of the Serbs who fled have not returned; and
that in order for reconciliation to occur, no crime can
remain unpunished, whoever the victim or the
perpetrator.

My Government also subscribes to Mr. Cady's
conclusion that the main challenge for UNMIK is to
create stable conditions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo, not
only to prevent ethnic cleansing from occurring again
when the mandate of the international mission comes to
an end, but also to ensure normal development and
prosperity for all communities, which must be free
from harassment and have equal access to institutions
and an impartial police and justice system.

Clearly, the record of the Provisional Institutions
in Kosovo and Metohija remains poor in the main.
Some may argue - as UNMIK often does - that such
a record is understandable in view of their limited
experience, and that their performance is improving
slightly and gradually.

The underlying problem, however, is that the
Provisional Institutions do not want - and UNMIK so
far has not succeeded in creating - conditions for the
meaningful involvement of the Kosovo Serb
community in the political life of the province. This
also applies to the process of drafting the standards
implementation plan, which was expected to be ready
by now and to have been presented today in the
Council. Because, based on their experience with the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government, Serb
representatives do not see how they can in any way
influence this document, they do not participate in the
working groups drafting the plan. Unfortunately,
UNMIK has not found a way to make this process all-
inclusive. Hence, it is already apparent that the plan
will serve to further divide the communities in Kosovo
and Metohija and their political representatives, instead
of bringing them at least at little closer.

Again, UNMIK is complaining about the so-
called parallel institutions and criticizing my
Government for their existence. We therefore once
again have to reiterate that the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and UNMIK have not provided
alternatives to the Serbian community.

UNMIK has also failed so far to persuade the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to move
forward with regard to the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue.
My Government has repeatedly expressed its readiness
to begin this dialogue within the envisaged four
working groups. There were - and there are - no
ambiguities in that respect. It is clear which side is
delaying the process. It is therefore unfair, to say the
least, to imply that problems concerning the dialogue
exist on both sides, as the report suggests.

As for relations between my Government and
UNMIK, we would like to see the Common Document
of 5 November 2001 implemented and the activities of
the high-level working group revived. This is an
important element in the overall context of the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and should
not be marginalized, as is now the case.

Although the standards implementation plan has
not yet been finalized, we are already steadily moving
towards a tentative date for the comprehensive review
of the standards in mid-2005. Then 4 or at a
somewhat later date, as the Council may determine -
talks about a political solution for Kosovo and
Metohija will commence in one form or another. Until
then, if any sustainable solution is to be found, every
effort should be made to create conditions that will
allow the representatives of the two major communities
and all other communities in the province to talk to
each other about their present and their future. They are
too far away from that point now. Currently, all the
political, economic and social advantages belong only
to one community. The other side has none, sees very
little hope and is becoming increasingly desperate.

UNMIK must take this reality into serious
consideration and take measures to rectify this huge
imbalance. If not, the end result will be a failure that
nobody can afford.

