Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): I
wish at the outset to thank the Secretary-General and his
staff, and all others who contributed to the valuable report
that has been submitted to both the Security Council and
the General Assembly. The report unquestionably reflects
the determination of the United Nations to absorb the
lessons of the past, and at the same time sets out an
ambitious vision for the future shape of United Nations
efforts regarding Africa and its political, economic and
humanitarian questions, with a view to achieving the lofty
purposes of the United Nations, as defined in the Charter.

Early on, the report rightly notes that it is impossible
to address the current situation in Africa without
considering the historical, geographical, political, ethnic and
economic elements of what the African continent
experienced between the end of the nineteenth century and
the end of the cold war just a few years ago. It is axiomatic
that any concept of a lasting solution must take all of these
considerations into account.

As today's debate is taking place in the Security
Council, which is primarily concerned with the maintenance
of international peace and security, my statement will
concentrate on the aspects of the Secretary-General's report
that relate to issues within the Council's purview, bearing
in mind that other aspects of the report will later be
considered in detail in the General Assembly.

Since 1993 Africa has been taking tangible, positive
steps towards the settlement of its disputes. It established
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution, which
was accompanied by vigorous efforts at the regional and
subregional levels which no one can deny. Some of those
efforts, indeed, preceded international efforts, as in Liberia
and the Central African Republic. Furthermore, the
Organization of African Unity and African leaders have
played an active mediation role for States in crisis, which
sends a clear signal of a major shift: that African States
have overcome the excessive sensitivity that they displayed
in the past with respect to intervening in each other's
affairs. Personal mediation by African Heads of State has
become a mainstay of crisis containment on our continent.

At a time when Africa is shouldering greater
responsibility for the settlement of African questions, many
regrettably detect international hesitancy with respect to the
Security Council playing its natural role in some of these
crises. The Secretary-General actually refers to this in
paragraphs 29 and 30 of his report, where he concludes
that setbacks suffered by the United Nations in Somalia
and in the former Yugoslavia have brought about a kind
of paralysis in the international community, of whose
symptoms the Security Council has failed to rid itself to
this day.

If the catastrophe of genocide in Rwanda provided
a clear example of this hesitancy, the fact that the United
Nations has thus far refrained from playing an effective
role in Somalia, and its recent reluctance to undertake
timely pre-emptive intervention in Congo (Brazzaville),
make it clear that the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular have not yet
recovered from this paralysis.

From this, we might conclude that the report of the
Secretary-General is fundamentally bold and honest in
acknowledging the errors and failures that marked the
Organization's past work. But it must be clearly said that
mere acknowledgement of errors, without the intention
and determination to prevent their repetition by adopting
timely and practical measures, is not enough to guarantee
optimal performance in the future.

I shall now make some remarks on specific topics,
starting with Somalia. It is unacceptable to continue to
turn a blind eye to what is taking place in Somalia. The
United Nations should take the initiative to assess
developments there and provide all possible help to
facilitate the establishment of the peace which that
country has been awaiting for so long. For its part, Egypt
supports the efforts made by all parties, and will persist
in these efforts to bring peace to Somalia, in coordination
with the League of Arab States, the OAU and all other
interested parties.

Another question to which the OAU gives top
priority is the sanctions that have been imposed on Libya.
The Security Council cannot maintain its position towards
developments in the Lockerbie crisis, especially the recent
decision of the International Court of Justice affirming the
Court's jurisdiction in the case. While affirming the need
to respect the norms of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council, Egypt expects the
Council to give serious consideration to the options
proposed by the OAU and the League of Arab States for
resolving this crisis in a way that would ensure justice -
especially as last month's open meeting of the Security

 

Council on this matter made clear the desire of the
international community to do this expeditiously.

In his report, the Secretary-General speaks of
increasing the effectiveness of sanctions regimes and
stopping the proliferation of arms as measures to ensure the
success of international efforts at crisis containment. On the
question of sanctions regimes, the report observes that
greater use should be made of sanctions aimed at decision-
makers in the targeted State, and that, when an arms
embargo is imposed against a given State, other States
should adopt national legislation to ensure stricter
observance of the embargo by their citizens. Although both
ideas are sound, the experience of implementing a number
of sanctions regimes has proved how difficult it would be
to put the first measure into practice.

The second proposal - relating to the adoption of
national legislation - raises questions about the nature of
the legal commitments arising from resolutions of the
Security Council. In principle, all States are collectively
committed under the Charter to comply with Security
Council resolutions without the need for national legislation
in each State to define the violation of their provisions as
a criminal offence. Here it is worth noting that the present
implementation of sanctions regimes is marred by a number
of deficiencies which led the General Assembly to adopt by
consensus resolution 51/242, entitled "Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace", which included a detailed text on the
question of sanctions regimes. That text could be the
nucleus of a comprehensive reassessment of the entire
question of sanctions regimes.

With respect to the importance of stopping the
proliferation of arms, the report notes that Africa's
compelling development interests require that a minimum
of resources be diverted for military purposes, and that this
could be achieved through transparency and confidence-
building measures in the security and military fields,
including support for the work of the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms. Despite the fact that we
agree with the general objectives of such an orientation, we
would like to point out that a large number of States have
a firm position on the need to expand that Register to
include also all weapons of mass destruction, in addition to
military holdings and the procurement of weapons from
national production.
All these subjects are of importance to Africa and to
all other regions of the world. Here I would like to refer to
the achievement actually made by Africa through the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
continent and the adoption in April 1996 of the Cairo
Declaration, which contains a number of principles which
reaffirm Africa's commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Concerning the illegal inflow of arms to Africa by
private international arms merchants, this is a matter of
extreme gravity. Perhaps the political and military turmoil
from which the States of the Great Lakes region suffered
is the best evidence of the endless conflicts that this
phenomenon can lead to. I wish here to express our full
support for the Secretary-General's proposal relating to
the necessity of confronting this phenomenon through
compiling and publicizing information about it. The
guidelines adopted by the Disarmament Commission two
years ago on illegal trafficking in small and light arms, in
addition to the work results of the panel of experts
formed by the Secretary-General on this subject, may
constitute a framework for strengthening the curb on this
dangerous phenomenon.

The Secretary-General's report also deals with the
importance of supporting regional and subregional
initiatives as a way to promote collective action to contain
crises. It reviewed the United Nations experience in
Liberia and Sierra Leone in cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
as successful experiences which must be built upon.

But on another level, it must remain clear that the
proper framework is to enable such regional arrangements
to play an effective role which complements the efforts of
the United Nations, as provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. It is necessary that the efforts of such
arrangements not be used as a pretext for the Security
Council to shirk its primary responsibilities or as a
justification for the Council not to adopt the appropriate
decisions at the appropriate times.

The Secretary-General's report also refers to the fact
that civilians have become more than ever before the
main target in most conflicts. Women and children are
subjected to ruthless atrocities. In this regard, I would like
to support the Secretary-General's call for the
establishment of an international legal mechanism to hold
warring parties accountable for their transgressions.

Yet the establishment of such a legal mechanism
also necessitates an international machinery for follow-up
and implementation. The failure of the international
community to pursue and apprehend those indicted by the
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia yields a clear picture

 

of sometimes giving political considerations primacy over
legal considerations. This must be avoided in the
establishment of the International Criminal Court.

Egypt agrees with the Secretary-General's reference in
his report to the importance of the humanitarian dimension
and the question of refugees in the African continent. The
report has focused light on the problem of the Rwandese
refugees in the Great Lakes region and on the need for the
international community to act decisively and effectively to
ensure protection and safety to all refugees and to keep
their camps free of any military presence. That may be
achieved through the establishment of an international
mechanism to assist the Governments of host States in
maintaining the security and neutrality of the refugee
camps.

Within such efforts, it is also necessary that all other
aspects of the problem of the refugees be dealt with,
foremost among which is the provision of technical and
humanitarian assistance to the host countries and mitigating
the social and environmental impact on those countries.
This is in addition to containing the negative effects on the
security and stability of the host countries themselves.

These efforts must also include measures for the
establishment of refugee camps away from the border areas,
and rationalized coordination of the provision of
humanitarian assistance between the United Nations
organizations on the one hand, and the international relief
organizations, on the other, and in particular the ICRC.

Concerning the reference in the Secretary-General's
report to post-conflict peace-building and the ways of
establishing durable peace through the promotion of
economic growth, Egypt will make detailed comments on
those subjects to the General Assembly, in its capacity as
the organ responsible for the questions which fall outside
the competence of the Security Council. In this regard, I
wish to refer to the need to respect the specialization and
competence of the various main organs of the United
Nations within the framework of coordination and
cooperation in dealing with multifaceted questions which
are of mutual concern.

Africa is, at present, undergoing a stage of important
historic evolution and of political, economic and social
reform, a stage in which the values of democracy and
respect for human rights are being consolidated. From that
perspective, Africa yearns for the establishment of
democracy on the international level as well. It is our hope
that the process of reform of the United Nations, including
the reform and restructuring of the Security Council, will
lead ultimately to the achievement of justice, democracy
and transparency in international transactions in the light
of respect for the principle of sovereign equality.

Finally, I must express our agreement with the
conclusions of the Secretary-General, contained in his
report, on the need for the African States, the
international community and the United Nations to
discharge their respective responsibilities in order to give
a new impetus to peace and development in Africa within
a true and constructive partnership. The time is long past
when the responsibility for producing change can be
shifted onto the shoulders of others, or be totally relieved
of such responsibilities. The commitment of the
international community to Africa will be measured in
deeds and not in words. Today we are in need of
reactivating the existing initiatives, whether political or
economic, of coordinating them and of presenting new
ideas to deal with their shortcomings.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt would like to
express its support for the Secretary-General's proposal
that the Security Council reconvene at the ministerial
level on a biennial basis and meet at the summit level
every five years to assess the achievements aiming at
establishing peace and political and economic stability in
Africa for the good of its peoples and for their future. We
also look forward to tangible movement on the part of the
Security Council and the General Assembly in the
direction of the recommendations and proposals contained
in this important report, following their thorough
consideration.

