The President (spoke in Spanish): 1 thank
Prosecutor Brammertz for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Peru.

I would like to thank Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, for their important presentations.

Today, 17 July, as we are celebrating international
justice, we underscore the significance of the fight
against impunity and the need to provide justice to
the Victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide. We therefore reaffirm the importance
of access to justice to achieving lasting peace, and
we stress in that context the work of the Residual
Mechanism, the heir to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda.

In that connection, we welcome the priorities
identified in the report (see S/2019/4l7) by both the
President of the Residual Mechanism, whom we
welcome, and the Prosecutor of the Mechanism. We
also welcome the rapid, efficient and transparent
manner in which the Residual Mechanism is carrying
out its intense judicial activities, and we encourage it to
continue its efforts to strike a balance between the civil
and common law legal systems.

We must remember that the success of the
Mechanism, including the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor, hinges on the cooperation of States to
implement judgments, respect orders and respond
to requests for assistance. That is why we wish
to highlight the support that several African and
European Governments have been providing so that
convicted persons can serve their sentences in their
respective countries.

On the other hand, we note with special interest
the measures that are beginning to be taken by the
President of the Mechanism in responding to the
concerns raised in resolution 2422 (2018) on the early
release of convicted persons, some of whom have not
expressed regret for their crimes, which includes not
only systematic consultation with other judges of the
Mechanism, but also with the Governments concerned.

I conclude by underscoring the important support
lent by the Secretariat and the United Nations Office
of Legal Affairs, while stressing the need for the
Council to remain united in its support for the Residual
Mechanism and its far-reaching and landmark work.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

