Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin
others in thanking Special Representative Zahir Tanin
for his clear and precise briefing, and I also thank
Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Citaku, the
Ambassador of Kosovo to the United States, for their
statements. I would like to respectfully point out
that, in accordance with the working methods of the
Security Council, as stipulated in paragraph 22 of note
507 (S/2017/507), those statements should not exceed
five minutes.

As the representative of the United Kingdom has
eloquently made clear, while the issue under discussion
is rooted in a past marked by traumatic violence, over
the past decade Kosovo has made remarkable gains that
must be consolidated. We must redouble our efforts
today to leave behind the wounds of the past and the
remaining problems. Given the situation described
in the Special Representative's briefing and the
Secretary-General's report (S/2019/102), as well as the
visible tensions in the statements by the representatives
of Serbia and Kosovo, I want to briefly emphasize the
following three points.

The first concerns the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), whose
consistent efforts to promote security, stability and
respect for human rights in Kosovo and the region mustbe
acknowledged. France especially welcomes UNMIK's
activities in bringing communities closer together and
promoting the women and peace and security agenda in
cooperation with UN-Women. Women's presence and
participation in the political arena and its institutions
should receive greater attention in that regard, and the
efforts to combat violence against women mentioned
by the Special Representative should also be continued
and encouraged.

Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999), we must continue to devote attention
to the issue of refocusing UNMIK's actions while
considering the situation on the ground, the Mission's
performance and the initiatives of other regional and
international actors, particularly the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). The note by
the President of the Security Council on the frequency
of our meetings also supports this view.

My second point concerns the normalization
of relations between Pristina and Belgrade, which
depends on the dialogue conducted between the two
parties under the auspices of the European Union.
In that regard, we support the mediation efforts of
Ms. Frederica Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy. I expressed our positions on the dialogue and
the difficulties it has encountered at our meeting
on 17 December (see S/PV.8427). They remain
fully valid, and I want to reiterate today that France
deplores the fact that several incidents and unilateral
decisions mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
have obstructed the dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina in recent months, particularly the Government
of Kosovo's decision to impose a 100 per cent tax on
goods coming from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina
comes to mind. We once again ask that it be repealed, if
possible, or at the very least suspended. It is important
to encourage two-way communication. We hope that
the dialogue, which is currently at an impasse, will be
resumed as soon as possible. We also want to ensure
that security commitments are respected.

France calls on both parties to show a spirit of
compromise and political will. We urge the political
leaders of both States to create the conditions conducive
to a comprehensive and final agreement, which would
be a major step towards achieving lasting stability
in the Western Balkans and making progress on the
path to a European future. It is crucial to ensure that
both parties refrain from any actions, statements or
measures that could undermine normalization. For its
part, France intends to continue providing support for
regional cooperation efforts, particularly the French-
German initiative on the control of small arms and
light weapons.

My third and last point concerns the European future
of Kosovo and Serbia. Given the values that are central
to the European project, we underline the importance
of the reforms needed to consolidate and strengthen
the rule of law. In Kosovo, EULEX is contributing to
that goal by focusing on the effectiveness, ethics and
multi-community nature of the Kosovo judicial system.

In conclusion, I want to remind the Council that
the primary responsibility for Serbia and Kosovo's
European visions lies first and foremost with their
political leaders. Only the full normalization of
relations between Pristina and Belgrade will make it
possible to achieve that shared European future.

