Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
As has been said, the security situation in Kosovo and
in the surrounding area continues to be very worrying.
That is why we regard the fact that General Carlo
Cobigiosu, the commander of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), was not able to be with us today and we hope
that he will visit us in the near future.

We would like to welcome Mr. Haekkerup, whom
we thank for the information he has given us. I will try
to focus my statement on a few elements raised by
Mr.Haekkerup and in the report of the Secretary-
General, omitting comments on the security situation,
since this is more related to KFOR.
There are four aspects I would like to highlight.
First is the strengthening of the local administrative
structures. We applaud the achievements that were
reached in the institutional and economic spheres.
These achievements have altered the almost total
dependence on outside actors, along the lines of what is
stipulated in resolution 1244 (1999). The training
offered by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to public officials who
were elected in October and who are assuming control
of local administrations has facilitated the process of
administrative decentralization, which could be a
guarantee for the establishment of strong institutions.
We would also like to note programmes to boost the
economy.

In discussing the strengthening of local
structures, I should also mention the importance the
report attaches to the administration of justice and, in
general, to the rule of law. We would like to draw
attention to the complexity of addressing
simultaneously such issues as amnesty, impunity,
access to justice, the establishment of a judicial
structure, security for judges and prosecutors, and a
related topic: the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. In this respect, I would like to ask Mr.
Haekkerup for some additional information on his
proposal for a distinct and unified structure for the
police and judicial systems, administered by UNMIK,
as mentioned in paragraph 38 of the report of the
Secretary-General.

The second aspect is the establishment of the
legal framework for provisional self-government. We
feel that the decision to postpone the holding of general
elections is wise. As we have said in the past, we must
first define the scope of the institutions before the
holding of elections. The participation of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in all stages of the process is
crucial. That is why we regret the fact that the Serb
representative has left the Working Group. Although
this has already been mentioned several times, I would
like Mr. Haekkerup to give us more information on the
possible causes of this decision and to tell us what
options exist to guarantee that he will return and
participate in the process.

The third aspect has to do with Belgrade. We note
that measures have been established to build
confidence, such as the establishment of an UNMIK
office in Belgrade, the programme proposed by Serbia
to solve the problems in southern Serbia and the
decision that Serbian forces will begin to control a part
of the territory of the ground safety zone. We are
concerned by the risks that these decisions could
represent, mostly due to the instability that we see in
the zone. That is why UNMIK and KFOR have to
continue supervising very closely the implementation
of these new mechanisms in order to ensure that the
parties comply with their commitments.

The fourth aspect is how acts of violence are
perceived. We would like the Special Representative to
tell us his opinion on how these violent acts committed
by extremists are perceived in the field. How much
support do these extremist groups have among the
population? How do they perceive the caution that is
exercised by the Serbian and Macedonian armies?
What is the impact on the population of statements and
communiques that are issued by the Security Council?

The resurgence of violence is a clear sign ofillicit
arms trafficking in this territory. We have to ask
ourselves; what is the real effect of an arms embargo
like the one that is in force? Where are the extremist
groups getting these arms and munitions? We feel that
this should not be overlooked. It is clear that the
provisions of resolution 1160 (1998) are being violated,
and as a result the Security Council must investigate
these facts through the Sanctions committee.

In conclusion, I would like to express Colombia's
support for the presidential statement that we will
adopt following this meeting.

