Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
join other colleagues in wishing every success to
Ambassador Butagira of Uganda.

I would like at the outset to thank you, Mr.
President, for having convened this open debate. My
thanks go also to Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le
Roy and Susana Malcorra and Special Representative
Hedi Annabi for their briefings. I pay special tribute to
all those who have given their lives for United Nations
peacekeeping.

Last November, the General Assembly
unanimously adopted its resolution 63/16, to
commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of United

Nations peacekeeping. These 60 years of history
encompass the tireless efforts that we the peoples of
the United Nations have made for peace and security,
and they demonstrate the firm determination of we the
peoples of the United Nations to ensure that equity and
justice prevail. Over the past 60 years, worldwide, we
have deployed 63 peacekeeping operations, with the
participation 120 countries, at a cost of some $54
billion and 2,500 lives. Today, some 110,000
peacekeeping personnel are deployed in 18 operations.
United Nations peacekeeping has become an important
means of defending world peace and strengthening
collective security.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have
experienced moments of glory, but also setbacks and
challenges. At present, world crises relating to finance,
food and energy have exacerbated the difficulties faced
by many developing countries, especially those where
peace is fragile and where there is a need for greater
investment by the international community. But there is
increasing demand for United Nations peacekeeping
operations. They are becoming larger and more
complex and require increased human and management
resources.

We must effect reform from the ground up. In my
view, we must adhere to the three principles of
peacekeeping: the so-called Hammarskjold principles.
Indeed, we have seen that these three pillars - consent
of the country concerned, non-use of force except in
self-defence, and neutrality - remain valid and
provide a solid foundation for the success of
peacekeeping operations. They also provide common
ground for reform. It is a fact that both theory and
practice are constantly changing, and we should
explore new theories and approaches, in the light of
those three principles.

Reform should ensure sufficient resources for
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Contributions
by United Nations Members are the main source of
funding for peacekeeping operations; we must continue
to pay our contributions in full and on time. That is
crucial in order to ensure that operations are properly
carried out and can respond to the greater demand for
peacekeeping. We favour seeking new means of
financing and new approaches to mandates. Review
and monitoring will help enhance the effectiveness of
operations and to effect savings given our limited
resources. We must also devote greater attention to
preventive diplomacy and to post-conflict
reconstruction in order to ease the pressure being
placed upon peacekeeping and its financing.

Reform ought also to improve our capacity in
terms of contributions of contingents, including in the
areas of logistics, management and command. We
encourage more countries to participate in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. The United Nations
and the international community should also help
countries in training their personnel. We must enhance
our logistical support capacity, and we encourage the
Secretariat to explore effective means for logistical
support. We encourage countries with the means to
provide assistance to do so. We must strengthen our
management capacity; Headquarters needs able
personnel and must act in a transparent manner. On the
ground, we must select the best possible Special
Representatives and Force Commanders. Coordination
between Headquarters and the field must be
strengthened. Reform must ensure full participation by
all parties concerned.

The reform process will involve the Security
Council, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries. We must benefit from what all those
stakeholders have to offer and strengthen synergy and
cooperation. Reform should also take into account the
views of the various parties and should be in keeping
with our long-term interests. Reform also has to pay
particular attention to Africa, a continent that has
special peacekeeping needs. At present, 75 per cent of
peacekeeping personnel are deployed in Africa. In
2008, 70 per cent of peacekeeping contributions were
spent in Africa. But even with those figures, we cannot
fully satisfy Africa's needs.

The Security Council must assume its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. At the same time, we must
encourage the African Union to play a more active role
and strengthen strategic cooperation between the two
organizations. We welcome the report submitted by the
African Union-United Nations high-level panel, and we
are ready to discuss its recommendations.

We have always played an active role in United
Nations peacekeeping operations, and we shall
continue to make our contribution. To date, we have
sent 20,000 military, police and civilian personnel to
22 peacekeeping operations. At present, we have more
2,100 peacekeeping personnel working in 11
operational areas. We are ready to continue to provide
our support to peacekeeping operations and we are
ready to work with all parties in order to contribute to
peace and human progress.

