Mr. Baja (Philippines): I, too, would like to
thank Ambassador Denisov, Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), for his comprehensive
report on the activities of the Committee over the past
three months, and its fourteenth 90-day work
programme covering the period from the beginning of
this month to the end of March this year.

The scourge of terrorism remains one of the
defining threats to international peace and security for
the twenty-first century. In fact, in the synopsis of its
report contained in document A/59/565, the High-level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change cites
terrorism as one of the "six clusters of threats with
which the world must be concerned now and in the
decades ahead".

Given that scenario, the work of the CTC serves a
central role in fulfilling Security Council's mandate -
the maintenance of international peace and security
under the Charter. We note with satisfaction that there
has been steady progress in the work and in the
evolution of the CTC. This includes, first, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
which was established last June and which has been
useful and functional with regard to the CTC, even
though it has yet to become fully operational.
Secondly, cooperation between international, regional
and subregional organizations is flourishing and has
produced notable results. Thirdly, coordination with
other Council bodies dealing with terrorism continues
to expand. And, fourthly and most importantly,
interaction with Member States is advancing and
deepening, mainly through country reports, which have
served as the most important mode of dialogue
between States and the CTC in the fight against the
menace of terrorism.

The CTC has pursued its mandate vigorously
under resolutions 1373 (2001), 1535 (2004) and 1566
(2004), which most recently affirmed the unity and
resolve of the Council in rooting out terrorism and its
perpetrators. The working group established under
resolution 1566 (2004), which the Philippines is
privileged to chair, will hold its first meeting and start
its work before the end of the month.

While the work of the CTC is progressing, there
is still plenty of room for improvement. We hope to see
the CT ED activated early within the next 90-day
period. As pointed out by Ambassador Denisov, the
transition period before the CTED reaches full capacity
is undercutting the productivity of the CTC in
reviewing country reports and performing its other
tasks. We encourage the process of hiring experts and
personnel to be carried out in an expeditious manner so
as to enable the CTED to reach high gear as early as
possible.

On the matter of the composition of the
Directorate, my delegation places strong emphasis on
the hiring of competent individuals on the basis of the
principle of gender equity and geographic balance. We
believe that a representative pool of experts in the
CTED will provide a greater measure of legitimacy and
a solid source of intimate knowledge of all the areas of
the world, which will benefit the work of counter-
terrorism.

We are pleased to note that visits to States, with
their consent, as envisaged under resolution 1535
(2004), will be carried out within the next 90-day
period. We also note that the CTC is preparing for the
first of such visits and finalizing the framework within
which such visits will be conducted. We have always
considered that face-to-face interaction between the
CTC and Member States is qualitatively better than
letter-writing and the submission of country reports,
and could be transformative in improving international
cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Cooperation
is enhanced by better understanding, and country visits
by the CTC would contribute to greater understanding
by Member States of what the Council is trying to
achieve in the counter-terrorism field.

Ambassador Denisov also raised the issue of the
growing trend of the late submission of country
reports. The problem has steadily worsened over time,
and the CTC must begin seriously to consider remedial
approaches to deal with the growing problem of tardy
reports. If the matter is not resolved, at stake will be
the effectiveness of the CTC in the short term and, in
the longer term and more critically, the credibility of
the Security Council. In a larger context however, the
problem appears to be the exclusive domain of the
CTC. But it is also plaguing the other Council
Committees dealing with counter-terrorism and non-
proliferation issues. Thus, it is critically important for
all concerned Council bodies to ensure close
coordination and cooperation in pursuing their
respective mandates. They should seek synergistic
approaches and methods that will help them to pursue
their respective mandates and resolve common
problems.

We support the activities that are already
undertaken, and to be undertaken, by the CTC to
actively and effectively strengthen practical
cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations in all areas related to
resolution 1373 (2001). We know that, under the joint
auspices of the CTC and the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the fourth meeting with such
organizations will be held later this month in Almaty,
Kazakhstan. We hope that that meeting will further
deepen contacts and cooperation between the CTC and
those organizations for the purpose of obtaining the
full implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

Finally, in the fight against terrorism, we fully
adhere to the idea that the Security Council, working
through the CTC, must be guided by the principles of
cooperation, transparency and the equal treatment of
all States. The global effort against terrorism requires
the Security Council and the rest of the membership of
the United Nations to remain committed partners if
success is to be achieved in eradicating that scourge. It
is my hope that that will be our shared goal as we
move ahead in this endeavour.

