Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let mejoin my colleagues
in expressing our gratitude to the United Kingdom
presidency for convening today's debate, taking up
the issue of reconciliation and placing it high on the
Council's agenda. We congratulate the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the presidency.

Reconciliation is vital to achieving sustainable
peace and, in today's continuous cycle of wars, violent
conflicts and failed peace agreements, advancing the
process of reconciliation becomes urgent.

Georgia is committed to the policy of peaceful
conflict resolution, and pursues a reconciliation and
engagement policy towards its occupied Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia. Even as it confronts
Russian occupation and creeping annexation along
the occupation line in those two regions, the Georgian
Government spares no effort to build trust and
confidence between artificially divided communities
and to enhance people-to-people contacts, including
through the engagement of women in peace projects
and confidence-building measures.

In 2018, in close cooperation with all relevant
national and international stakeholders, the Georgian
Government adopted a new package of peace initiatives
entitled A Step to a Better Future. The initiative has
sparked the interest of the local population in both
Georgian regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, and even
with the artificial obstacles installed along the dividing
lines, people-to-people contacts and interest in travel
throughout Georgia have increased. The main novelty
of the initiative is that, together with other tangible
benefits and opportunities, for the first time the
initiative provides possibilities for economic activity
and trade across the dividing lines. The peace initiative
covers three main dimensions.

The first is facilitating trade across the dividing
lines. The goal is to encouragejoint business initiatives
and to simplify and expand trade through the creation of
new opportunities by enabling the products originating
from or produced in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali to access
the internal market of Georgia, as well as foreign
markets, through the export opportunities available to
Georgia. It also allows the supply of goods produced
on Georgian-controlled territories, or imported into
Georgia, to the occupied regions.

The second dimension is enhancing educational
opportunities for the residents of Abkhazia and
Tskhinvali by easing access to all stages of education
throughout the area and expanding opportunities to
participate in international educational programmes
by simplifying access to international universities in a
status-neutral way. Importantly, in partnership with the
international community, the initiative seeks to protect
the Abkhaz language so as to ensure education in the
native language in Abkhazia.

The third dimension is easing access to State
services by simplifying technical procedures for
obtaining Georgian passports and life-cycle documents
by the residents of occupied regions. Documents issued
in Abkhazia and Tskhinvali, while being illegal, will be
used for the purpose ofidentification and determination
of facts of birth, death, marriage, divorce and residence
in these regions, and necessary civil documents will be
issued subsequently.

In order to support the implementation of the peace
initiative A Step to a Better Future, on 12 August the
Georgian Government established a peace fund. The
fund issues grants for socioeconomic projects across
the dividing lines, thereby facilitating dialogue,
cooperation, reconciliation and confidence-building
between divided communities, as well as the
empowerment of conflict-affected populations living
on both sides of the dividing lines and the improvement
of their socioeconomic conditions.

Free health-care services are a key direction of the
Georgian Government's peace and engagement policy,
whereby the residents of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali
regions are able to access various State health-
care programmes. In particular, the State referral
programme covers the medical treatment of persons
residing in the occupied regions free of charge. It is
important to mention that the number of beneficiaries
increases each year.

However, as we speak, the programme is under
serious threat in the Tskhinvali region. Just a few
weeks ago, we informed the Council on the recent
cases of the borderization and closure of the so-called
crossing points in the Tskhinvali region, particularly
in Akhalgori district. As a result, we had yet another
fatal accident when 70-year-old Margo Martiashvili,
requiring urgent medical assistance, died because ofthe
refusal by the occupying regime to open the so-called
crossing point in order to access the nearest hospital.

Recently, on 9 November, Dr. Vazha Gaprindashvili
from Tbilisi, while paying a visit to a patient in
need of urgent care, was illegally detained by the
occupation forces, sentenced to two months of pretrial
detention, and remains in custody as we speak, on
the allegation of so-called illegal border crossing
and other concocted accusations. Dr. Gaprindashvili
should be released at once. We call on the international
community to take a firm and principled stance on that
issue. This represents a clear attempt on the part of the
occupying Power and the authorities in control to further
destabilize the already grave security, humanitarian
and human rights situation on the ground. It is even
more alarming that illegal detentions, kidnappings,
torture, killings and loss of life have become regular
and no one is held accountable for those crimes.

The occupying Power is the sole party responsible
for the situation on the ground. Therefore, the
engagement of our partners and the United Nations, first
and foremost to support our reconciliation efforts, will
significantly contribute to achieving sustainable peace.

