Mr. Madadha (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
I extend to you, Mr. President, our thanks for your rapid
response in convening this emergency meeting, which is
very important for this Council. I also take this opportunity
to extend our congratulations to you on assuming the
presidency of the Council for this month.

The swift, bloody events that have taken place in the
self-rule areas and the occupied territories, which have left
dozens of people dead or wounded, have confirmed that the
peace process has reached a serious and crucial stage. This
Council must take appropriate decisions and steps to deal
with this crucial situation.

Since the outset, the Government of Jordan has
welcomed the resolve shown by the Israeli people in
choosing their newly elected Government. We have opened
channels of communication with them and even called on
them to cooperate with all concerned parties in order to
resume the peace process, in accordance with the Madrid
Conference and the ensuing agreements based on the
land-for-peace formula and Security Council resolutions,
in the hope that a just and lasting peace can be
established and that through dialogue a number of slogans
and negative and unrealistic statements from the election
campaign can be put to rest. We believe that the reality
and responsibility of governance require more positive
and realistic attitudes.
Our position during the Arab Summit in Cairo in
June 1996 was that we should look beyond these slogans
and give the new Israeli Government time to define its
position with regard to the peace process.

In the last three months, His Majesty King Hussein
and the Jordanian Government have made persistent
efforts and continued dialogue to urge the Israeli
President and his Government to return to the framework
of the Madrid Conference and to halt any steps that could
divert us from this framework. We have also warned that
continued settlement activities, the demolition of houses,
confiscation of territories, displacement of the population,
closure of autonomous areas, aggravated problems of
economy and living conditions and the confiscation of
identity cards could not fail to lead to desperation, misery,
violence and tension. We also warned of the gravity of
desecrating holy places and Al-Quds. We agreed to defer
any final-status negotiations related to this.

We have asked our partners in the peace process not
to procrastinate with regard to the implementation of what
we have agreed.

The serious and bloody events that have taken place
recently have confirmed our apprehensions. They came as
no surprise to us. Opening the tunnel was a spark that
ignited these bloody confrontations. We have listened
with great attention to the statements made by the Heads
of delegations before this Council, which contained a
number of positive points that may also be included in a
draft resolution to be adopted by the Council to deal with
this crisis.

The most important provisions of such a draft
resolution are to calm the situation, close the tunnel and
establish an international fact-finding committee, as
proposed by His Majesty the King, to determine how to
deal with the desecration of the archaeological sites in
Jerusalem, particularly since there are international
resolutions clearly stating that the holy shrines are
 

inviolable. It is also important for the draft resolution to
call for a clear Israeli commitment to implement
expeditiously all the agreements, particularly on the
withdrawal from Hebron, thus paving the way to
negotiations on the final status.

The same draft resolution must include measures to
rectify the situation so that these dangerous events do not
occur again.

We call upon the Israeli Government to resume peace
negotiations on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks, starting
from the point where they were stalled, and to take rapid
measures to lift the siege of the closed areas so as to
alleviate the economic problems facing the Palestinian
people.

The peoples of our region, who yearn for peace, are
calling on us to make serious efforts to resume the work
that started in Madrid. We Arabs and Israelis must rise to
the expectations of all those peoples in order to achieve a
just and lasting peace based on the principles we agreed on,
so that our children and grandchildren will in future enjoy
their lives in stability.

