Ms. Wolcott (United States of America): We
thank United Nations Special Representative Ould
Abdallah for his briefing this morning.

The United States welcomes the appointment of
Nur Hassan Hussein as the new Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government. We hope that that
Government can now focus on renewing its efforts
towards inclusive political dialogue and resuming the
comprehensive political process outlined by the
Transitional Federal Government Charter.

We hope Prime Minister Hussein will draw on his
humanitarian background to address the needs of
Somalia's nearly one million displaced persons, and in
working to alleviate current impediments to effective
delivery of United States and other international
humanitarian aid.

We urge the Transitional Federal Government to
move quickly to facilitate the drafting of a new
Constitution and formation of key commissions, such
as a national electoral commission, that will allow
national elections to take place on schedule in 2009.
We also continue to call on Somali stakeholders across
the political spectrum to rejoin the political dialogue
process and to discuss key elements of the transitional
political process leading towards national elections in
2009.

In fiscal year 2007, the United States was the
largest bilateral donor of humanitarian assistance to
Somalia, with approximately $90 million in such aid
provided, in addition to $25 million in development
and democracy assistance. And we continue to be the
largest bilateral donor in support of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), with nearly $59.6
million provided to date in support of that effort.

We call on all Somali and regional actors to
prevent extremist elements from using Somalia as a
safe haven for continued attacks against civilians, the
Transitional Federal Government and AMISOM. The
United States has repeatedly urged the leadership of the
Transitional Federal Government to reach out to key
stakeholders, particularly in Mogadishu, to resume the
transitional political process and work towards an
effective ceasefire arrangement as the best means of
isolating extremist elements seeking to prevent further
political dialogue.

The United States commends AMISOM, in
particular the Ugandan forces, for their efforts in
Somalia, operating under difficult and dangerous
circumstances. We welcome the commitment by
Burundi, Ghana and Nigeria to deploy forces in
support of AMISOM. We urge all members of the
African Union (AU) that have pledged to send troops
to Somalia to do so without delay, and we urge the
international community to assist the AU with the
necessary logistical and financial resources, so that
AMISOM. may be fully deployed. We continue to
support the full and timely deployment of AMISOM. as
a critical component in restoring stability and creating
the space for continued dialogue and reconciliation.

The United States would like once again to stress
the need for contingency planning for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia. We ask that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations send a
technical assessment mission to Somalia as soon as
conditions allow. As we all know, the dynamics in
Somalia are fluid and can change at any time. We must
begin the contingency planning now, so that the United
Nations will be prepared to deploy if and when
conditions on the ground permit.

The United States remains concerned about the
increase in piracy off the coast of Somalia. We commend
our partners in the Combined Task Force 150 that
continue to patrol the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean
to ensure the safe passage of merchant ships, especially
ships carrying humanitarian cargo. The United States
supports the 5 July letter from Mr. Efthimios Mitropoulos,
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization, to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the
need for a new Security Council resolution to address the
problem of piracy off the coast of Somalia. The United
States looks forward to working with other members of
the Council on this issue next year.

Finally, the United States is gravely concerned
about the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
particularly in south-central Somalia. We will continue
monitoring the humanitarian situation, and we
welcome continued close coordination and cooperation
with the United Nations country team and our donor
partners in Nairobi to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches those most in need within Somalia.

