Mr. Popolizio Bardeles (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru welcomes the holding of this open debate and is grateful for the valuable statements made by the briefers, who recognized the essential nature of transitional justice in restoring and invigorating the social fabric of post-conflict situations. That is accomplished through an improved diagnosis and understanding of the reasons that triggered a given conflict situation, while providing reparations to victims and fighting impunity. To that end, we have a valuable collection of lessons learned in various parts of the world. Peace, truth and reconciliation commissions, for example, have been instrumental in interpreting facts and contexts from a reflective and conciliatory perspective. Similarly, independent fact-finding missions and arbitration bodies have shown their worth in clarifying situations and, ultimately, enabling the acceptance of their results. We note that transitional justice processes must be adapted to the specificities of each post-conflict situation, using independent criteria, indicators and evaluation parameters, because what works for one reality might lead to a very different outcome for another. In that regard, it is critical to strike a balance between efforts to prevent impunity and convict those responsible for abuses and lawbreaking and measures to foster a climate of reconciliation and reunion. Thatquest for balance is successfully reflected in the case of Colombia, for example, where key instances for reconciliation such as the Truth Commission and the International Commission on Missing Persons have been added to the establishment of special peace tribunals. Peru has also been part of those developments for restitution of justice and rights to nationals who suffered at the hands of violence. In August 2012, we ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and in 2016, we adopted Law 30470, concerning the search for persons who disappeared during the violent period that plagued the country between 1980 and 2000. Our policy on the search for missing persons prioritizes a humanitarian approach and focuses on the alleviation of suffering and uncertainty and providing family members with the answers they need. Nevertheless, we must stress that, in cases of serious violations of human rights law and international humanitarian law, such as genocide and crimes against humanity, amnesties do not apply to their perpetrators. On the contrary, the full force of the law must be brought down upon them. When that does not occur at the local level, the international community - including the Security Council - must assume its responsibility by configuring special political missions and ad hoc tribunals or referring situations to the International Criminal Court within the framework of the principle of complementarity. In that regard, we wish to highlight the value of entities such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well as the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. I conclude by underscoring the positive role played by the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting transitional justice efforts, whether by promoting synergies between the United Nations system and other international agencies or by mobilizing financial resources through the Peacebuilding Fund.
