Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking the People's Republic of China for organizing
this open debate and by thanking the Secretary-
General for his briefing. This meeting provides a timely
opportunity to exchange views on how to enhance
international efforts to prevent and fight terrorism. The
United Nations is the appropriate forum to identify ways
and means to tackle that global threat. Discussions that
took place just a few days ago at the Geneva Conference
on Preventing Violent Extremism also provide useful
inputs for the upcoming review of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Brazil is a country committed to the elimination
of the scourge of terrorism. The Brazilian Constitution
establishes the repudiation of terrorism as one of the
guiding principles for our foreign policy. Moreover,
Brazil is a signatory to 14 international legal instruments
against terrorism negotiated under the auspices of the
United Nations.

Our commitment to effectively preventing and
countering terrorism, including its financing, has also
been translated into domestic legislation. In October
2015, Brazil adopted a law specifically designed to
facilitate the implementation of Security Council
resolutions concerning sanctions against individuals

and entities affiliated with terrorist organizations.
Last month, in March 2016, we also adopted legislation
defining the crime of terrorism. As Brazil prepares to
host the 2016 Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio
de Janeiro this summer, we have redoubled our efforts
to counter terrorism, including through the creation of
platforms for the exchange of information and good
practices, as well as for the sharing of intelligence.

The absence ofa universally agreed upon definition
of terrorism is detrimental to the shared goal of
eliminating it. We are convinced that filling that legal
gap would contribute to enhancing cohesion in counter-
terrorism efforts. It would also properly establish the
relationship between concepts, such as terrorism and
violent extremism. It would create improved conditions
for harmonizing regional and national initiatives in
terms of the due process of law and compliance with
human rights.

As several reports on peace and security have
reminded us in 2015, prevention is always the best
policy, and that template should also be applied to
fighting terrorism. In that context, we should give due
consideration to the underlying causes, including those
associated with social, political, economic and cultural
exclusion. Approaches that rely exclusively on military
strategies have demonstrated their limitation in tragic
ways: today, terrorism is more widespread and claims
more lives than 15 years ago.

Terrorist groups, such as Da'esh, have been
attracting recruits by offering them a sense of purpose,
belonging and identity that they have probably failed
to acquire elsewhere. Social exclusion and youth
unemployment have been increasing the vulnerability of
youth to violent extremist narratives that are conducive
to terrorism. The promotion of genuine inclusion in all
countries will undoubtedly contribute to inoculating
societies against terrorism. In that regard, we must
also take a critical look at certain types of response to
the refugee crisis. Such responses may be increasing
rather than decreasing the risks associated with violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. We cannot argue
that there is a responsibility to protect civilians when
they are victims of waves of terrorism and human right
violations in theatres distant from our homes and then
ignore their plight when they knock on our doors.

Countering terrorism is a goal that has a
galvanizing potential. That can be demonstrated by
the fact that the Council has often been able to reach
consensus on decisions related to counter-terrorism,
even as it remains divided on other important issues.
In the particular case of countering terrorism, recent
experience should encourage the Security Council to
recommit to diplomatic efforts as the privileged vehicle
for promoting peace based on justice. At the same
time, let us not lose sight of the protracted conflicts
that directly or indirectly fuel terrorist agendas. Our
collective failure to deal adequately with ongoing
crises in the Middle East, including the Israel-Palestine
conflict, is an obvious case in point.

We can no longer fail to acknowledge that
strategies that privilege the use of force and unilateral
interpretations of Security Council mandates have
generated more harm than good. The presence of
Da'esh in countries, such as Iraq and Libya, cannot
be dissociated from the local and regional instability
provoked by military intervention.

The Charter of the United Nations is both our
best ally and our best defence against terrorism. Our
efforts will only be effective to the extent that they
are consistent with international law, including human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

The Council has a duty to condemn terrorism and
prevent its spread in a coherent and universal manner,
that is, wherever and whenever international terrorism
strikes.

There can be no justification for terrorist acts.
Brazil reiterates its commitment to a multidimensional
response to that serious threat to peace and security
and remains convinced that cooperation and dialogue
within the United Nations will enhance our capacity to
achieve the results we are all looking for. We will only
succeed if we join efforts on the basis of shared values
and enhanced multilateral cooperation.

