The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Canada,
Germany, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Douri
(Iraq) took a seat at the Council table," Mr. Stuart
(Australia), Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Buallay
(Bahrain), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Kastrup
(Germany), Mr. Sharma (India), Mr. Francese
(Italy), Mr. Akasaka (Japan), Prince Zeid Ra 'ad
Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan
(Kuwait), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia), Mr. van den Berg
(Netherlands), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand),
Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia), Ms. Ndhlovu
(South Africa), Mr. Arias (Spain), Mr. Schori
(Sweden), Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Pamir (Turkey) and Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen)
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 25 June 2001
from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia, which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that

Ambassador Dr. Hussein Hassouna, Permanent
Observer of the League of Arab States to the
United Nations, be allowed to participate without
the right to vote in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the United Nations Charter and rule
39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council in the Council's discussion of
the item presently on its agenda, "The situation

?"

between Iraq and Kuwait .

This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2001/631. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to extend an invitation under rule 39 to Mr. Hassouna.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hassouna to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to the request contained in a letter
dated 15 June 2001 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
document S/2001/597.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2001/603, which contains
the text of a letter dated 18 June 2001 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.


