Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the briefing on the activities of the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea, which you, Sir, chair.

We are worried about the recent intensification in
the various terrorist tactics of Al-Shabaab throughout
large parts of Somalia, including Mogadishu, and
the trend of strengthening the group's ties with Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). Despite the fact that the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) now control
80 per cent of the Somali territory, large-scale terrorist
attacks committed by Al-Shabaab since the beginning
of the year clearly demonstrate that extremists are still
in a position to seriously destabilize the situation.

Those factors, together with the potentially negative
consequences of the conflict in Yemen, demonstrate
the need to continue the military pressure on the
Islamists, based on the efforts of Somali authorities,
to stabilize the liberated areas and establish Viable
local governance there. It seems that there is a need for
further international support for African peacekeepers
and the Somali National Army, including along the
lines of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS), as well as in line with the coordination and
advisory role played by the United Nations Support
Office for AMISOM. We look forward to the successful
implementation of the obligations set out in resolution
2245 (2015), which expanded the mandate of UNSOS.

We support the idea of strengthening the police
contingent of AMISOM. and adapting the activities of
UNSOS to the task of increasing of the effectiveness
of its operations. In the future, we must increase the
provision of equipment and technical support in line
with Security Council decisions. In that context, we
welcome the adoption of a law on combating money
laundering and terrorist financing by the country's
Parliament on 26 December 2015.

We call for a strengthening of the sanctions regime
with respect to Somalia, including strict adherence to
the arms and charcoal embargo, as well as monitoring
of the coastal waters of Somalia and assistance from
AMISOM. in that area, in line with resolution 2244
(2015). We think that the embargo on arms and charcoal
from Somalia are key instruments for preventing the
fuelling of extremist forces in the country. We have
seen the effectiveness ofa partial lifting of the embargo
in the provision of arms to the Somali armed forces.

The restrictions with respect to Eritrea reveal a
totally different picture. We are pleased to note that
the Monitoring Group has found no evidence that the
Eritrean Government is supporting the Al-Shabaab
armed group. No convincing data have yet been
provided to indicate that country is conducting
subversive activities. In that regard, we think attempts
to increase pressure on Asmara are counterproductive.
Once again, we call upon the Monitoring Group to use
only verified information in its reports.

