Mr. Chambas: I thank you, Madam, for the
opportunity to introduce the report of the Secretary-
General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (8/2013/420). It highlights progress
in our common effort to achieve peace and stability in
Darfur and the challenges we face on this path, and
reviews possible opportunities.

As detailed in the report and brought keenly to our
attention by recent tragic events, the security situation
in Darfur remains volatile. Since the beginning of the
year, fighting between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatory movements, on the one hand, and,
on the other, inter- and intra-ethnic clashes have led not
only to loss of life, but also to a situation of protracted
displacement, socioeconomic dislocation and loss
of property for the civilian populations caught in the
crossfire. Although, civilian populations do not appear
to have been deliberately targeted, the main impact of
these events on civilians is still displacement, injury
and death.

The steady upsurge in inter-ethnic violence
throughout the Darfur states in the first half of 2013
is very worrying. Inter- and intra-ethnic fighting
between the Beni Hussein and the Aballa/northern
Rizeigat in Northern Darfur; the Salamat and the
Misseriya and the Salamat and Ta'aisha in Central
and Southern Darfur; the Birgid and the Zaghawa in
Northern Darfur; and the Gimir and Beni Halba in
Southern Darfur reflect growing tensions over access
to and control of land, water and mineral resources.
The increased militarization and proliferation of arms
among civilian populations in Darfur, accompanied
by a deterioration in the humanitarian conditions for
host communities and internally displaced persons, has
meant that inter-ethnic violence has actually brought
about more death, injury and displacement than the
fighting between the Government and non-signatories
in 2013.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) has continued to
strongly encourage all parties to those inter-ethnic
conflicts and relevant civil society actors to enter into
dialogue with a view to addressing the root causes of
the clashes and developing a common vision for their
resolution. UNAMID has also, in conjunction with
Government authorities, supported local mediation
activities to bring community-based conflicts under
control and create space for reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence.

Against that backdrop of increased violence and the
resultant threats to the population, UNAMID continues
to do its utmost to protect civilians. That includes
logistic and technical support to local mediation,
assistance to Government efforts aimed at ending the
violence, medical evacuation of the injured, increased
patrolling in the affected locations, advocacy with
local authorities and non-signatory movements, and
conducting reporting, monitoring and evaluations on
issues pertaining to human rights abuses, sexual and
gender-based violence and child protection.

In the case of the clashes in and around El Sereif
in Northern Darfur, UNAMID has established and is
currently upgrading a temporary operating base for
the protection of the population from armed attack
and the facilitation of the safe delivery of emergency
humanitarian aid by the United Nations country team.
Whenever there is a concentration of newly displaced
persons around our camps, as happened recently in
Labado and Muhajeria, UNAMID provides initial
humanitarian assistance, such as water and food, from
our own resources, in addition to ensuring security for
displaced persons.

In the past four months, UNAMID military
personnel have come under attack from unknown
armed elements on four occasions. The most recent of
those occurred on 13 July, when a routine patrol from
the Khor Abeche team site in Southern Darfur came
under attack between Khor Abeche and Menawashei.
In the ensuing firefight, seven Tanzanian peacekeepers
were killed and 17 other mission personnel injured. An
internal investigation is ongoing. We in the UNAMID
family are counting on the Government of the Sudan to
investigate that war crime and bring the perpetrators to
justice. I have met with senior Government officials to
impress upon them the mission's readiness to cooperate
with any such process and, only this week, we have
been informed by the special prosecutor for Darfur
war crimes that his office has opened an investigation
into the ambush of our personnel. The mission extends
its deepest condolences to the families of our fallen
and injured personnel and to the Government and the
people of Tanzania. We naturally and deeply appreciate
the expressions of condolence and similar sentiments
made by the Security Council and individual Member
States.

Questions have been raised about troop strength and
effectiveness in the light ofrecent attacks on UNAMID
personnel, including the incident at Khor Abeche. It
goes without saying that, in the current environment,
the proper composition, strength and posture of the
UNAMID military and police are essential to mandate
implementation. I believe that UNAMID has the troop
numbers to implement the mandate. What is required
is better training and equipment and more flexibility
within our current deployment. UNAMID headquarters
is working with our military and police contingents to
develop a quarterly threat assessment process and the
flexibility to redeploy personnel within the mission
area of responsibility in order to address new and
emerging areas of concern.

In that regard, I welcome the news that troop
deployments will now be extended from six months
to one year in duration, allowing the mission to
benefit from personnel more familiar with conditions
on the ground. The mission, in coordination with
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, is working with our
troop and police contributors to address and improve
predeployment training issues and contingent-owned
equipment issues. Acquiring a tactical helicopter for
hot-pursuit purposes would provide an additional
deterrent to ambushes.

As we enter the tenth year of the conflict in Darfur,
it is evident that the only solution to the conflict will
be a political one. That is a statement worth countless
repetition. The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
represents the most viable path to sustainable peace and
development for the people of Darfur. The signatory
parties to the Doha Document have continued to work
towards the implementation of the agreement, even if at
an unacceptably slow pace.

The establishment of various bodies under the
Darfur Regional Authority was completed in January,
with the Authority Council being the last key institution
of governance to come into being. The Government
of the Sudan has released to the Authority the first
tranche of funds, in the amount of $170 million, for
reconstruction and development. The Darfur Joint
Assessment Mission, completed in October 2012,
evaluated the needs for economic recovery and
development and generated the Darfur Development
Strategy as a framework to achieve those ends.

At the Doha International Donor Conference held
in April, international support for the peace process
and the Doha Document in particular was confirmed,
while concerns were expressed over the slow pace of
the Document's implementation, access restrictions
and the insecurity that continues to constitute a major
threat to those endeavours. We have to confirm that the
rate of implementation has been quite slow, particularly
in the area of ceasefire and final security arrangements.
Honouring the pledges made at the Donor Conference
in a timely manner would help to change the dynamic on
the ground, as projects under the Development Strategy
are aimed at improving the living conditions of conflict-
affected populations and creating an environment more
conducive to peace.

UNAMID continues to provide technical and
logistic support for the implementation of Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, including in close
collaboration with the United Nations country team.
We work especially closely with the United Nations
Development Programme and also with the World Bank,
the African Development Bank and other partners.

In October 2012, a faction of the Justice and
Equality Movement (JEM) led by Mohamed Bashar
joined the peace process, agreed to cease hostilities
and successfully negotiated its entry into the Doha
Document. To our great regret, Mohamed Bashar and
several other leaders of that group, who were on their
way from Doha to Khartoum to start the implementation
of the peace agreement, were killed by elements of
JEM-Gibril in Bamina, Chad. That was considered to
be an attack against the peace process with the potential
to cause serious damage to its progress. Nevertheless,
the new leadership of JEM-Bashar has pledged
to stay the course of the Doha peace process. The
Implementation Follow-up Commission provided for in
the Document has again requested the non-signatories
to abandon armed struggle and embrace dialogue with
the Government towards a peaceful settlement of the
conflict on the basis of the Doha Document.

The tragic killing of Mohamed Bashar prompted
us to re-evaluate the current direction of mediation
efforts. Today, the peace process remains incomplete
without the inclusion of major armed movements such
as the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi, the
Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid and J EM-Gibril.
In my engagements with regional leaders, specifically
with Presidents Museveni of Uganda, Kikwete of
Tanzania and Deby Itno of Chad, aimed at persuading
the non-signatories to renounce violence and come to
the negotiating table with the Government of the Sudan
without preconditions, those three Heads of State all
have agreed that the time is right for inclusive and
comprehensive peace talks. Such talks between the
main non-signatory movements and the mediation
would serve as a forum where they can voice their
concerns and continue to build trust with the mediation.
Hopefully, that would lead to formal talks with the
Government of the Sudan.

Let me reiterate that this year marks 10 years since
the outbreak of the Darfur conflict. While considerable
progress has been made throughout the years to bring
down the initially great casualty numbers and to craft
a peace process, much more remains to be done. The
parties to the conflict that have courageously embraced
the path of peaceful settlement must be encouraged,
supported and protected. The stated intention of the
Government of the Sudan to engage in an all-inclusive
political dialogue with all non-signatory groups
without exception is commendable, and it needs to be
encouraged to propose a concrete framework to deliver
on that undertaking. Those that are still holding out
should be persuaded to agree to start peace talks with
the Government of the Sudan without conditions. For
that to happen, the continued support and engagement
of the Council is absolutely necessary.

This conflict cannot and will not be won by force of
arms, but can be resolved only through an all-inclusive
political dialogue that seeks to address the legitimate
grievances of the people of Darfur and to create the
conditions for good governance, the rule of law, social
and economic recovery, and development.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Security Council for its continued
support.
