Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank India for taking the initiative to
hold today's open debate on piracy. I wish also to thank
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for his briefing.

Piracy is a common scourge facing the international
community. Over recent years, pirates have carried
out rampant activities off the coast of Somalia, in
the Gulf of Aden and in the Gulf of Guinea. They are
increasingly taking to it as a business model. Their
all-weather operational capacity has been further
strengthened, the area of attacks has further expanded,
and their activities are becoming more violent.

Acts of piracy have not only undermined the safety
of international navigation but have also affected
normal trade and economic activities. In addition, they
have made more vulnerable the situation of certain
areas that already pose threats to international peace
and security. The international community must pay
close attention and strengthen cooperation, and address
the phenomenon accordingly. In that context, I would
like to make the following comments.

First, it is important to strengthen international
cooperation in our fight againstpiracy. Suchinternational
cooperation has achieved marked results, making piracy
attacks less successful than they have been. We hope
that the international community will continue to be
guided by the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and relevant international law and will persist
in strengthening cooperation and coordination through
coordinated actions designed to further combat piracy.
In such activities the international community must
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned. We support the continued role
of the United Nations in coordination in that regard.
It is important to enrich and improve cooperation
mechanisms, strengthen information-sharing and
effectively prosecute and try those involved in piracy
so as to forge synergies in our fight against it.

Secondly, it is important to strengthen the
capacity-building of relevant countries and regional
organizations in fighting piracy. We support the
initiatives taken by the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea, which include formulating national strategies,
improving international legal regimes, strengthening
good governance and enhancing naval, judicial and law-
enforcement capacities. All of those efforts will enable
them to play a better role in preventing and fighting
piracy. We commend the Economic Community of
West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Commission of the Gulf
of Guinea for having developed a regional strategy for
fighting piracy and on the establishment of a regional
centre for coordination. We call upon the international
community to be more responsive to the capacity-
building efforts of relevant countries and regional
organizations by providing more financing and
technical assistance.

Thirdly, it is important to take a holistic approach
and address both the symptoms and root causes of
piracy. Piracy comes about as a result of deeply rooted
economic and social factors. Although piracy takes
place at sea, its genesis lies on land. The international
community must take into account considerations of
specific conditions of specific areas and address the
problem at its source so as to eliminate the conditions
upon which piracy thrives. As far as Africa is concerned,
poverty and economic and social underdevelopment are
the root causes of piracy. We call on the international
community to redouble its efforts to provide assistance
to African countries and the least developed countries
and to play a better, more active role in achieving
stability, eliminating poverty and attaining sustainable
economic and social development.

China has actively participated in the international
fight against piracy. Since January 2009, the Chinese
navy has dispatched escort convoys to the Gulf of
Aden and the coastal areas off Somalia. By early
November this year, China had dispatched in total 13
escort formation convoys, totalling 34 vessels. They
have carried out 515 operations, providing escorts to
4,901 vessels, of which half were foreign vessels, and
they have achieved a 100 per cent success rate. China is
willing, on a voluntary basis and with coordination on
an equal footing, to continue strengthening coordination
and information-sharing about military operations with
the parties concerned.

China has also, within its capacity, provided
assistance to the countries in the Gulf of Guinea in
their fight against piracy. We are ready to continue
to strengthen cooperation and coordination with the
countries concerned in order to play a more active and
constructive role in our fight against piracy.

