Mr. Daeie (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): I am honoured to have
the opportunity to address the Security Council in my
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the
world's largest regional security arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. In
doing so, I shall present to the Council the main points
of Serbia's OSCE chairmanship agenda. I shall also
brief members on a number of other issues of critical
importance to peace and security in the Euro-Atlantic
and Eurasian regions.

Serbia's chairmanship of the OSCE comes during
the worst European security crisis since the end of
the Cold War. Mistrust and divisions, confrontational
policies and zero-sum logic are undermining the
cooperative approach to security that is at the heart of
the OSCE's comprehensive body of commitments and
principles.

The OSCE of 2015 is very different from the
OSCE of just two years ago. The crisis in and around
Ukraine continues to dominate security considerations
in Europe as it did in 2014, but its impact is far greater.
Today, the OSCE faces sharpening institutional
divisions, competition and confrontation in a context
of mutually exclusive perceptions, yet the current crisis
has highlighted the enduring strengths and advantages
of the OSCE as the organization best suited to bridge
growing divides and facilitate cooperative solutions.

The OSCE response to the current crisis has
once again demonstrated its relevance to European
security. The Organization has proved itself capable
of substantive engagement under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. The deployment of two OSCE
field missions - the Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, and the Observer Mission at the Russian
Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk - is the most visible
example of the OSCE's ability to launch collective
actions even during a highly divisive crisis.

The OSCE has been continuously engaged in
seeking a diplomatic solution to the current crisis.
Serbia is now doing its utmost to pursue those efforts
in an impartial and transparent manner. Our highest
priority is to protect the inclusive and cooperative
nature of the OSCE's work and to prevent the crisis
from escalating into a larger confrontation. Serbia
recognizes that both the OSCE and European security
are at a critical juncture, and is fully committed to
working with the main stakeholders to restore peace
and stability in Ukraine. We are making every effort to
rebuild confidence and trust among participating States
and to restart our work together towards the vision of a
Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian security community.

I would like to personally acknowledge the
unstinting efforts of the 2014 Swiss OSCE chairmanship,
and of my colleague, Swiss Minister Didier Burkhalter,
to facilitate a political process aimed at de-escalating
the crisis. I would also like to thank Ambassador Heidi
Tagliavini, my Special Representative to Ukraine
and to the Trilateral Contact Group, for her tireless
commitment to helping the parties find the path
towards peace. I also commend the dedicated work of
the Special Monitoring Mission.

Since assuming the chairmanship of the organization
at the beginning of the year, my agenda has been
dominated by the ongoing political crisis and escalating
violence in Ukraine. An increasing number of people
in eastern Ukraine have been impacted by recurring
violence. Waves of civilians have been dislodged from
their homes in a desperate search for safer ground,
accounting for a combined figure of over 1 million
displaced, over 5,000 killed, and more than 12,000
wounded. It is therefore high time for peace to take
hold. The package of measures announced in Minsk
on 12 February is the best available road map to
restore calm to the east of the country. We hope that
the political will displayed by the signatories to the
package of measures in Minsk will prevail in order to
ensure that the guns are silenced and human suffering
is eased.

Ukraine is at a critical juncture; what is needed
is full adherence to the ceasefire to allow for the
implementation of the other elements of the package,
notably the withdrawal of heavy weapons and
equipment. The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission
is ready and willing to play its role to facilitate,
monitor and supervise those crucial activities, in
close coordination with the Trilateral Contact Group.
While the current focus understandably remains on
implementing the military aspects of the second Minsk
agreement, we should not lose sight of the non-military
elements of the arrangement, such as the sorely needed
restoration of socioeconomic ties, local elections and
constitutional reform.

Turning to the humanitarian situation, I wish
to emphasize the importance of coordination and
cooperation between the OSCE and the relevant United
Nations agencies. While the Monitoring Mission is not
a humanitarian presence, it is well placed - given its
large number of monitors in the conflict zone - to
assist in the identification of urgent humanitarian needs.
I welcome the close cooperation between the OSCE
and the United Nations on the ground on humanitarian
issues and the protection of human rights.

Concerning border-related issues, I would like
to highlight the ongoing importance of the OSCE
Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints
Gukovo and Donetsk. Despite the limited scope of its
operations, it remains the only international presence
on the international Ukrainian-Russian border. The
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission will continue to
conduct patrols to locations on the Ukrainian side of
the border, but increased border monitoring activities
will be dependent upon the security situation on the
ground. I sincerely hope that in the weeks and months
to come we can further build on the measures recently
agreed upon in Minsk, with a view to returning peace
to eastern Ukraine. Serbia's chairmanship will continue
to do its utmost to help reach that goal.

We must not overlook the detrimental impact of
the crisis in and around Ukraine on the broader OSCE
agenda, in particular on the protracted conflicts in
Moldova and the Southern Caucasus. In particular, as
we prepare to commemorate the fortieth anniversary
of the Helsinki Final Act this year, we need to find
ways to rebuild trust and confidence and to re-engage
in joint efforts to strengthen security across the whole
OSCE region. We must keep a close eye on the broader
strategic perspective of European security, and we must
continue to uphold our common values and principles
as enshrined in the Helsinki Final Act and other
landmark OSCE documents. I strongly believe that the
OSCE has a crucial role to play in the overall European
security architecture as an inclusive platform for
dialogue, building trust and bridging the growing East-
West divide. That is captured in the motto of Serbia's
chairmanship - "Rebuilding trust and confidence in
order to create a positive agenda for the future" - and
we shall spare no effort in pursuing that goal.

In this regard, I welcome the creation of the Panel
of Eminent Persons on European Security as a Common
Project, which was launched in December at the annual
OSCE Ministerial Council in Basel. I am confident
that the Panel has the potential to generate innovative
ideas that can help us recapture the spirit of Helsinki
and I look forward to its recommendations on how to
replace the current culture of confrontation with one of
cooperation and joint action.

Addressing the protracted conflicts is high on
Serbia's OSCE agenda. All parties should step up their
efforts within the agreed formats to move away from
the current status quo and show more political will
to make progress towards a peaceful settlement. We
believe that small but concrete steps will help improve
trust and confidence among the parties and can pave
the way to address problems effectively.

I am particularly concerned over recent developments
related to Nagorno Karabakh. Last year's three meetings
between the Presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan
were an encouraging indication of a renewed appetite
for dialogue. However, since then we have observed
a sharp deterioration of the situation on the ground
and the political process has slowed. Serbia's OSCE
chairmanship continues to support the efforts of the
Minsk Group co-chairs to facilitate high-level meetings
and to explore, together with the parties, all avenues
that may lead to a long overdue settlement. In Munich
earlier this month, I met with the co-chairs and my
personal representative to discuss further steps to
decrease tensions in the region. On that occasion, I
discussed the situation also with the Foreign Ministers
for Armenia and Azerbaijan. I shall continue my
engagement with the leaders in the region when I visit
them in a few months.

Serbia's chairmanship continues to support the
OSCE's close cooperation with the United Nations
and the European Union in co-chairing the Geneva
international discussions. Our co-facilitation with
the European Union of a Joint Incident Prevention
and Response Mechanism helps us ensure the safety
and security of people living close to South Ossetia's
Administrative Boundary Line. The OSCE continues to
support the swift resumption of the meetings of the Gali
Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism. We are
keeping the possibility of some form of OSCE presence
in Georgia on the agenda to enhance our support for
both the Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism
and the Geneva discussions.

It is unfortunate that the "5+2" process for the
settlement of the Transdniestrian conflict has stalled
in recent months. I intend to try to re-energize the
process. My Special Representative recently visited
Chisinau and Tiraspol precisely for that purpose. The
establishment of the new Government in Moldova will
hopefully also contribute in this regard. Restoring the
regular rhythm of official 5+2 meetings during the
course of the year is the first step. What is needed
now is the political will to move forward and to make
tangible progress. This would benefit the populations
on both sides of the Dniestr/Nistru River.

Some years ago, the Western Balkans was riddled
with conflicts similar in nature. Nowadays, however,
cooperation and the solution of problems by peaceful
means prevail. We have decided to include in our
chairmanship, as a matter of priority, the promotion of
cooperation in the Western Balkans, which is telling
proof that, irrespective of height and entrenchment, the
obstacles on the road to peace can be overcome with
political reason and good will.

The OSCE'S activities in Ukraine and in areas affected
by protracted conflicts underline the fundamental role
of regional organizations in maintaining peace and
security in their respective regions, as envisioned in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
Serbia's chairmanship will continue to pursue the
efforts initiated under the Swiss chairmanship to further
operationalize the role of the OSCE as a Chapter VIII
regional arrangement. The OSCE stands ready to make
its experience available to the High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations. As we speak, the members
of the Panel are visiting Vienna. They will meet with
relevant OSCE interlocutors, including representatives
of the participating States.

The OSCE'S anti-terrorism activities provide
another example of the substantial contribution that
regional organizations acting under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations can make in support of
United Nations-led efforts to fight terrorism. Recent
events have underscored the need for the international
community to remain vigilant andjoin forces in tackling
this deeply troubling phenomenon. I am pleased to
highlight the OSCE'S close collaboration with virtually
all United Nations entities taking part in the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. The benefits of
this kind of collaboration have been plentiful. We are
determined to make the most of all opportunities for
collaboration in the future.

As we know, the OSCE and the United Nations
share common interests in many parts of the OSCE
area. Increased cooperation will enable us to maximize
synergies globally, regionally and locally. At the same
time, we will use existing resources more effectively and
leverage capacities on the ground, like the OSCE field
operations. At the 2014 Ministerial Council in Basel,
OSCE participating States committed themselves to
countering the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters,
as well as kidnapping and hostage-taking for ransom by
terrorist groups. Both ministerial declarations support
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Thanks to its comprehensive approach to security,
the OSCE not only plays an important role in countering
terrorism, but also helps prevent divisions within
societies and to foster tolerance and non-discrimination.
Our chairmanship will devote special attention to
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters and also
to violent extremism and radicalization that lead to
terrorism, particularly the radicalization of youth. We
will convene an OSCE-wide counter-terrorism expert
conference on this issue in Vienna on 30 June and
1 July. The OSCE is well placed to work, through its
participating States and field operations, on promoting
community-based approaches to countering violent
extremism, including through the involvement of youth,
women and civil society. We are also in dialogue on this
issue with our Mediterranean and Asian Partners for
Cooperation.

The partnership between the United Nations
and the OSCE is critical for addressing security
challenges in the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian space.
The OSCE engages in political dialogue, coordination
and information exchange with the United Nations on
thematic and regional issues both at the political and
expert level. All OSCE structures work with a wide
range of United Nations entities to enhance security in
all three dimensions across the OSCE area and in the
adjacent regions. We highly value this close cooperation.
We are eager to make it more operational and results-
oriented through revamped staff talks, targeted staff
exchanges and the pragmatic implementation of the
existing institutional framework.

The OSCE is also committed to creating new
synergies with the United Nations in key regions of
common interest, including Eastern Europe, South-East
Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia and Afghanistan,
as well as the southern Mediterranean. Both OSCE and
United Nations field operations are precious assets,
and their potential for cooperation should be exploited
to the maximum. The OSCE is eager to intensify its
partnership with the United Nations. I hope that we
can turn creative ideas for cooperation into successful
initiatives.

I thank Council members for their attention and I
am ready to answer any questions they may pose.

