Mr. Barnier (France) (spoke in French): Rarely
in its history has the Organization had to confront and
manage so many crises at the same time - managing
them not only simultaneously, but in all their
dimensions and aspects so that we can provide lasting
solutions to them. At the same time, we have been
increasingly capable of anticipating and preventing
new conflicts. That is why, I believe - like all my
colleagues - that your initiative today, Mr. President,
to bring us together around this table is not only timely
but necessary. Why? Because, as everyone knows,
peace-building is a very difficult objective to attain.
Thirty per cent of countries emerging from conflict fall
back into it. In Africa, that proportion is 60 per cent. A
few moments ago, the Secretary-General rightly
recalled that we have had success in Africa and
elsewhere. Such success is encouraging and should
prompt us to continue our discussions and our efforts
to increase the effectiveness of United Nations
interventions.

In reacting to crises, the work of Blue Helmets
remains central. But, to restore confidence, rebuild
institutions, restore economies and - as should be
done everywhere - initiate a democratic electoral
process, we need not only Blue Helmets on the ground,
but also police officers, judges, human rights observers
and public service specialists.

Like many here, I was able, on recent visits to
Haiti and Kosovo, to observe such difficulties on the
ground. And it is my feeling that we must face three
main challenges.

The first challenge is to be able to react on time.
Let us draw a lesson from a crisis that revealed the
international community's inability to act pre-
emptively to prevent its appearance. We therefore need
to discuss our common action and sometimes our
inaction, particularly in the area of development and
human rights protection. Once a crisis has erupted,
civilian actions must be carried out immediately. Why?
First, it is in situations of extreme instability and
uncertainty that, generally speaking, the most serious
violence is committed against civilian populations and
the most serious human rights violations occur, and it
is at such times that crisis exit strategies are prepared.
But, unfortunately - as the Secretary-General noted in
his report on justice and the rule of law - our rapid
reaction capability remain very insufficient when
compared with our military capacities. That lack of
means is compounded by procedural slowness, which
increases the gap between the people's expectations
and concrete actions - a situation that certain groups
may exploit to prolong a state of war.

How can we respond to this? First, we can
reinforce the human resources available to the United
Nations by establishing a pool of jurists, police
officers, judges and human rights experts who can
quickly be made available. That is precisely the
approach that the European Union has chosen, as
Javier Solana has just explained very well.

To political and human crises, I would like to add
those crises caused by natural disasters. It is an idea I
have put forward in other circumstances. In the
European Union, we need a civilian protection force
that can be present as a whole on the ground when
disasters and crises of this kind occur, as they also have
human consequences.

We can respond by thinking about establishing
financial instruments that can be rapidly mobilized.
That way, we can hope to create without delay a
virtuous circle that encompasses civilians. And finally,
we can, of course, respond by increasing funding. In
comparison to the $4 billion budget for peacekeeping
operations for 2004, financing for certain essential
actions - for example, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants and the
establishment of joint tribunals - is quite pathetic.

The second challenge we should underline is that
of coordination. Given the complexity of crises, we
have to act as a team. There is no shortage of actors.
There are United Nations funds and agencies, the
international financial institutions and the regional
organizations. We have seen - and support - the role
played by the African Union, non-governmental
organizations and civilian, military and humanitarian
stakeholders. Progress has been made, but the
coordination among those numerous actors is
inadequate, with the result being too much duplication
and a certain lack of coherence on the ground.

Accordingly, we need to continue to strengthen
the responsibilities of the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and the resident coordinators of the
United Nations Development Programme. Another
practice that would be useful to expand in a pragmatic
way is the creation of ad hoc contact groups consisting
of the countries most concerned and interested in the
settlement of a given crisis. They would help establish
a shared analysis and priorities around which a
coherent strategy for action could be based.

Finally, we hope that the high-level panel
established by the Secretary-General will produce
concrete proposals for the creation of permanent
mechanisms to coordinate among world and regional
institutions, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector.
The third and last challenge is that of an exit
strategy. It is a complex problem. How can we help a
country without creating a long-term dependency on
external assistance? How can we move from an
approach of substitution to one of ownership by the
local people? How can we uproot crisis factors in the
long term? First, we must stress men and women -
human resources, training, education and assistance -
the approach consistently favoured by the European
Union, and we must respect the specific nature of a
situation and the local cultural identity. We must more
thoroughly involve civil society in international
assistance. In that respect, I note the very important
proposal contained in the Cardoso report on civil
society and the United Nations, which we must
carefully study in an open-minded and constructive
manner.

Finally, I underline the linguistic requirements of
peacekeeping operations, particularly for civilian
police. As I myself have seen on the ground, French-
speaking individuals are sorely lacking in Haiti, as well
as in Cote d'Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. France is undertaking to better respond to those
needs. We hope to mobilize potential contributors,
particular among the francophone community, to meet
the appeals made by the Secretary-General.

Crisis management is no longer the preserve of
the Security Council, nor even of the United Nations. It
is the responsibility of the international community as
a whole. Together, we must examine both the pre-
emergency and post-emergency stages of crisis
management. Before an emergency arises is the time
for prevention. After an emergency is the time of
transition. We must move towards an integration of
those stages in our collective action. With its partners
in the European Union and the United Nations, my
country will work towards that goal.

I welcome once again the initiative you have
taken, Mr. President, on this question, which is at once
very political in nature and a very concrete one for our
people.

