Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors for their
presentations today. The United Kingdom is fully
committed to the principle that there must be no
impunity for the most serious international crimes, and
we continue to support the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in their
work in tackling that.

Regarding the ICTY, I would like to welcome
President Agius in his new role and to thank President
Meron for his excellent work for the Tribunal in is
capacity as its President for the past four years. We are
pleased to note that the transition to the Mechanism is
going as planned. We understand the challenges of staff
attrition, but we hope that the ICTY staff will see their
roles through until the end of the Tribunal's mandate.

We are pleased that the trial judgement in the
Mlaa'ic' case is still on track, and we hope that continues
to be the position. It is disappointing that the Karadzie
case completion date has slipped, but we understand
the difficulties and look forward to a judgement in
March. We note the update on the Hadeie case and look
forward to receiving more information on it. We are
disappointed to hear that the date for a judgement in
the Seselj case has slipped to early 2016. We agree with
the Office of the Prosecutor that every effort should
be made to expedite that, and we note the commitment
to a written judgement in the first quarter of 2016.
We understand that it may be a challenge to meet the
projected time frame for the Prlic' appeal, but we hope
that November 2017 date will be met. We are pleased
that the other two outstanding appeals remain on track,
and we are looking forward to a judgement in one of
those next week. We support extending the Judges'
mandates in order to complete the work that remains.

We have also noted the concerns ofthe Office ofthe
Prosecutor about the pace and effectiveness of national
war crimes prosecutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We agree that the Challenges can be overcome, and we
urge the Government to support those efforts. We are
also concerned about the fact that national war crimes
prosecutions in Serbia are at a crucial point, and we
urge the Serbian Government to support those efforts
too. We once again voice our support of the Prosecutor's
call for a search for and exhumation of mass graves, and
the United Kingdom encourages regional Governments
to continue to support those efforts.

We are concerned by the President's letter of
13 October with regard to non-compliance by Serbia
with the Tribunal in relation to three arrest warrants and
orders for surrender. We note the Prosecutor's report
that cooperation is satisfactory in other respects, and
we call on Serbia, and indeed all States, to cooperate
fully with the Tribunal.

Turning to the ICTR, I would like to thank the
Tribunal's judges, prosecutors and staff for their hard
work over the past 21 years in the pursuit of justice
for the victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda. We look forward to the final judgement in the
Butare appeal next week.

Over the past 21 years, there have been some
notable developments and achievements. I should like
to name a few. The judgements recognizing sexual
violence as acts of genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity have significantly contributed to the
development of international criminal law. There was
no legal aid system at the international level when the
Tribunal commenced, and they succeeded in developing
a new system. There are many lessons to be learned
from the ICTR, and we encourage other tribunals to
profit from them and from publications such as their
manual on best practices in the prosecution of sexual
violence in crimes and their manual on tracking and
arresting fugitives. The Tribunal leaves behind a great
legacy.

We welcome the work done on preserving evidence
for use in future trials, and we very much welcome
today's news that one of the fugitives has just been
arrested. We encourage full and prompt cooperation
by all States with the Mechanism and the Rwandan
Government to ensure the arrest of the remaining
fugitives still at large. I think that today's arrest shows
that we must not give up on these continued efforts. We
will ensure accountability, no matter how long it takes.

Finally on the ICTR, we look forward to receiving
the report of the International Organization for
Migration's assessment study on reparations for victims
in due course and the follow-up on that.
Moving on to the Mechanism, we are pleased
with its work in the past 6 months, and indeed since
its commencement. We particularly welcome the news
that progress continues to be made on new permanent
premises in Arusha. We would welcome an update in
due course on the negotiations on The Hague branch
premises. We welcome the fact that the recruitment
of staff is proceeding well and that staff with relevant
experience from the ICTY and ICTR are being drawn
upon. The Council is currently conducting its first
review of the Mechanism's work, and there is good
evidence that the Mechanism is functioning well. It has
a vital role to play in the international criminal justice
system, and we have every confidence that it will carry
out the residual functions appropriately in the future.
In that respect, we would also like to thank Chile
for its leadership of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, both with regard to the review
and in other respects over the past two years.

Let me conclude by thanking the ICTR once
again for its service to international justice over the
past 21 years. I had the honour to attend the closing
ceremony events in Arusha, which were a fitting way
to mark the end of the Tribunals's work. We wish all its
judges, prosecutors and staff well as they move on to
other things.

