Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As usual, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs Mark Lowcock and Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman
just gave us detailed briefings on the humanitarian
and political situation in Syria. Those were the first
briefings to be delivered to the Security Council
following the unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), on 24 February. I take this opportunity to
thank both Under-Secretaries-General, as well as to
acknowledge the willingness of the United Nations and
its partners to send convoys of trucks with the necessary
humanitarian aid and begin medical evacuations as
soon as conditions on the ground allow.

As Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said two
days ago in his statement before the Human Rights
Council, "Security Council resolutions are only
meaningful if they are effectively implemented". The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea hopes resolution 2401
(2018) is meaningful in that way in order to relieve the
affected population of the suffering it has endured,
especially in eastern Ghouta, that is, we hope for it to
be immediately implemented.

We want to reiterate that the Syrian conflict has no
military solution. The opponents therefore must take a
seat at the negotiating table to engage in direct and frank
dialogue, without exclusions, however complicated it
may be to do so. It must be the Syrians who determine
the future they want for their country. The international
community must redouble its efforts in making sure the
opponents engage in negotiations, and the countries
that have influence need to wield it to establish trust,
with the ultimate goal of achieving lasting and just
peace in Syria. We commend the intention expressed by
the largest opposition groups - Jaysh Al-Islam, Faylaq
Al-Rahman and Ahrar Al-Sham - to respect the
ceasefire, and we invite all the other parties involved to
take the same decision.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea believes that
the only reason that the humanitarian situation remains
of concern is because the opponents do not agree
on negotiating to reach a peace agreement, which
consequently causes more civilian victims, leads to
the destruction of hospital facilities and hampers
humanitarian aid operations. The conflict has recently
intensified around the town of eastern Ghouta and
some other parts of Syria, which has resulted in civilian
casualties, the destruction of a considerable number
of medical and relief facilities and the obstruction of
humanitarian relief operations led by the United Nations.

Equatorial Guinea is very touched and horrified by
the critical situation the Syrian people are experiencing,
and we must not show indifference to so much pain and
suffering. It is therefore imperative that the parties to
the conflict implement and uphold the relevant Security
Council resolutions, especially the most recent,
resolution 2401 (2018), including allowing access to
humanitarian aid, halting hostilities and ultimately,
cooperating with the United Nations in its efforts to
assuage the conflict and make humanitarian operations
effective by ensuring aid deliveries reach the affected
populations and evacuating the sick and seriously
injured so that they can receive the necessary medical
care. The international community, while striving to
help Syria, must not forget the neighbouring countries
that have welcomed refugees and shown a spirit of
solidarity worthy of praise.

I would like to conclude my statement by expressing
well-deserved tribute to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and all those who work with
it on the ground for their bravery and determination in
fulfilling their humanitarian mission to deliver aid to
those in need. We encourage them to persist in their
noble efforts.

