Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): First of
all, Madam President, I would like to thank you for
having taken the initiative to organize this open debate
on the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, and to focus it on the
African Union.

This theme, which is of great importance to us,
speaks to the new vision of an Africa that on a daily
basis affirms its ambition to address with courage and
determination the interdependent challenges of peace,
security and development, in a region where the
question of peace and security remains a major
concern.

Our debate today reflects, once again, the need
increasingly felt by the United Nations and the
international community to attach particular
importance to the role that regional organizations can
play in crisis management. It was in this spirit that the
2005 World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1) recognized the capacity of regional
organizations to contribute to United Nations efforts in
the maintenance of peace and security and called for
greater involvement by them in the work of the
Security Council. In that way, the Council recognizes
that owing to their proximity to areas of conflict, those
organizations can usefully and effectively contribute to
stabilizing a situation. Depending on their geographical
location, in Europe, South-East Asia or Africa, regional
organizations are engaged in different ways in
maintaining peace, and their involvement should be a
focus of our attention.

Africa continues to experiment and improve the
tools and the channels for conflict prevention,
management and settlement on the continent. Thus, to
take up these challenges, eminent African leaders have
often engaged in efforts at mediation, conciliation and
good offices, all in the interest of preventive
diplomacy.

Thus, it is not surprising that African leaders have
used either the good offices of the President of the
African Union or mediation conducted by a designated
individual. This also requires intensified cooperation
with the international community. Mindful of that
requirement, the African Union has chosen to
harmonize its action with that of the United Nations,
within a beneficial partnership that has enabled us
together to manage quite a few African crises.

That is the thrust of the appeal made by African
leaders during the most recent African Union Summit,
held in Addis Ababa, for close cooperation, within the
framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter, between the
United Nations and African Union, in order to
strengthen and improve peacekeeping operations
deployed by the African Union.

Similarly, during its 69th meeting, held on
19 January 2007, the African Union Peace and Security
Council emphasized, among other things, the essential
role that must be played by the countries in the region,
whose efforts seek to promote sustainable peace and
reconciliation.

The co-management of the situations in Darfur,
Cote d'Ivoire and Somalia is a major development in
the Council's approach to the settlement of conflicts
that threaten international peace and security. Of great
significance, and symbolic of this trend, the sending of
joint missions and the development of a hybrid
operation plan for Darfur represent a partnership
formula that we very much hope to see implemented.

In order to consolidate gains and to maintain
more reassuring prospects, we must continue tirelessly
to promote this new pragmatic approach, which is
consistent with the spirit and the letter of Chapter VIII
of the Charter, but which up to now has had only

limited impact in the practice of the Security Council.
The African Union, through subregional organizations
such as the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Southern African
Development Community, has shown an active
commitment to the prevention and resolution of
conflicts.

This type of effort, to be effective and to produce
lasting results, must be sustained. First of all, we need
to make greater use of institutional and legal
mechanisms established to promote a partnership based
on complementarity and on comparative advantage.
Here, I would refer to the memorandum of
understanding between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, the signing
of which in Addis Ababa on 16 November 2006 has
made it possible to lay the foundation for expedited
formalization of cooperation mechanisms between the
two bodies. The two organizations now have a
framework for dynamic and useful cooperation for the
joint management of crisis situations.

I would also like to mention the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union,
the development of which is proof of the commitment
of heads of State or Government at the 2005 World
Summit to take into consideration the specific
capacity-building needs of Africa in the area of
peacekeeping.

In the spirit of the letter dated 10 December 2005
from the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission addressed to the Secretary-General
regarding the priorities of the African Union in the
context of a new partnership with the United Nations,
implementation of that Programme must be
strengthened, especially in essential areas such as the
planning and management of operations, the training of
civilian, military and police personnel, logistical
support and financial assistance. That should be done
in order to take account of the constraints on the action
of a regional organization that is engaged in a bold
policy of crisis management but with limited means.

Then, based on the June 2006 report of the
Secretary-General, published as document A/60/891,
and the recommendations of resolution 1625 (2005) of
14 September 2005, we need more coherence in our
common action, by implementing a comprehensive
conflict prevention strategy. That is the purpose of the

Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa, currently chaired by the Congo.
This work is being carried out in the spirit of the 2005
World Summit Outcome.

Indeed, much remains to be done in the area of
prevention. The action of the Security Council has too
often been to intervene once conflict has already
broken out, although it is generally recognized that the
cost of prevention is far less than the cost of repeated
peacekeeping operations.

Finally, I would like to emphasize the need to
establish an institutional relationship between the
United Nations Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. In this respect,
the mission to Addis Ababa undertaken last year by the
Security Council is an encouraging sign, should be
followed by others and should give rise to a regular
cooperation framework.

To conclude, I would like to stress the advantages
to be derived from cooperation between the United
Nations and the regional organizations for the
maintenance of peace and security in order to ensure
greater complementarity, coherence and effectiveness
in a partnership we consider indispensable. My
delegation lends its full support to the draft presidential
statement presented by South Africa.

