Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and for your
kind words about our stewardship last month. We very
much look forward to working with you.

The United States welcomes today's adoption of
resolution 2046 (2012), which underscores the Security
Council's strong and unanimous support for the road
map for peace between the Sudan and South Sudan, as
laid out by the African Union Peace and Security
Council.

The current conflict between the Sudan and South
Sudan is on the verge becoming a full-scale and
sustained war. It poses a clear and present threat to
international peace and security. Both countries are on
the brink of returning to the horrors of the past and
threaten to take the entire region with them. To avoid
untold devastation and suffering, the fighting must
stop, and stop now.

This conflict did not begin last week, last month,
or even last year. The tensions underlying this conflict
have long roots, most recently in the unresolved issues
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

For months, the Security Council, the African
Union, my Government and many others in the
international community have sent strong warnings to
the parties that they must resolve these issues
peacefully. To date, the parties have both failed to do
so. In the history of this conflict, there has been a long
litany of promises made and promises broken, so as
this resolution indicates, we will judge the parties by
their actions, not simply their words. With this vote,
the Council has clearly imposed tight deadlines for
concrete action, in line with the African Union
decision.

This Council, especially those members with
particular influence, including my own, must continue
to press both parties to implement the African Union
road map by ending hostilities, ceasing cross-border
attacks and movements, halting aerial bombardments,
withdrawing all their forces from the border areas,
including Abyei, activating the necessary border
security mechanisms, and ending support to rebel
groups working against the other State. It is also
essential that both parties return at once to the
negotiating table under the auspices of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel to reach
agreement on critical outstanding issues.
12-32731
We support the plans of the African Union to
travel to Khartoum and Juba in the coming days to
begin the process. This is ultimately the only way that
further conflict can be avoided. If the parties fail to
take these steps promptly, the Council is united in its
determination to hold both sides accountable. We stand
ready to impose Chapter VII sanctions on either or
both parties, as necessary.

Resolution 2046 (2012) also directs the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North to return to the
negotiating table to resolve the outstanding political
and security issues that are substantially fuelling the
current conflict, and it strongly urges the Government
of the Sudan to accept the tripartite proposal and
immediately allow urgently needed humanitarian
access to all the affected areas of Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile states. If they do not, untold thousands
more will die needlessly.

The United States welcomes the stated
commitment of South Sudan to honour the road map of
the African Union and to abide by the decisions of the
Security Council. We welcome its announced intention
and determination to pull its police forces out of Abyei.
The Government of the Sudan should clarify its
statement of today to indicate its acceptance of the
African Union road map and without conditions.

The reports of the Sudan's continued deadly
bombing campaign against South Sudan, documented
again first hand on the front page of today's
Washington Post, are deeply alarming and profoundly
disturbing, especially following South Sudan's recent
steps towards peace. The Government of the Sudan
must immediately halt cross-border attacks,
particularly the aerial bombardments that have killed
scores of civilians. Equally, South Sudan should refrain
from any retaliation, especially any additional cross-
border attacks. The occupation of Heglig was illegal
and unacceptable and must not be repeated.

Finally, the United States calls upon both parties
to implement fully and without delay all elements of
the African Union Peace and Security Council
communique, starting with an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire. If either or both parties fail to
do so, the Council stands ready to act and to impose
consequences.

