Mr. Martin: Last Friday and Saturday, Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon visited Nepal. He had hoped to
open this briefing personally, but the Council well
understands the urgent reasons for the travel that
prevents him from doing so.

In addressing members of the Constituent
Assembly, the election of which represents the central
achievement to date of the peace process and which
bears the crucial responsibility of drafting a federal
constitution for the new republic, the Secretary-
General offered congratulations on the historic
transformation the country has undergone. He said that
the Assembly was the most inclusive legislative body
in the country's history and proof of remarkable
progress driven by the people of Nepal. He said that
the political transformation must go hand in hand with
social and economic transformation. Steady progress in
the peace process will ensure international support.

When I last briefed the Council, the political
parties were divided over the election of the first
President of the republic. The report before the Council
(S/2008/670) describes the process by which the
Constituent Assembly, which also acts as the
Legislature-Parliament, elected a President, a Vice-
President and a Prime Minister and the long
negotiations that led to the formation of a coalition
Government, led by the Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) (CPN (M)) as the largest party and
comprising two others of the four largest parties, but
with the Nepali Congress remaining in opposition.

Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal "Prachanda"
describes the three priorities of the Government he
heads as: completing the peace process; ensuring the
drafting of the new constitution; and achieving rapid
economic progress. In each of those, it faces major
challenges. The mandate of the United Nations Mission
in Nepal (UNMIN), as extended by the Council for a
further six months in July (see resolution 1825 (2008)),
relates directly only to a key aspect of the first
challenge, that of completing the peace process, with
particular reference to the management of arms and
armies.

In briefing the Council on 18 July (see S/PV.5938), I was frank in expressing concern about
how rapidly the new Government would be able to
08-59080
move forward in implementing the agreement reached
among political parties on 25 June regarding the
completion of the peace process. That, I said, would
depend greatly on the degree of multiparty cooperation
that survived the disagreements at that time over the
sharing of posts. I regret to say that that concern is
proving to be well founded, and the political actors are
not finding it easy to move forward together.

The foremost outstanding issue of the peace
process, in addition to the drafting of the new
constitution, is the transition from the current
temporary arrangements for monitoring the
management of arms and armies, which have now been
in existence for almost two years, to decisions
regarding the future of the Maoist army combatants.
Their integration and rehabilitation were to have been
completed within six months of the formation of the
new Government, more or less coinciding with the
additional six months for which a continuing presence
of UNMIN was requested. The key requirement for
resolving that issue is the effective functioning of the
special committee responsible for the supervision,
integration and rehabilitation of the former Maoist
combatants, prescribed by the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and enshrined in article 146 of the interim
constitution.

That committee was first established in mid-2007
by the Nepali Congress-led Government, but met only
once. In the 25 June agreement, the parties
recommitted themselves to proceeding by way of that
committee and further defined how it should go about
its task. They also agreed that it should not be confined
to the parties forming the coalition Government, but
should comprise major parties represented in the
Constituent Assembly, thus obviously including the
Nepali Congress.

The Secretary-General, UNMIN and concerned
Member States have all urged the early establishment
of the special committee. On 28 October, the
Government announced its establishment, which was
welcomed by the Secretary-General during his visit.
However, the Nepali Congress has so far refused to
name a representative to the committee, maintaining
that consultation regarding its establishment was
inadequate and objecting to the composition and terms
of reference announced by the Government.
Meanwhile, parties other than the four largest parties
are claiming representation. Negotiations are currently
taking place to try to resolve those issues.
08-59080

I trust that those negotiations will soon be
successful, but the task of the special committee, once
it begins to function, will not be an easy one. Widely
differing views have been expressed among parties,
and sometimes within them, regarding the extent to
which Maoist army combatants should or should not be
integrated into the State army, and in what manner.
Views inside the Maoist party and army, including
about whether to argue for integration on a group or
individual basis, are to be debated in a major national
gathering of their cadres in late November.

On the other hand, the Madhesi parties are
particularly concerned to see the implementation of the
commitment to increase Madhesi representation in the
Nepal Army. The CPN (M) is concerned not only about
the future of its own combatants, but also about
pursuing the parallel commitment in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement to the
democratization of the Nepal Army, including
determining its appropriate size, training the army in
the values of democracy and human rights, ensuring its
democratic structure and building its national and
inclusive character. Integration of Maoist combatants is
raising the issue of the exclusion of those responsible
for violations of human rights and humanitarian law.
That, in turn, will draw attention to the failure of the
State security forces to take effective action against
those within their ranks responsible for such violations,
which continues to be a major concern of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in Nepal.

As yet, the debate regarding those issues has been
little informed by consideration of international
experience, but the proposed terms of reference of the
special committee envisage that it would invite input
from Government security agencies, Maoist
combatants, UNMIN and other security experts, as
required, and would be supported by a technical
committee with the involvement of relevant experts.

The functioning of the special committee is also
essential to UNMIN's objective of simplifying its
monitoring responsibilities and further reducing its
number of arms monitors, as the committee will
become responsible for the supervision of the Maoist
army while the nature of integration and rehabilitation
is being decided.

However, the discharge from the Maoist army
cantonments of some 4,000 personnel disqualified by
3

UNMIN's verification, because they were under 18
years of age in May 2006 or recruited after that date, is
not dependent on the special committee and is long
overdue. Ever since verification was completed, early
this year, the United Nations has called repeatedly for
discharge without delay and has offered to assist with
the reintegration of those involved. In recent weeks,
senior Maoist army commanders have been holding
meetings at the cantonments to prepare the ground for
discharge, and the new Minister of Peace and
Reconstruction has engaged UNMIN and United
Nations agencies regarding his proposals for
supporting their orderly reintegration and his intention
to formally request United Nations assistance. During
his visit, the Secretary-General called on the
Government to move quickly on the discharge, and that
same call has been made, as regards minors, by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, who expects to visit
Nepal in early December.

I have dwelt on those matters because they are at
the core of UNMIN's remaining responsibility and
because of the desire we share with the Council to
bring UNMIN'S mandate to completion as soon as
possible. The Secretary-General wishes to draw down
further and close the Mission, in a manner that does not
jeopardize the peace process, but ensures continuing
international support to consolidating peace in Nepal.
In meetings with the Secretary-General in late
September, during the General Assembly, and a week
ago in Kathmandu, Prime Minister "Prachanda"
expressed his View that the UNMIN presence at the
cantonments would remain necessary pending
integration and rehabilitation, and that UNMIN should
coordinate international advice and support to that
process. The realistic timetable for that process will be
for the special committee to consider once it begins
functioning, but even under the most optimistic
assumptions it cannot now be expected to end by
January, within the current mandate of UNMIN.

The Secretary-General asked that if a further
extension is to be requested by the Government, that
request should be made as soon as possible, so that he
could put it to the Council. We envisage that any
recommendation to the Council in response to such a
request would be for a substantially smaller presence.
But I am sure that members of the Council will agree
with the observation in the report of the Secretary-
General that experience in various countries has
demonstrated the dangers of failing to address
successfully the issue of former combatants and the
risks that that can pose to durable stability. That key
aspect of the completion of the peace process and the
need for cooperation among Nepal's political parties
must be seen in the wider context of the
implementation of commitments.

Past reports of the Secretary-General and my
briefings have noted the weak implementation of peace
process commitments during the interim Government,
prior to the Constituent Assembly election. The
25 June agreement reiterated many of those
commitments, as have statements by ministers of the
new Government. But commissions provided for in the
agreements are yet to be formed, and commitments to
compensation for victims of the conflict, to
investigations into the fate of those who disappeared,
to the return of displaced persons and of property
seized during the conflict and to ensuring that the
youth groups of political parties remain within the law
need to move beyond rhetoric into practical measures
to put them into effect. The Madhesi parties also
demand the fulfilment of pledges made to them for
greater inclusion.

While fully respecting that the process has always
been and remains Nepali-driven, the United Nations,
through United Nations agencies as well as UNMIN,
has repeatedly offered its support in the
implementation of peace process commitments and is
continuing to do so. The United Nations Development
Programme is providing major assistance to the
process of constitution-making, and the $10 million
made available by the Secretary-General from the
Peacebuilding Fund is being programmed to support
key areas of peace support.

In his report, the Secretary-General notes
positively the commitment of the Nepali Congress to
cooperation in the drafting of the new constitution and
completion of the peace process, as well as the
commitments of the Maoist-led Government to
multiparty democracy and the protection and
promotion of human rights. Those too are
commitments which need to be fully reflected in
practice.

In his public remarks in Nepal, the Secretary-
General expressed his confidence that the parties could
minimize potential rifts through dialogue and
compromise. He called on all parties in the coalition
08-59080

Government to maintain cohesion, while continuing to
work with parties outside the Government in a spirit of
cooperation, and he hoped that the Nepali Congress
would continue participating in key decisions. He
stressed that the parties are accountable to the Nepali
people in helping to complete and consolidate peace.
Such cooperation is essential not only for addressing
the difficult issue of arms and armies and for
completing the peace process, and not only for
reaching sufficient consensus on a federal constitution,
but also for the economic development essential to
consolidating peace.

Nepal urgently needs effective local as well as
national governance. The new Government has
ambitious plans for better access to education, to health
care and to employment opportunities for young
people. It is appealing for increased levels of
international assistance to support those plans. The
United Nations country team is preparing to play its
part. Our aim is the earliest possible completion of
UNMIN's mandate, but also the sustained and
intensified support of the United Nations system and
the international community to the peace, development
and change which the people of Nepal have demanded.

