Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I too would like to begin by expressing
our heartfelt congratulations to you and your team on
your leadership of the work of the Security Council this

month, which theoretically - well, not theoretically, as
February is in fact the shortest calendar month of the
year 4 could mean less work, but the intensity of the
work has in no way diminished, and your delegation
has been in continuous motion and provided very
able leadership.

The month of February has also brought us an
absence, in the form of the death of our colleague
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. This event affected us all,
and once again we wish to reiterate our condolences
to his family and to the Government of the Russian
Federation, as well as to our colleagues at the
Russian Mission.

In February, the Council has adopted a number
of resolutions, on terrorist attacks against critical
infrastructure (resolution 2341 (2017)), the renewal of the
mandates ofthe UnitedNations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (resolution 2343 (2017)) and
of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (resolution 2340 (2017)), and on the 2140 (2014) Committee's sanctions
on Yemen (resolution 2342 (2017)). We also adopted a
presidential statement on Somalia in the wake of that
country's elections (S/PRST/2017/3). We have adopted
a number of press statements and, as has unfortunately
been the trend at to date, some of them have been in
response to terrorist attacks.
With regard to Security Council meetings, I do
not want to talk about each meeting but would like to
refer to several, particularly those that were not public
and to which the general membership did not have
access. I will of course respect the confidential nature
of consultations.

I would like to begin by mentioning a consultation
that took place on 3 Februay in which the Secretary-
General participated in person and discussed his
participations at the African Union summit. We thank
the Secretary-General for sharing first-hand with
Council members the details ofhis busy agenda in Addis
Ababa. That was the first time that I participated in the
Council, and it was a very open initiative in which the
Secretary-General gave a very comprehensive overview
not only on the meeting that he held in Addis Ababa
but also on the political context of the situation in the
region. It was extremely useful to have that exchange
with him and exhange views.

The Council also discussed a number of issues
under the agenda item of "Any other business". Uruguay
called for one of those meetings on the United Nations

Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara. As a
troop-contributing country, Uruguay places a very high
importance on respect by the parties of Security Council
mandates, as well as with with regard to documents
that have been signed with Secretariat. Unilateral
measures not only affect peacekeeping operations and
set a dangerous precedent for the peacekeeping system,
but they can they can also create risks to international
peace and security.

I would be remiss if I did not mention the
questions that the Security Council received from the
membership in response to Ukraine's initiative to hold
the wrap-up session. My response will not cover all of
the questions, but I will attempt to comment on several
of them in connection with the code of conduct of the
Accountability, Coherence, and Transparency Group
with regard to genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. I do not recall the code as having
been invoked as an instrument for addressing specific
situations. What I can affirm is that those of us who
signed that code must act in concert and in a spirit
of shared responsibility to prevent and combat such
serious crimes from occurring.

In the case of South Sudan, the Council is seeking
to achieve results, but as we know, in some respects it
is united and in another it is not. An example of that
was the draft resolution of an arms embargo on South
Sudan in December that could not be adopted and that
Uruguay, moreover, supported.

In response to a question that was asked by a
non-member of the Security Council concerning
working methods, I reiterate the idea that the briefing-
consultations format provides us all - members and
non-members of the Security Council - with the
opportunity to achieve greater transparency through
using the meeting to read out statements made in a
national capacity publicly and to save consultations for
more sensitive issues within a more interactive dynamic.

However, with regard to consultations and the
agenda item of "Any other business", I would like to
mention the issue of documentation. It is crucial to have
as much information as possible from the Secretariat
during those closed meetings, including illustrative
documents, such as detailed maps, when we discuss the
situation in a particular region.

It is also necessary for the members of the Council
to be able to obtain from the Secretariat the required
documentation before those meetings so that members
can fully acquaint themselves with the issues at and
make the appropriate decisions. It therefore is totally
unacceptable for the Secretariat to deny access to
documentation that is indispensable for Council
members to be able to take a position and the necessary
actions in order to fulfil their commitments. That is an
extremely delicate issue, and in my View needs to be
carefully considered by the Council.

