Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank you
so much, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting
and for all the work you and your team have done to
shine a light on how children are faring around the
world in your time on the Security Council.

I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and
for consistently giving the issue of children in armed
conflict the attention it so clearly deserves. We are
grateful to Special Representative Zerrougui and her
team for their determined efforts to bring to light the
plight of affected children. We also thank UNICEF
Executive Director Lake for his lifelong dedication to
supporting and protecting children. I also want to single
out for thanks the diverse range of ambassadors and
other diplomats who have turned out today. I think this
turnout reflects how important the broader membership
of the United Nations deems this issue.

Letmebeginwithwhat shouldbeanon-controversial
point, which is that two decades after Graca Machel's
groundbreaking report (see A/51/306) highlighted the
disproportionate and devastating impact of armed
conflict on children, the Secretary-General's annual
report continues to be a valuable tool for documenting
abuses and for identifying those responsible.

The Security Council's mandate on children and
armed conflict, which includes monitoring, reporting
and listing of parties for violations, is crucial and
must be maintained. The monitoring and reporting
mechanism must play a central role in this process,
including subjecting incoming reports to what needs to
be a transparent, independent, impartial and thorough
review. Yet to continue to be effective, adequate measures
must be put in place to ensure sound methodology and
to protect sources. The methodological approach needs
to be continually strengthened to meet the highest
standards, and victims. United Nations agencies and
others must be able to provide information without fear
of their identity being revealed or fear of reprisals.

Member States, all of us, have a responsibility to
cooperate with the Secretary-General's reporting on
this issue. We do not expect Governments to agree with
everything in the Secretary-General's report. In fact,
we encourage Member States to engage with the United
Nations early and often and to challenge findings they
deem inaccurate or unjustified, as well as to present
evidence to support their views. That means Member
States and the United Nations working together in good
faith to share information and to address concerns,
ascertain the facts and look for ways to improve. Even
if we Governments do not ultimately agree with certain
United Nations findings or conclusions, we must
maintain support for the United Nations, such a vital
organization that is aiming, as we have heard today, to
help children everywhere.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2016/360)
provides a bleak yet unsurprising picture of the
human rights violations committed against children in
conflicts, many of which are actually worsening. The
examples are myriad. In Yemen, the United Nations
verified a five-fold increase in the number of children
recruited during 2015, and a six-fold increase in the
number of children killed and maimed during 2015, as
compared to the previous year. In Afghanistan, 2015
saw the highest number of child casualties since the
United Nations began systematically documenting
them in 2009, with an average of more than 50 kids
killed or injured every week.

In Syria, the Secretary-General's report highlighted
the massive recruitment of children by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), including child foreign
fighters as young as 7 years old. Seven - that is the
age of my son, who is about to start the second grade.
The report also documents the detention, and in some
instances the torture, of children by the Al-Assad
regime. For a sense of the horrors children are enduring
in real time, just look at the Al-Assad regime's current
siege of Aleppo. Of the 300,000 civilians trapped
in the city, an estimated 100,000 are children, the
overwhelming majority of whom do not have clean
water to drink. When kids hear the sound of a helicopter
or fighterjet overhead, one medical worker said, "They
start screaming, hugging you and crying." It is not hard
to understand why.

A non-governmental organization that runs an
ambulance network said that approximately one third of
the casualties in Aleppo are children. One relief worker
described arriving at the scene of an air strike to help
dig through rubble for survivors and seeing a small boy,
who could not have been older than 10 years, walking
towards him. The boy was holding his amputated left

arm in his right hand and shouting, "Sir, please put my
arm back." Wounded children like that little boy arrive
at the few hospitals that are still standing only to find
there are no doctors or nurses to treat them because they
are so overwhelmed by patients. Or they find medical
professionals who cannot help them because they lack
basic equipment or have run out of medicine due to the
Siege.

Often, as we all know, hospitals themselves are
bombed. On 23 July, a paediatric hospital in Aleppo
was hit by air strikes, not once but twice in a single
night. The second blast shut down the oxygen supply
to the room where newborns were being held, forcing
the staff to evacuate the babies to a bomb shelter in
the basement. An infant who had been alive for just
two days reportedly died when he was taken from the
room 4 a 2-day-old infant. This is the world that the
children in Aleppo and so many other Syrian cities and
towns are growing up in day after day. For children
younger than 5 years old, it is all they have ever known.

So once again, we call on the Al-Assad regime
to lift its deadly siege of all the other Syrian cities
and towns where it is using these barbaric starve-or-
surrender tactics 4 or perhaps more accurately:
starve, get bombed or surrender. In Aleppo, the
regime and allied militias must immediately allow
all non-military traffic, including humanitarian and
commercial suppliers, to move along Castello Road in
order to address the tremendous needs exacerbated by
the deadly siege. We also call on Russia to stop its air
strikes on civilian targets, as well as to halt its support
for the regime's encirclement of the city.

In addition to protecting children in conflict, we
must address the mass displacement of children caused
by conflict. As we all know, at the end of 2015 more
than 65 million people were displaced worldwide,
and more than half were children. Not only are more
children displaced than at any time since the Second
World War, but - and it is worth pausing on this - it is
increasingly common for kids uprooted by war to spend
their entire childhoods as refugees. Yet the world is not
doing nearly enough to provide for child refugees - or
for refugees in general, for that matter.

To help address this problem, President Obama
is convening a refugee summit in September on
the margins of the General Assembly to try to get
Member States to take on more of their share. Together
with Canada, Ethiopia, Germany, Jordan, Mexico
and Sweden, we are asking Governments to make
a deeper commitment to funding United Nations
and humanitarian organizations and appeals and to
welcome more refugees into their countries. And we
are asking front-line countries, which are already doing
way more than their fair share, to take additional steps
to facilitate refugee education and employment. To that
end, we hope that all members of the Council that have
not yet made new commitments will send word back
to their capitals about the need to step up. The lives of
millions of children depend on it.

Let me conclude by saying that in June I travelled
to Germany, where had the opportunity to meet with
thousands of refugees. One was a l6-year-old Syrian
girl named Nujeen Mustafa, who has cerebral palsy and
relies on a wheelchair to get around. Nujeen and her
family used to live in Kobani, which was taken over by
ISIL in 2014. When ISIL arrived, Nujeen told me that
one of two fates awaited her. Either she would be killed
for being a Kurd or she would be thrown into a mental
institution, because that is how ISIL treats people with
disabilities. So, together with her older sister, Nujeen
fled, first across northern Syria and Turkey and then
Greece, Croatia and Slovenia. She travelled by train,
taxi, inflatable dinghy and on her own two wheels
before arriving in Germany, where she was reunited
with her older brother.

When we met, Nujeen told me that if one thing
made her sad, it was that people found her optimism
so rare. When did being positive become so unusual,
she asked. But Nujeen also recognize how exceedingly
fortunate she was to have made it out of Syria and to
have survived her journey in her wheelchair. People are
dying every day for a normal daily routine, she told me,
for the chance to get up and brush their teeth in the
morning and go to school. It can be easy to forget that
for millions of children living in conflicts around the
world, that simple routine is a dream, a routine every
kid deserves, something countless children would risk
their lives for. No child should be put in that position.
We must do everything we can to ensure that they do
not end up in that position.

