Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish to
begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption
of the Council's presidency for this month. I am
confident that you will lead the Council with your
well-known wisdom and ability. I also extend my
appreciation to your predecessor.

Allow me also to thank Ambassador Oshima for
his informative briefing on the recent mission to
Afghanistan. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and to his Special Representative, Mr. Tom Koenigs, as
well as to their colleagues in UNAMA, for their
tireless efforts and dedication. We continue to
underline the central role of the United Nations.

The recent Security Council mission visited
Afghanistan at a crucial juncture, at a time when, on
the one hand, the Afghan people have many reasons to
be satisfied with their accomplishments, while, on the
other, a number of grave challenges have tempered
their legitimate hopes with signs of disillusionment.

It is indeed imperative to emphasize in words and
in deeds the continued commitment of the international

community to support the Government and people of
Afghanistan and the Afghanistan Compact, under
Afghan ownership and leadership, which remains the
central and strategic framework for cooperation
between the Afghan Government and the international
community.

As rightly mentioned in the reports of the mission
and of the Secretary-General, in the past several years,
Afghans have undertaken significant efforts, with the
support of the international community, towards the
development and stability of Afghanistan. These
achievements are grounds for hope and optimism. As
these reports indicate, the major achievements of the
Afghans in the past several years include the
establishment of democratic institutions, economic
growth, per capita income increase, trade and
investment expansion - principally with regional
partners, including Iran - significant infrastructure
projects, and successful national programmes in the
fields of education, health and rural development,
along with the development of new Afghan security
institutions.

However, it is unfortunate that, despite all these
positive and encouraging developments, the Afghan
people are still facing grave and daunting challenges in
their endeavours towards stability, security and
development. The security situation, as mentioned in
the reports, has, in general, remained precarious
throughout the country, with the increasing threat of
suicide attacks and other forms of terrorism, posed
mostly by the Taliban and Al-Qaida. We agree with the
finding of the mission that the spread of insurgent and
terrorist activity by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups, linked with the illegal drug trade and
coupled with other menaces such as corruption,
collectively disrupt rehabilitation and reconstruction
work in Afghanistan, thus posing a grave threat to
reconstruction and nation-building.

We strongly condemn the terrorist acts
perpetrated in Afghanistan and remain steadfast in our
unwavering support for the Afghan people and
Government in their efforts to achieve development
and security.

In the meantime, we believe that in combating
terrorism and insecurity in Afghanistan, any action,
including contacts and talks with terrorists who are
responsible for insecurity and mayhem, that could be
wrongly interpreted as rewarding terrorists and
criminals should be avoided.

We support the report's conclusion that
establishing a strong and sustainable Afghan National
Army is of vital importance in effectively addressing
the surge in terrorist activities and violence in certain
parts of Afghanistan. In this regard, it is imperative to
redouble the efforts to establish a trusted and effective
Afghan National Police throughout the country and to
address the inadequate and belated efforts to develop
the Afghan National Army.

As a neighbouring country, the Islamic Republic
of Iran is extremely concerned over the increase in
poppy cultivation and opium production in
Afghanistan, which according to various findings has
increased from 180 tons in 2001 to 6,100 tons this year,
representing more than 60 per cent of Afghanistan's
gross domestic product. We concur with the mission's
interlocutors, who have identified Afghanistan's
flourishing narco-economy as a primary threat to the
stability of the country and as a cancer that is fast
becoming the number one problem in Afghanistan and
the wider region.

To effectively address this menace, greater efforts
and resolute actions on the part of both Afghanistan
and the wider international community are
unquestionably needed. We share the View that a more
robust campaign against drug traffickers, the
elimination of illicit poppy cultivation, demand
reduction, crop substitution, the strengthening of law
enforcement, promoting and diversifying lawful
livelihoods and stepping up Government activities to
arrest and prosecute major drug traffickers, regardless
of their position or status, and proceeding with the
energetic implementation of all elements of the
National Drug Control Strategy are Vital and
indispensable if this menace is to be contained, let
alone eradicated.

For its part, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
fought a costly war against heavily armed drug
traffickers and is resolute in its continued fight against
that menace. Meanwhile, for Iran to sustain its ongoing
fight against drug trafficking, international support,
especially the cooperation of neighbouring countries, is
essential.

Given the importance of regional cooperation to
help the Afghans cope with growing insecurity, we
look with hope to a number of positive steps taken in

the past several months with a view to enhancing
cooperation between Afghanistan and its neighbours in
more rigorously addressing the insecurity and terrorist
threats in the south, south-east and east of Afghanistan.
In this context, my Government has always been at the
forefront of efforts to support a regional dialogue to
combat terrorism, extremism and traffic in drugs. We
have also actively promoted regional cooperation for
the reconstruction of Afghanistan, as well as
cooperation on refugee issues.

We continue to have an enormous stake in the
success of the Afghan people and thus have extended
our unreserved cooperation to them and their
representatives throughout the process. Of
$560 million worth of reconstruction assistance
for Afghanistan pledged by Iran at the Tokyo
Conference - which is the highest pledge in terms of
per capita income of donor countries - we have thus
far spent $270 million on mutually agreed projects in
the areas of infrastructure, technical and educational
services and financial and in-kind assistance.

During his latest visit to Iran last May, President
Karzai, heading nine cabinet ministers and several
provincial governors, conferred with Iranian authorities
and discussed the expansion of relations in areas of
mutual interest. During the Visit, seven agreements and
memorandums of understanding on exchange of
prisoners, extradition of criminals, promotion of
investment and construction of the Khwaf-Herat
railway, as well as cooperation in cultural, judicial and
economic fields, were signed.

The people and Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran have warmly hosted 3 million Afghan
refugees for about three decades, incurring huge costs
in the process. Now that Afghanistan has entered a new
phase of its history, we expect more cooperation on the
part of the international community and the Afghan
Government in the process of voluntary repatriation of
refugees. Despite the commendable actions taken in the
past several years, progress has yet to reach a
satisfactory level. We had expected the Security
Council mission to address the important issue of
refugees and their return in a more serious manner
during its visit and in its report.

