Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I wish to
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia, for his very
informative briefing. Over recent months, significant
opportunities for consolidating regional peace and
stability have emerged, including through the holding
of peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan,
under the auspices of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, and the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups,
facilitated by the African Union-led African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation.

Against this positive backdrop, threats posed by
armed groups, rising tensions between the signatories
of the agreements and human rights abuses, as well
as violations of international humanitarian law and
further displacement of people, continue to impact
countries of the Great Lakes region. In that regard,
Poland believes that countering illegal cross-border
activities has to be an integral part of responding to
challenges in the region. It is an essential precondition
for the limitation of the activities of armed groups and
successful submission of combatants to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.

We therefore welcome ongoing efforts to strengthen
regional security cooperation mechanisms, notably the
expanded Joint Verification Mechanism and the Follow-
up Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces.

Poland remains deeply concerned over persistent
challenges to the exercise of basic political freedoms
and human rights in parts of the Great Lakes region.
We therefore call on Governments to uphold their
respective commitments, notably those under the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance, and to create the conditions necessary for
the voices of all stakeholders to be heard in local and
national decision-making processes.

We likewise recognize the important and vital role
of women in efforts to maintain and promote peace
and security in the region. In this regard, we welcome
the role play by the Advisory Board of the Women's
Platform for the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. At the same time, we call on all national and
regional stakeholders to implement the regional action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
notably by achieving the agreed quota for women's
representation in peace and political processes by 2020.

Poland considers the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region to be an essential mechanism
for achieving peace and security in the region. We
therefore call on all signatories promptly and in good
faith to fulfil their respective commitments under the
relevant agreement. We thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General and his team for their tireless
support to the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework.

