Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): The draft
resolution before us today demands an immediate
cessation of the hostilities and urgent resumption of
negotiations. What has the entire international community
been doing since the beginning of the humanitarian crisis
in Kosovo if not negotiating urgently and actively in
order to avert this escalation? We dispatched many
diplomatic missions and special envoys to Belgrade, under
the auspices of the United Nations, of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization and of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe. We also engaged on many
occasions in bilateral initiatives aimed at convincing
President Milosevic of the seriousness of our intentions.

 

We deployed an international monitoring force and
organized a major peace conference. The Security Council
adopted a number of resolutions and presidential statements
precisely asking President Milosevic to put an end to the
brutal repression perpetrated against his fellow-citizens.
During that process, President Milosevic took advantage of
the international community's good intentions to continue
and even intensify his tactic of repression in Kosovo -
even while negotiations were under way - in obvious
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and of the commitments he undertook last October.

(spoke in English)

Having done so only 36 hours ago, I do not need to
reiterate the extent of the humanitarian crisis in Kosovo. I
would, however, remind those members of the Council who
need reminding that thousands have died and many
hundreds of thousands remain homeless and at the mercy
of extremely harsh winter conditions. Hourly their numbers
increase; their homes and farms have been looted and
burned and their livestock slaughtered.

Those who would support this draft resolution place
themselves outside the international consensus, which holds
that the time has come to stop the continuing violence
perpetrated by the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia against its own people. Rather than bringing
forward this unproductive draft resolution in an attempt to
divert attention from the fundamental humanitarian issue,
these countries might more usefully have directed their
energies towards convincing the leaders in Belgrade to stop
the violence against their people and to accept the
Rambouillet peace agreement.

As proposed, this draft resolution would serve only to
grant President Milosevic free rein to finish the brutal job
he started last year and has since continued to such deadly
effect, most prominently at Racak.

For these reasons, Canada will vote against this draft
resolution.

