The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Turkey.

I should like to extend a warm welcome to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremic'
and the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kosovo,
Mr. Skender Hyseni.

I would also like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
briefing. We appreciate his efforts. We would also like
to acknowledge and express our appreciation for the
past and current role of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
ensuring peace and stability in Kosovo. Of course, the
same goes for the Kosovo Force.

Sixty countries have recognized Kosovo. Turkey
was one of the first to do so. This figure also lends
clear legitimacy to the declaration of independence of
Kosovo. We are pleased to see that the overall situation
in Kosovo is stable and that the Kosovo authorities are
taking the necessary steps to consolidate their State
institutions and system. This is a process that we fully
support and to which we remain ready to further
contribute in any way we can.

In that line, we support the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
reconfigure UNMIK. In this regard, we are pleased to
see that the process is going smoothly and that we are
close to finalization. At the same time, we believe that
UNMIK still has an important role to play in Kosovo,
especially in helping to facilitate the resolution of a
number of practical but serious problems.

We are also pleased to see that there is a good
working relationship and cooperation between UNMIK
and the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We encourage both Serbia and
Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK and EULEX.

We attach great importance to security and
stability in the Balkans and see the independence of
Kosovo in the framework of lasting peace, stability and
prosperity in the entire region. That being the case, the
support given to Kosovo in its efforts to integrate into
the international community and institutions should be
further intensified. We will do our part in that regard.

We must also underline that a democratic and
prosperous Serbia at peace with its neighbours is
crucial to regional stability and cooperation. The
international community should continue to encourage
and support Serbia in its efforts to integrate into
European and Euro-Atlantic structures. As for Turkey,
we are determined to carry forward our friendly and
mutually beneficial relations with Serbia.

Being very much a part of the Balkans, we are
committed to working with all our partners towards
ensuring a safe, stable and prosperous future for the
region.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
Mr. Skender Hyseni has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.

