Switzerland would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing this debate, as well as all the briefers for their contributions. The current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has far-reaching negative implications for the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. Switzerland therefore urges the Security Council and the international community to immediately implement resolution 2532 (2020). We support the call of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict on all parties to conflict to cease all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. We welcome the Secretary-General's recent report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2020/487) and reiterate the primary responsibility of Member States to protect all women and girls, as well as men and boys, against acts of sexual violence. Let me highlight three issues. First, conflict-related sexual violence is deeply rooted in gender inequality and gender-based discrimination. Hence, it constitutes both an early warning sign and consequence of conflict. It is therefore crucial to empower women and girls, as well as to engage men and boys, in order to achieve gender equality. While the majority of survivors of sexual violence are women and girls, men and boys also suffer from such horrible acts of violence. The stigmatization and exclusion of victims can lead to an even higher number of such acts going unreported. The contribution of civil society, including women human rights defenders, in creating mutual trust and respect remains key to preventing and resolving conflicts. Secondly, Switzerland advocates for a community-based approach in treating survivors of sexual violence, including children born of rape. The rights and needs of survivors, including their sexual and reproductive health and rights, must be at the centre of every response. Survivors must be treated with dignity and respect. We emphasize the importance of reintegrating survivors into their communities and related social structures. That is why Switzerland supports projects that strengthen solidarity networks and collective healing as conflict-related sexual violence affects a community as a whole. Thirdly, Switzerland is concerned about the persisting gaps related to accountability and justice for conflict-related sexual violence at national and international levels. While supporting the crucial efforts of the International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor to hold perpetrators accountable for sexual and gender-based crimes, Switzerland also engages with national actors to facilitate access to justice for survivors. Such partnerships empower survivors to become key stakeholders and agents of change in efforts to prevent and respond to conflict- related sexual violence. In line with resolution 2467 (2019), Switzerland reiterates the need for a holistic approach, including legal and non-legal measures, and calls on the Council to continue to fight impunity and uphold accountability with all means at its disposal. This year, we commemorate important milestones, such as the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beiing Declaration and Platform for Action, the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) and the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. Decisive progress in eliminating the root causes of sexual and gender- based violence is long overdue. The Security Council has a crucial role to play, in particular with regard to strengthening and monitoring the full implementation of commitments by all parties to conflict to prevent and address all forms of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations. We therefore urge the Council to continue its efforts in this sense.
