Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to extend my
appreciation to Mr. Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo,
Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head of
the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID), for the comprehensive and most relevant
briefing he has just delivered.

We note with satisfaction the favourable results
of the joint work between the Government of the
Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations,
as evidenced by the fact that clashes between the
Sudanese Government and rebel groups in Darfur
have diminished significantly. Generally speaking, the
security situation appears more stable.

The successful impact of the Government-led
weapons-collection campaign is commendable, as
it has contributed substantially to the reduction of
intercommunal clashes. Moreover, as the report
indicates (S/2018/389), there has been a significant
improvement in the freedom of movement for civilians.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls for
due observance of human rights and not neglecting
their violations, especially those perpetrated against
children and women. While it is true that statistically, as
compared to last year, cases of rape have decreased, the
situation remains precarious. We expect an immediate
end to such atrocities.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is concerned about the slow progress in the
search for a comprehensive political solution to the
conflict in Darfur. The Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur is a viable framework for the peace process in
Darfur because it is important that all parties show
leadership and commit to the implementation and
enforcement of the Document. Equatorial Guinea, as
always, understands that the conflict in Darfur must
be resolved through a political process that allows the
most controversial and topical issues to be addressed,
improved and resolved. That is why we would like
to call on all parties to make efforts to reach peace
with the Government through a frank and inclusive
negotiation process.

For those considerations, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea believes it is essential that current efforts
be redoubled, particularly support for the Sudanese
Government in seeking solutions to the root causes of
the conflict. In that regard, we believe it is necessary for
negotiations to take place between the Government and
the rebel groups in Darfur, and for the Doha Document,
adopted in 2011, to be implemented. It is with a view
to securing that support that we already endorse the
renewal of the mandate of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) in
June, as well as the desirability of inviting Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chair of the High-level Independent Panel of
the African Union, to inform the Council of efforts
under way, as he did 18 months ago. We also call for
the adoption of measures and targeted sanctions against
recalcitrant groups or individuals who are reluctant to
participate in negotiations between the Government
and the rebel groups.

I conclude by once again congratulating UNAMID,
the United Nations, the African Union and the Sudanese
Government on their hard work and we urge them to
continue their efforts.

