Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I
would like to convey our profound sympathy and
compassion to all those affected by the horrendous
terrorist attacks that occurred recently in London. We
strongly condemn all acts of terrorism, irrespective of
their motivation, wherever and by whomever
committed. We also reaffirm our commitment to
contribute, to the fullest extent, to the international
fight against terrorism in all its aspects, including
through full cooperation with the relevant United
Nations bodies.

We thank the Chairpersons of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), the Al-Qaida and Taliban
sanctions Committee, and the 1540 Committee for their
briefings. We appreciate their contribution and the hard
work of the experts who are supporting their tasks.
Increased coordination between the counter-terrorism
Committees of the Security Council can greatly
enhance the effectiveness of United Nations activities
in this area. In the light of the upcoming renewal of
Security Council resolution 1526 (2004), my comments
this afternoon will be focussed on the strengthening of
the sanctions regime against Al-Qaida and the Taliban.

The Council is currently engaged in informal
consultations on a draft resolution to be adopted, as we
understand it, by the end of July, which contains a
number of suggested improvements to the current
sanctions regime based in part on the valuable work of
the Monitoring Team. We generally support measures
such as better cooperation with Interpol, streamlining
of the working methods of the 1267 sanctions
Committee and its Monitoring Team, and improved
sanctions monitoring. At the same time, we remain
convinced that due process, human rights and
humanitarian concerns must be addressed in an equally
urgent and thorough manner, and that doing so will in
effect enhance the implementation, and thus the
effectiveness, of targeted sanctions.

As reported by the Monitoring Team, a number of
countries have been facing legal challenges in national
and international courts against specific measures of
sanctions implementation. Some of those have yet to
be decided. We wish to mention a recent judgement
handed down on 30 June 2005 by the European Court
of Human Rights in the case of Bosphorus Airways v.
Ireland. While the Court concluded that, in this
specific case, the applicant's right to protection of
property had not been violated, it also issued an
important caveat: State actions taken in compliance
with international legal obligations, such as
international sanctions regimes, are justified only as
long as the relevant organization protects fundamental
human rights, with respect both to their substance and
to the mechanisms controlling their observance.
Otherwise, there can be circumstances in which the
European Convention would have to prevail over other
legal obligations.

That judgement makes it clear that there is a real
possibility that a State party to the European
Convention might find itself in a situation where, by
implementing its obligations flowing from a United
Nations sanctions regime, it is found in violation of
rights protected by the Convention. Such a scenario
must be avoided; it can if the Security Council
intensifies its work on enhancing the fairness and
transparency of procedures for listing, delisting and
humanitarian exemptions, and on improving the access
of individual applicants to the decision-making body.
In that respect, informing individuals and entities of
their listing and granting them the possibility of
directly submitting to the Committee a request for
delisting or humanitarian exemption would be a step in
the right direction. In the long run, any regime
depriving individuals of their rights will have to
include an appeals process involving a judicial or
otherwise independent organ in order to comply with
international due-process standards.

We recall in that context that we requested in
February this year that the list of Member States
having made notifications regarding humanitarian
exemptions in accordance with resolution 1452 (2002)
be made accessible to all Member States, as a
straightforward means of improving transparency. That
request is still pending before the sanctions Committee.

Current discussions on an improved sanctions
regime also deal with the question of which
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities can be
considered as being "associated with" Al-Qaida for the
purpose of listings. This is a welcome exercise that
takes into account the structure of Al-Qaida and the
nature of the threat it poses. The draft currently under
discussion, however, entails the danger that such a
definition could become too sweeping and include
third parties that have some relationship to those
targeted and that might factually contribute, in an
inadvertent manner, to terrorist activities. In
accordance with our legal understanding, knowledge
and intent are indispensable mental elements of
criminal liability and must thus be included in such a
definition. This would also be in line with international
legal standards such as those established by the
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, to which we are a party.

I wish finally to express our hope that Council
members will give non-members of the Council ample
opportunities, both formal and informal, to contribute
to the strengthening of the Council's counter-terrorism
measures in all relevant contexts. The implementation
of the Council's counter-terrorism measures will
undoubtedly be more successful if all States concerned
are involved in their design.

In that spirit, I thank the President very much for
convening today's meeting.

