Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and for giving us the
opportunity to make a statement on the situation in the
Balkans.

For almost 10 years now, the Balkans have been
the focus of priority attention on the part of the world
community. In that time, the Security Council has been
making efforts to achieve a settlement and stability in
that part of the world. My country's Government
believes that today's discussion, which is being
followed very carefully by all Member States of the
United Nations, should not focus on resolving disputes
and contradictions. It is our belief that the Security
Council can and must become aware of the whole
extent of its responsibility and determine the right
strategy for United Nations action in the region over
the coming years.

Over a year ago, Belarus joined other countries in
welcoming Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
which put an end to the military confrontation in
Kosovo. Today, we would solemnly declare that it is
the United Nations and the Security Council that must
remain the guarantors of the political dialogue among
all States in the region. Any actions circumventing the
Security Council must be regarded as inadmissible and
contrary to the norms of international law.

Belarus believes that the basic element of a
Balkan settlement must remain the principle of the
territorial integrity of all Balkan States, including the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. All the necessary legal
instruments for this exist. The members of the Security
Council and the Member States of the United Nations
have those instruments available to them. They are,
primarily, the Charter of the United Nations, the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and the resolutions and
decisions ofthe Security Council.

We cannot fail today to recognize that efforts by
the United Nations have averted the worst: an
escalation of the armed conflict in the Balkans.
However, we cannot yet say that the crisis has passed.
There are still many problems that constantly threaten
the fragile stability in the region. We believe the most
important and substantive of those to be the fact that
there are not yet equal guarantees of security for the
peoples and ethnic groups in a number of areas of the
Balkans. We believe that security of person must apply
equally to all. However, as in the past, we are still
witnessing many incidents of cruelty and violence
against representatives of ethnic and religious
minorities.
A second important factor that must remain on
the agenda of the Security Council and the world
community is the establishment of legal frameworks
for talks among all parties involved in the conflict.
Obviously, it is only by respecting this condition that it
will be possible to have a productive dialogue and
arrive at a compromise.

Many difficult issues in Kosovo and the Balkans
remain unresolved. In implementing the provisions of
Security Council resolutions on the Balkans, many
essentially new issues have arisen that are in fact
unprecedented in the entire history of the United
Nations. The most important in this regard was the
establishment of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and a
mechanism whereby it could operate in the province.

Belarus welcomes the regular briefings by leaders
of the Mission and the reports of the Secretary-
General. But we believe that the experience of a body
with such broad powers should be the subject of an
exchange of views among all Members of the United
Nations, possibly involving a broader circle of
academics and political analysts. We believe that the
Secretary-General's idea of a wide-ranging discussion
within the Organizations about Kosovo's future-
which has not taken place so far- rightly points us
towards a fully transparent consideration of the
problems of Kosovo and the Balkans as a whole.

The conclusion that the crisis in the Balkans
began in Kosovo, and that it will end in that part of the
Balkans, seems more true today than ever before. The
Security Council, and all Members of the United
Nations, have no more an important task to carry out
than to untangle this web of contradictions. Belarus is
willing to participate actively in that work.

