Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I am pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish you every success in your work. We
also wish to thank your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Norway, who guided the Council's work with great
wisdom.

The situation in the Palestinian territories
continues to deteriorate daily. Israel has stepped up its
aggression against the Palestinian people and invaded
most of the territories of the Palestinian Authority in
order to destroy their infrastructure, which had cost
immense amounts of money to build. Furthermore, ever
more victims are being claimed among young people,
women, children and the elderly through arbitrary
bombing and the excessive use of force against a
defenceless people whose only weapon is its resolve to
end Israeli occupation. Israel continues to besiege
Palestinian cities and to starve and kill their people
without trials. This policy of aggression also targets the
headquarters of Yasser Arafat, President of the
Palestinian Authority and living symbol of the
Palestinian people. No one knows how these terrorist
acts of Israel, the occupying Power, will come to an
end.

The Israeli forces have prevented the wounded
from reaching hospitals and have shot at ambulances
and prevented them from reaching their destination, in
contravention of the 1949 Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War,
which is the basis of international humanitarian law. In
its article 3 (1), that Convention provides that

"Persons taking no active part in the hostilities,
including members of armed forces who have laid
down their arms and those placed hors de combat
by sickness, wounds, detention, or any other
cause, shall in all circumstances be treated
humanely."

Worse yet, Israel is preventing inhabitants from
burying their dead, some of whom were martyred
several days before. This is in contravention of Islamic
precepts and constitutes a flagrant violation of all
international humanitarian laws and norms.

The Israeli occupying forces have been
committing acts that can only be described as war
crimes of the twenty-first century. At the Millennium
Summit, the heads of State and Government sought to
make this century an era of peace, security and calm.
However, the current Israeli Government has sent all
those dreams up in smoke and made the language of
violence and state terrorism an organized policy and
way of life of the Israeli occupying State.

The Israeli Prime Minister could not find in his
behavioural vocabulary a way to cooperate with the
Arab peace initiative adopted at the Beirut summit. He
could only find State terrorism, which he is using to
subvert the peace process. Israeli practices against
President Arafat, the symbol of the Palestinian struggle
and the elected President of the Palestinian people, are
highly dangerous. State terrorism carried out by Israel
can only bring destruction upon the entire region. That
is what the Israeli Government is attempting to do. The
international community must put an end to the Israeli
aggression so as to avert a catastrophe whose
repercussions for the region and the entire world would
be irreparable and incalculable.

In conclusion, we call on Israel, the occupying
Power in the Palestinian territories, to do the following.
First, it must respect the provisions of the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention and the principles of international
humanitarian law, international law of human rights.
Secondly, it must withdraw immediately and
unconditionally from all Palestinian cities and villages,
including Ramallah, the provisional headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority, and lift the siege imposed on the
Authority's President. Thirdly, it must lift the blockade
against the Palestinian people in all the occupied
territories, including Islamic and Christian holy sites
and houses of worship. Fourthly, it must implement all
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002).

This will require the Council to take effective
action to make Israel respect its resolutions, which
remain dead letter. The Council must reaffirm that, if
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian and other
occupied territories does not end, the region will never
be able to enjoy calm or peace. International peace and
security will be constantly threatened. Thus, the
Security Council must discharge its responsibilities
under the United Nations Charter. The Council is
obligated to use all possible means to exert pressure on
the aggressor State, Israel, to put an end to its
occupation of the Arab territories.

We call on the Security Council immediately to
dispatch international observers to guarantee protection
for Palestinian civilians. History will not acknowledge
the Council's due role unless it fulfils its
responsibilities. Moreover, it is unacceptable for the
Council to remain paralysed while international peace
and security are threatened, for it is the Council's duty
to preserve international peace and security.

