The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly deplores the three
underground nuclear tests that India conducted on 11
May 1998, and the two further tests conducted on 13
May 1998 despite overwhelming international concern
and protests. The Council strongly urges India to
refrain from any further tests. It is of the View that
such testing is contrary to the de facto moratorium on
the testing of nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices, and to global efforts towards
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament.
The Council also expresses its concern at the effects
of this development on peace and stability in the
region.

"The Security Council affirms the crucial
importance of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). The Council appeals to
India, and all other States which have not yet done
so, to become parties to the NPT, and to the CTBT
without delay and without conditions. The Council
also encourages India to participate, in a positive
spirit, in the proposed negotiations with other States
for a fissile material cut-off treaty in Geneva with a
view to reaching early agreement.

"With a view to preventing an escalation in the
arms race, in particular with regard to nuclear
weapons and their delivery systems, and to
preserving peace in the region, the Security Council
urges States to exercise maximum restraint. The
Council underlines that the sources of tension in
South Asia should only be resolved through dialogue
and not by military build-up.
"The Security Council reiterates the statement
by its President on 31 January 1992 (S/23500) which
stated, inter alia, that the proliferation of all
weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to
international peace and security."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/ 12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
