Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
the Deputy Secretary-General for her report on the
contribution of peacekeeping missions to achieving
sustainable peace. We are also grateful to to Mr. Youssef
Mahmoud and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal for their
informative briefings and to the Egyptian presidency for
convening a debate today that has enabled us to explore
the effectiveness, significance and relevance of the
current mandates of United Nations peace operations.

The challenge for peacekeeping operations has to
do with their ability to use the tools they need, tools
whose use must be facilitated through measurable,
clear, coherent and achievable mandates, as is laid out
in the report (S/2015/446) ofthe High-level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, without forgetting that the
tools of first resort are preventive diplomacy, strategic
alliances with regional bodies and post-conflict
peacebuilding. Preventive diplomacy is vital and
should be strengthened through mediation, dialogue,
good offices, confidence-building measures and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations itself
regarding State sovereignty, and should not be used as
an instrument for intervention. Such measures, along
with strict regard for civilian populations' human rights
and dignity, should govern the conduct of peacekeeping
missions, creating ways to achieve connection and
cohesion that can ensure coordination with and the
participation of local communities and civil society
in general.

There should be no military option in conflict
resolution. In that regard, we believe that a mission's
success depends in part on preventive diplomacy based
on an active political process, and with goals that are
commensurate with its capabilities and resources,
that correspond to the purposes for which they were
conceived, and that are framed by the principles
governing them - above all the consent of the
parties - with a comprehensive strategy capable of
tackling the situation and progressing systematically
towards its primary goal, through a consensus political
process that facilitates peacebuilding and in particular
promotes national ownership.

Success also depends on establishing realistic
deadlines both for peacekeeping operations and other
peacebuilding activities, and on their ability to adapt to
the realities ofa particular situation, all of which should
be clearly defined in their mandates, while working
with the communities involved - including women
and young people - to help to build their confidence
in political processes, and with zero tolerance for
sexual violence.

The more than 60 years of experience that the United
Nations has accumulated in peacekeeping operations
have given it invaluable knowledge and experience that
no other body possesses, which is why we know that it is
impossible to fulfil a mandate without a Government's
trust and active participation. Independence, neutrality
and respect for States and their peoples' rights must be
observed at all times, because that is how the United
Nations becomes a valid stakeholder in promoting
political processes, coordinating alliances between
States and facilitating the work of staff deployed on
the ground.

We should make greater analytical use of strategic
reviews and the other tools that we possess in order
to monitor, evaluate and verify not only whether a
mission is achieving its goals but also ifit has adequate
numbers of troops and, if necessary, whether the
civilian population's human rights and the purposes
and principles of the Charter are being respected, since
a mission can often end up in a vicious circle of self-
propagating bureaucracies that distort its mandates. In
that regard, it is crucial to ensure that when a peace
operation's mandate is about to expire, a serious effort
is made to reformulate it and enable its peacebuilding
tasks to be achieved.

Similarly, it is important to work to strengthen
closer strategic alliances with regional and subregional
bodies. We should prioritize developing and deepening
links that incorporate innovative working methods
based on predictable funding, for they are vital to
sustaining peace. One such clear example is the
strategic partnership between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council,
both committed to developing a structured, equitable
relationship and to strengthening their partnership
with mutual support and continued technical assistance
on the political, security, cross-border and preventive
diplomacy fronts, including the management of
transboundary waters, through mediation and the
exercise of good offices. We are looking forward to the
visit to the African Union headquarters in the coming
days in order to strengthen our partnership and the joint
work of both organizations.

Restoring a post-conflict society requires a
great deal of effort planning and implementing the
experience gained on the ground, working together with
Governments to implement agreements between the
parties, demobilization, reintegration, disarmament,
the removal of anti-personnel landmines, economic
development and addressing the causes of the conflict.
All ofthese are issues that need to be taken into account
in order to promote and consolidate sustainable peace.

The inclusion of society in the peace processes is
key to promoting confidence, given that it can take years
to make this happen. Its inclusion can play an important
role in the prevention and resolution of conflicts and in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and in building
peaceful and resilient societies. A clear example of
this is the peace process in Colombia, whose Final
Agreement established measures for the reintegration
of former combatants in civil society, along with the
support of regional organizations and the international
community in general, in order to establish lasting and
sustainable peace.

Finally, Bolivia reaffirms its support to the work
and commitment of peacekeeping operations and thanks
United Nations staff and peacekeeping personnel, as
well as the staff of the troop- and police-contributing
counties, for their sacrifices and hard work. They are
men and women who risk their lives on a daily basis
to build a lasting and sustainable peace in order to
fulfil the principles and objectives of the Charter of the
United Nations.

