President Kirchner (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset to commend you, Madam, and your
delegation, for having chosen this subject for today's
debate - a subject of the utmost importance for the
international agenda.

Unfortunately, it must be acknowledged that
today, in spite of the efforts made by the international
community through the United Nations, peace and
stability in the world are still a distant goal.

From our perspective, threats to peace and
security result not only from the criminal activities of
terrorists, but also from weapons of mass destruction,
violations of human rights and the lack of much-
needed participation.

Peace is much more than the absence of conflict.
It requires a positive stance and ongoing dynamic
action designed to foster dialogue and understanding.
Preventing conflict is always better than reacting after
a conflict has already broken out, because prevention
avoids loss of life and ensures stability, as well as
being much less costly. But effective preventive action
requires more of us. It requires us to respond in a just
manner to longstanding disputes and injustice, to the
deepest and most abject poverty, hunger and terrible
pandemics such as those affecting Africa. This is also
an important issue for Latin America.

Such instability highlights what must be the
dominant agenda for Security Council action. Within
that context, it is necessary to understand that peace is
preserved through the participation of all nations and
peoples. Those who take shelter behind their own
security are forgetting that this is no longer the
twentieth century; they should know that a threat to
one will, sooner or later, also affect all - including
those who believe themselves to be safe. These new
threats make us understand at last the true meaning of
solidarity among nations.

Terrorism is a threat to life and human dignity, an
affront to civilization and humankind. Argentina
regards all terrorist acts as criminal and unjustifiable.
No ethnic, religious, ideological or other motivation
can justify the slaughter of innocent civilians.

The Argentine people express their full solidarity

with the victims of terrorism throughout the world and
with their families. We experienced two terrible
terrorist attacks during the 1990s - against the Israeli
embassy and against the headquarters of the Argentine-
Israeli Mutual Association. We share the pain and
despair of those who suffered as a result. That is still
an open wound at the heart of our society.

We know that in order to tackle terrorism
successfully, our response must be legitimate and must
have the support of the international community. This
requires us to look at the problem from a broader
perspective; the response cannot be purely military or
unilateral in nature. We must understand - and make
sure that others understand - that peace and
development are mutually reinforcing. We must stress
the close relationship between respect for human rights
and the fight against terrorism.

Terrorist acts can no longer be considered
national or transnational crimes; they are a threat to
international peace and security. The vulnerability of
all nations - large and small, rich or poor - demands
international action that is intelligent, coordinated and
sustainable, based on legitimacy, respect for human
rights, proportionate response and the support of
international public opinion.

In combating terrorism we must ensure respect
for international law, human rights and international
humanitarian law, as well as refugee law. When we
respond to specific events, it is in the defence of
individuals and their rights that the raison d'etre of this
Organization and its Member nations is revealed.

Argentina fully cooperates with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee set up by resolution 1373 (2001),
as well as the Committee set up pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999).

The General Assembly is also doing outstanding
work in the area of combating terrorism. We must
encourage that and take it further. Recently, after years
of efforts, the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism was adopted,
and we hope that the comprehensive convention
against terrorism will soon be adopted.

International cooperation is vital. Judicial
cooperation - that is, extradition and mutual legal
assistance - is fundamental, because if it does not
work properly, any norm or antiterrorist legal regime
will be rendered ineffective and illusory.

Combating the financing of terrorism is also
essential. Pursuant to Security Council resolutions,
States need to strengthen and maximize their
cooperation to prevent funds from being used in
support of acts of terrorism and terrorist groups,
freezing such funds by means of effective
arrangements.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and the danger of their falling into the hands of
terrorists is one of the greatest threats to international
peace and security. Argentina, which is the only Latin
American country that is party to the five non-
proliferation regimes, attaches great importance to
resolution 1540 (2004). The international community
has made commendable efforts to curb terrorism,
responding to a challenge to all of humankind. In this
context, Argentina reaffirms its readiness to work
together with the rest of the world to combat this
scourge. If we are to be successful, we must also
energetically confront unresolved conflicts and deal
with situations of deep-seated injustice, social
exclusion, extreme poverty, famine and illiteracy.

In other words, we must address, in a
comprehensive way, all threats to international peace
and security; that is the only way to ensure that the
Council properly fulfils its mandate. As recent events
show, working for peace is not an easy task. There are
many conditions that have to be met. But above all, we
need a commitment to collective political action. The
United Nations was created on the basis of the resolve
of all States that collective action was the only basis
for taking measures to maintain international peace and
security.

The Security Council was created to maintain
peace and prevent wars, those manmade disasters that
are born in the human heart, when humankind observed
with incredulity the great savagery and brutality that
had occurred.

Today, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, the
dynamics of international relations demand, more
obviously than ever before, that we make multilateral
mechanisms stronger and more robust as appropriate
means to preserve international peace and security and
that we respond in a balanced manner to the situation
of global instability confronting us.

Firmly attached to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations, we are convinced of the need to
build consensus aimed at strengthening international
law and promoting universal values associated with
peace and security, representative democracy and
respect for human rights. We believe it is essential, if
that vision is to be effective, to have a Security Council
whose actions and legitimacy cannot be called into
question.

The strengthening of multilateralism - a crucial
principle of collective security - requires a constant
search for agreed responses. Argentina will continue to
play its role in that important process. Therefore,
Argentina calls for reform of the multilateral system
that will result in true strengthening of the United
Nations, which reform is essential if the Organization
is to carry out its functions of maintaining international
peace and security, promoting social and economic
development and eradicating hunger and poverty.

It is imperative that we take an all-inclusive
approach to reform of the Organization, one based on
development, security and full respect for human
rights. We must consider all issues that might affect
those elements, including violence and massive human
rights violations, weapons of mass destruction,
terrorism, organized crime, poverty and disease, as
well as a general concern with regard to unilateralism,
the continuance of trade barriers in developed countries
and the inequities characterizing the current
international financial system.

We must recognize that much remains to be done,
particularly given the terrible situation of social
problems facing the international community. But there
is also much that can be done to lessen the effects of
the evils we face. We must mobilize ourselves to fight
for the defence and dignity of the human person.

We are convinced that today's world can
accommodate different civilizations and different
religions. There can be no cultural leadership imposed
by force. We firmly defend diversity and plurality.
There will be no peace without justice. Defending
human rights must be at the heart of our agenda. In this
fight, we will be fulfilling our moral obligation and our
duty to future generations.

