Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We want
to thank you, Sir, for allowing us to have this meeting
so promptly, as it is very urgent. We also want to thank
the Ambassador of Egypt and his team for the steady
hand and the calm way in which they led the Council
last month.

For more than 20 years, the Security Council has
taken actions againstNorth Korea's nuclear programme,
and for more than 20 years North Korea has defied our
collective voice. It is worth taking a few moments to
recount some of the history.

In 1993, the Council adopted resolution 825 (1993),
calling on North Korea to remain in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. That did
not work. North Korea withdrew from the Treaty and
continued its nuclear pursuit. In 2006, the Six-Party
Talks faltered, and North Korea conducted several
ballistic missile launches. That led to resolution 1695
(2006), condemning them. The same year, North Korea
conducted its first nuclear test. That led to resolution
1718 (2006), establishing a United Nations sanctions
regime aiming to stop all nuclear, ballistic missile and
other weapons of mass destruction programmes.

After the Six-Party Talks fell apart again in 2009,
North Korea conducted additional missile launches
and its second nuclear test. That led to resolution 1874
(2009), which expanded sanctions, including an arms
embargo and cargo inspection obligations. In 2012, the
leap day deal failed, and North Korea conducted two
new space launches. The Security Council responded
with the adoption of resolution 2087 (2013). Following
North Korea's third nuclear test in 2013, the Council
adopted resolution 2094 (2013), expanding sanctions
to restrict financial, maritime, aviation and diplomatic
activities. By 2016, North Korea had conducted
its fourth nuclear test and another space launch. It
followed that with more missile launches. In response,
the Council adopted multiple resolutions expanding
sanctions even further, targeting whole sectors of North
Korea's economy.

Finally, this year, the Council got even more serious.
First, we adopted resolution 2356 (2017), designating
high-ranking North Korean Government officials
and the military's Strategic Rocket Forces Command
for individual sanctions. Then, just last month,
after the regime's first two intercontinental ballistic
missile (ICBM) launches, we adopted resolution 2371
(2017) - the strongest sanctions we have ever imposed
on North Korea. That resolution banned North Korean
exports of coal, iron and seafood, and imposed several
other measures that will significantly cut off the
revenues needed to fund its nuclear programme.

Why did I take the time to go through this history?
I did so to make this point. The Security Council has
spoken with unusual unity and consistency on North
Korea. That is a good thing. Along the way, there have
been problems with implementation, and the Council
has at times been too slow and too weak, but this is not
a situation in which we have allowed divisions among
us to stop any action.

Still, here we are. Despite our efforts over the past
24 years, the North Korean nuclear programme is more
advanced and more dangerous than ever. It now fires
missiles over Japanese air space. It now has ICBM
capabilities. it now claims to have tested a hydrogen
bomb. And just this morning, there are reports that the
regime is preparing for yet another ICBM. launch.

To the members of the Security Council, I must
say, "enough is enough". We have taken an incremental
approach and, despite the best of intentions, it has not
worked. Members of the Council will no doubt urge
negotiations and a return to talks. But as I have just
outlined, we have engaged in numerous direct and
multilateral talks with the North Korean regime, and
time after time they have not worked. The time for
half measures in the Security Council is over. The
time has come to exhaust all of our diplomatic means
before it is too late. We must now adopt the strongest
possible measures.

Kim Jong Un's action cannot be seen as defensive.
He wants to be acknowledged as a nuclear Power, but
being a nuclear Power is not about using those terrible
weapons to threaten others. Nuclear Powers understand
their responsibilities. Kim Jong Un shows no such
understanding. His abusive use of missiles and his
nuclear threats show that he is begging for war. War
is never something the United States wants. We do not
want it now, but our country's patience is not unlimited.
We will defend our allies and our territory.

The idea that some have suggested of a so-called
freeze-for-freeze is insulting. When a rogue regime
has a nuclear weapon and an ICBM. pointed at you, you
do not take steps to lower your guard. No one would
do that. We certainly will not. The time has come to
exhaust all diplomatic means to end this crisis, and that
means quickly enacting the strongest possible measures
here in the Security Council. Only the strongest
sanctions will enable us to resolve this problem through
diplomacy. We have kicked the can down the road long
enough. There is no more road left.

This crisis goes well beyond the United Nations.
The United States will look at every country that does
business with North Korea as a country that is giving
aid to its reckless and dangerous nuclear intentions.
What we do in connection with North Korea will have
a real impact on how other outlaw nations that seek
nuclear weapons choose to conduct themselves in the
future. The stakes could not be higher. The urgency
is now. Twenty-four years of half measures and failed
talks are enough.

