Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation joins
previous speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening this
meeting. We also wish to welcome the Minister for
External Relations of Angola and the Minister of State of
the United Kingdom, who are with us today.

My delegation wishes to thank Ambassador Fowler
for his clear and comprehensive presentation of the report
of the Panel of Experts on violations of the Council's
sanctions against Angola. We also wish to pay a tribute
to him for his leadership of the Sanctions Committee,
because it is largely thanks to his initiative, commitment
and willingness to be innovative that the Expert Panel
was established by the Council. We also wish to thank the
members of the Council for the diligence, fearlessness
and timeliness with which they have executed their
mandate.

As the report reminds us, the purpose of the
sanctions was not to punish UNITA, but to promote a

 

peaceful settlement of the lengthy conflict in Angola by
requiring UNITA to comply with obligations which it
undertook in 1991 and 1994 and by limiting UNITA's
ability to pursue its objectives by military means. It was for
that reason that the sanctions were carefully targeted,
relating to the supply of arms and fuel, UNITA's bank
accounts, foreign travel of UNITA's officials and the
operations of UNITA's offices abroad. All of these have
been addressed by the Panel's investigations and
recommendations on sanctions-busting.

We have noted from the report that the Panel's
existence and presence have already had the important
effect of stimulating Governments and others into focusing
on what each of them can do to improve the
implementation and enforcement of sanctions and to curtail
existing violations. We therefore share the Panel's view that
the Security Council and the international community must
remain engaged in this effort. We must send a strong signal
that breaches of the Council's sanctions regimes cannot be
tolerated and that the activities of violators will not go
unpunished.
My delegation recognizes that the report of the Expert
Panel and its recommendations will require detailed study
by the Sanctions Committee and by the Council itself. It is
also important that those cited in the report cooperate with
the Council by providing it with the necessary information.
At this time, my delegation therefore wishes to offer a few
preliminary comments, as this report has implications not
only for Angola, but for the wider international community
and for the sanctions regimes imposed by the Council.

First, the report leaves no doubt that there have been
serious violations of the sanctions regimes by individuals,
companies and government officials. Those who have
violated the sanctions regime on Angola share in the
responsibility for the human suffering resulting from the
conflict and, with UNITA, are equally culpable in many of
the tragic incidents, including the shooting-down of the
United Nations aircraft.

Secondly, the Governments of the countries whose
nationals are engaging in sanctions-busting have an
obligation to investigate and to take appropriate action
against those who are responsible. Such investigations and
actions must be undertaken in a transparent and credible
manner.

Thirdly, it is clear that UNITA abused the period
following the signature of the Lusaka Protocol to
accumulate arms and prepare itself for restarting the war. It
is also clear that it was aided and abetted in this by a
wide range of individuals in many countries.

Fourthly, the international community must bring to
an end the flow of illegal arms to conflict situations. It
must also better regulate the legal export of arms,
particularly in regard to end-users.

Fifthly, the plundering of Africa's mineral resources
to purchase arms to fuel these conflicts must be brought
to a halt. In the case of Angola, without buyers for the
diamonds, UNITA would not have been able to sell
diamonds to finance its purchase of arms.

It is also clear that there has been a linkage
established between the conflict in Angola and the
conflicts in the Great Lakes region.

The perpetuation of the conflict in Angola continues
to divert scarce resources, which should be used for the
economic and social development of Angola. My
delegation therefore calls on UNITA to spare the innocent
people of Angola further hardship by ending the fighting
and by complying with its obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol. The war-weary people of Angola deserve to live
without the violence and fear which have attended them
over the past 25 years.

The report presented to the Council today represents
a significant milestone. The action taken by the Council
will present an opportunity for us to clearly demonstrate
our determination to implement our decisions aimed at
furthering international peace and security.

