Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
regrets that we were drawn today into a vote whose
outcome was known in advance. We regret it all the
more so because it was unnecessary.

The Security Council met with the Contact Group
of the African Union, and that exchange enabled us to
reach an agreement on principle with respect to Kenya's
role in ensuring regional stability and on the need to
find common solutions to the legitimate concerns of
the African Union with a View to allowing President
Kenyatta to fulfil the obligations entrusted to him by
the Kenyan people following the March 2013 elections.

Our disagreement, therefore, resided not on our
shared goal but on the way to reach it. A majority of
the Council's member States believed that suspending
the judicial proceedings by involving article 16 of the
Rome Statute was neither applicable nor necessary and
that other solutions were available.
For France, the meeting was a launching point to
define these shared, pragmatic solutions in the spirit of
the customary working relations between the Security
Council and the African Union. Those solutions are
within reach. The Kenyan lawyers themselves have
demonstrated the way by filing procedural motions
at the Court, which recommended various relaxations
of the proceedings and a deferment of the actual case.
The Court itself showed the way by adopting several
decisions taking into account the need for the Kenyan
authorities to shoulder their responsibilities in a process
of alternation that would guarantee that neither the
President nor the Deputy President would ever both be
absent simultaneously from Kenya, as well as deferring
the proceedings for several months and allowing them
to participate only in some parts ofthe case. The States
parties themselves, in the framework of joint work
with Kenya, showed the way by recommending various
rearrangement of procedures, including using video
teleconferencing.

The meeting of the Assembly of States parties in
the Hague next week will provide an opportunity to
realize these fruitful exchanges. But the choice made
was to move forward hastily, for which we were offered
no explanation. Such haste is useless and fraught with
the risk of an artificial and dangerous confrontation
between the African Union and the Security Council,
which would should like to avert. These are crucial
partners in resolving crises on the African continent.
That is why my country abstained in the voting,
proving that we hope to continue the dialogue as we
move beyond this painful episode.

France is a partner of the African Union in Mali,
Somalia and the Central African Republic. We are
mobilizing together, on the basis of shared values,
to help civilians in need. France has lost soldiers in
defending those populations. France is a friendly ally
of Kenya, which is a democratic and respected country.
We understand its concerns and the role it plays in
support of regional stability, in particular in Somalia.
In that spirit, France will continue to work with Kenya
and African Union countries to find solutions to allow
Kenya's leaders to take up their responsibilities, while
also respecting the integrity of the Rome Statute.
The various proposals put forward by various States,
including Kenya, are on the table of the Assembly of
States Parties to the Rome Statute, which will meet as
of 20 November. We support the principle. A solution
is always within reach. We must grasp it. We must look
to the future.

