Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this high-level meeting
on such an important issue. I also wish to thank you
personally for presiding over it. I also thank both
Mr. Ban Ki moon and Mr. Nabil Elaraby for their very
valuable contributions to today's discussion.

These are indeed challenging times in the Middle
East, where strong emotions and deep-seated grievances
have again come to the fore, with tragic consequences.
We were deeply saddened by the deaths of Ambassador
Stevens and his colleagues in Benghazi, and we again
wish to extend our sincere condolences to their families
and the American people. There is simply nojustification
for such acts of violence or attacks against diplomatic
missions. They must be unequivocally denounced and
condemned. They are also attacks against all of us and
the values enshrined in the Charter.

Now is a moment for restraint and sober reflection
by all. Certainly, people in North Africa did not fight
so bravely for their basic rights simply to have their
dreams and legitimate aspirations hijacked by a few.
Also, the distortion of religion to fuel hatred and to
advance narrow extremist agendas must be vehemently
condemned. It is imperative that we all work collectively
to counter such destructive forces. As President Obama
said yesterday, "violence and intolerance has no place
among our United Nations" (see A/67/PV.6). Diversity
is something that deserves to be celebrated, not feared.

The challenges of today's world demand common
responses. In that sense, we believe that the Security
Council could and should enhance its role and
effectiveness as the primary body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security by
developing strong complementary partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations, as was the case
in Libya, Syria and Yemen.

There are ample opportunities to increase the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
League of Arab States, be it in the realms of preventive
diplomacy, mediation, rapid response, conflict
resolution or in the framework of Chapter VII of the
Charter.

The United Nations and the League of Arab States
must also build upon shared accomplishments. Such
is the case in Libya, where, together with the African
Union and the European Union, they can play a decisive
role in supporting Libyans on their path to democracy,
reconciliation, peace and prosperity. Such is also
the case in Yemen. As the Secretary-General said,
cooperation between the two organizations should not
limit itself to political issues or the crisis of the day,
but move to other areas, be they economic, social or
humanitarian in nature.

The Middle East faces renewed risks as the bloody
conflict in Syria rages on and the Middle East peace
process remains in protracted stalemate. Both of those
conflicts constitute serious threats to international
peace and security and must be urgently resolved. Both
the Security Council and the League of Arab States
have specific responsibilities in this context that they
cannot shy away from. There is a pressing imperative
for them to renew efforts and work together with a view
to reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
throughout the region.

In Syria the death toll continues to mount. The
tragic humanitarian situation is worsening day by
day, and widespread and systematic gross violations
of human rights proceed unabated. We appeal to all
parties in the conflict to abide strictly by the principles
of international humanitarian law and to respect human
rights. This terrible human tragedy could have been
averted had the Syrian Government not responded to
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people with
brutal force and shunned all attempts to promote a
peaceful political solution.

Further militarization of the conflict will only
entail further human suffering, threaten the integrity
of Syria itself and destabilize neighbouring countries.
There is no alternative to a political solution that meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people, allowing
for a peaceful and democratic transition.

The appointment of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League ofArab States, just as the previous appointment
of Mr. Kofi Annan, underlines the cooperation between
our two organizations. Mr. Brahimi can count on our
full support. However, his chances of success will
depend greatly upon the support he receives from the
Security Council and the League of Arab States, as
Mr. Elaraby rightly underlined.

Together, we must persuade the parties and
stakeholders to view his appointment as an opportunity
for them to rethink their options, end the violence and
engage seriously in an inclusive Syrian-led political
transition. To that end, the Council has to exert united,
sustained and effective pressure on all sides, and on
the Syrian authorities in particular in the light of their
primary responsibilities.

Developments in the Arab world render a final
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict ever more
urgent. That, however, will remain elusive as long as
the Palestinian question, which is the core of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, remains unresolved.

In September 2011, President Abbas submitted
the Palestinian application for membership to the
United Nations, and the Quartet set a framework for
the resumption of direct negotiations and a time frame
for their conclusion. A year on, the parties have not
yet engaged in a meaningful discussion on the core
issues. As a result, the prospect of a free and sovereign
Palestinian State is quickly withering away. Evidently,
the instruments and tools we have relied on thus far
have not succeeded and need to be reviewed, replaced
or adapted.

Israel's intensified settlement activities, which
are illegal, are eroding the very viability of the two-
State solution, as Minister Fabius rightly underlined,
undermining confidence and weakening moderate
voices. At the same time, settler violence has proceeded
unabated and vandalism against places of worship has
increased. We appeal to Israel once again to cease
settlement expansion and to act decisively against the
perpetrators of those acts of violence.

The Security Council and the League ofArab States
must renew efforts with a view to the swift resumption
of meaningful direct talks based on the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the internationally
endorsed parameters and the Arab Peace Initiative. In
order to succeed, direct negotiations must also establish
a clear and credible political time frame.

In the most immediate term, we must ensure that
the Palestinian State-building achievements are not
reversed due to the fiscal and economic predicaments
that the Palestinian Authority is currently facing.
However, we must not lose sight of the fact that the
problem remains a political one, namely, the continued
occupation that curtails the development of a sustainable
Palestinian economy, thus forcing Palestinians to be
donor-dependent.

We fully understand Israel's legitimate security
concerns, as we understand that an independent
Palestine is not only an inalienable right but also a
question of fundamental justice for the Palestinian
people.

In conclusion, there are many issues where closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the
League of Arab States can, and should, be further
deepened. That would undoubtedly be in the interest
of international peace and security, as well as of the
stability and prosperity of a wide and still unstable
region.

