Mr. Bathily: I have the honour to present the
Secretary-General's report (S/20lS/9l4) on the situation
in Central Africa and the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).
The report before the Council outlines the main threats
to peace and security in Central Africa, and provides an
update on the activities undertaken by UNOCA in the
past six months, in consultation with Member States,
United Nations entities and subregional organizations.

The recent spate of Violence that erupted in
September in the Central African Republic has
generated additional refugee populations within the
region and gross human rights violations against local
populations, particularly in Bangui. The intercommunal
violence has also further weakened the national
reconciliation process and increased the proliferation
of small arms and gang-related criminality. In that
context, Pope Francis' Visit to the Central African
Republic on 29 and 30 November, which I witnessed,
was timely. His message of peace and his prayers in
Catholic churches and Muslim mosques were embraced
by the population and welcomed as symbols of hope.
Now more than ever, it is critical to accelerate the pace
of implementing the recommendations of the Bangui
Forum for National Reconciliation - over which
I presided - in particular with respect to security
sector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

It is also critical for the presidential and legislative
elections to take place peacefully to conclude the
transition. In that regard, on 25 November President Ali
Bongo Ondimba of Gabon, in his capacity as Chairman
of the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), convened an Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, which I attended. The Assembly endorsed
the revised electoral calendar and took note of the
remaining gap in the electoral budget. The Gabonese
Republic and the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
announced new pledges, which fill the financial gap.
Together with earlier contributions made by Cameroon
and the Republic of the Congo, ECCAS is the second-
largest contributor to the country's electoral budget
after the European Union.

Boko Haram remains a critical threat to stability,
peace and security in the region. The terrorist group
has stepped up its attacks against civilian and military
targets in the Lake Chad Basin area, notably in
Cameroon and Chad, leading to a further deterioration
in the security, economic, humanitarian and human
rights situations. The proximity of other regional
conflicts near the Lake Chad Basin region, combined
with the risks of radicalization and the chronic poverty
of already marginalized populations, remains a serious
concern. The influx of refugees into the Lake Chad
Basin region has overstretched Government capacities
and further limited service delivery in the affected
areas. The refugee situation comes in addition to a
significant number of internally displaced persons and
returnees who require immediate assistance.

Boko Haram has been weakened as a result of
the intensified military campaign led by countries
of the Lake Chad Basin, and has started resorting to
attacks against soft targets. The ongoing efforts to
operationalize the Multinational Joint Task Force
underscore the commitment of the Lake Chad Basin
Commission and Benin to coordinating action to
fight Boko Haram. It is our sincere hope that a joint
summit of Central and West African Heads of State
and Government, to explore concrete ways to address
the root causes of terrorism and radicalization, will
take place without further delay. At the request of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative for West
Africa and I will continue to engage in consultations
with the States concerned and regional bodies in that
regard.

In addition, the Secretary-General has called
for all counter terrorism operations to fully comply
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee laws. He has also welcomed the adoption, on
26 November, by the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa of
an integrated regional strategy on counter-terrorism and
the non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa, and its plan of action.

The support of international partners remains
crucial in the fight against terrorism, radicalization
and armed violence, as such assistance contributes
substantially to reducing the burden on the States
affected. While there is a need to continue to support
the Multinational Joint Task Force, early recovery and
development activities should also be supported as part
of a holistic approach to countering radicalization in
the region.

While killings and attacks perpetrated by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) have diminished, the
LRA continues to pose a threat to regional security,
particularly to populations in the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The security and humanitarian crisis triggered by the
LRA's activities, including looting and abductions,
should not be underestimated. The LRA has adapted to
our strong collective response by keeping a low profile,
buying time and taking advantage of coordination gaps.
The armed groups hope that fatigue and competing
priorities will weaken our resolve to finish the job. We
must not fall into that trap.

UNOCA has continued its active engagement on
the LRA issue, including on the implementation of
the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the LRA. Last September, in close
cooperation with the African Union, UNOCA convened,
in Entebbe, Uganda, the bi-annual coordination meeting
of LRA focal points. Last month, the African Union
Special Envoy for LRA Issues, Mr. Jackson Tuwei, and
I undertook a visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to meet with the authorities and other relevant
stakeholders to encourage continued commitment
to counter-LRA efforts and enhanced coordination,
including across borders. We were encouraged by the
renewed engagement of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in supporting and cooperating with the AU
Regional Task Force in combating the LRA. I welcome
Special Envoy Tuwei's briefing to the Council today.

During the past months, the number of cases
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, especially along the
Bakassi Peninsula, has increased. In addition to the
usual robbery activities, pirates have been committing
acts of rape - a new and disturbing phenomenon.
Unfortunately, not much progress has been made
towards the implementation of the decisions of the
2013 summit at Yaounde of the ECCAS/Economic
Community of West African States, which includes the
full operationalization of the Interregional Coordination
Centre on Maritime Security in the Gulf of Guinea, as
well as its two subregional arms for West Africa and
Central Africa. I encourage the African Union to hold
as soon as possible the Extraordinary Summit of Heads
of State and Government on Maritime Security and
Development for Africa, originally scheduled to be
held in November in Lome.

Curbing cross-border criminal activities, including
the illicit trade in wildlife and natural resources used
to support the activities of armed groups such as the
LRA, remains a major challenge. In that regard, we
welcome the adoption of General Assembly resolution
69/314, of 30 July 2015, on tackling illicit trafficking in
wildlife, and look forward to its full implementation.
UNOCA also stands ready to support Central Africa
in the development of a subregional strategy to address
the growing phenomenon of poaching.

There are mounting political tensions in the region
as several countries in Central Africa enter an electoral
cycle that will run up to 2018. In part, such tensions
originate from disputes over national Constitutions
and a lack of political consensus. I will continue to
use my good offices to engage with stakeholders in
the subregion to encourage the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including through inclusive political dialogue.

In September in Bangui, at a seminar organized
by UNOCA, journalists endorsed a code of conduct
for media and journalists during the electoral period
in Central Africa. I welcome that commitment,
which defines the role of the media in the conduct
and promotion of peaceful electoral processes in the
subregion.

We look forward to the continued engagement of
the Security Council in promoting peace and security
in Central Africa. UNOCA will continue to work
closely with Member States of the subregion towards
that important endeavour.
