Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I should like first of all to welcome the participation by video-teleconference of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali. Allow me also to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing and, through him, all the staff ofthe United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We welcome their commitment to peace and stability in Mali. Again, inrecent months, many civilians and soldiers have died in Mali. Partner and friendly nations of Mali have also lost troops in the service of peace. On behalf of Belgium, I would like to express our condolences and solidarity with them. Some positive developments in Mali are to be welcomed, including the holding of the inclusive national dialogue, which was open to all, a decrease in intercommunity violence in Centre, thanks in particular to the efforts of the Government and of MINUSMA, timid progress towards the redeployment of reconstituted units to Kidal and signals in the fight against corruption. I also commend the work of the International Commission of Inquiry for Mali. The final report will be presented in June. It will be imperative to follow up and initiate criminal proceedings without delay. The next resumption of the meetings of the Agreement Monitoring Committee has been announced. That is good news. We expect the parties to demonstrate maturity and responsibility in the search for compromise. A resolution to the question of Kidal will be an important step. Despite everything, it is clear that Mali has been slow to emerge from the crisis. In addition to the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, we expect progress on all the priority actions mentioned in resolution 2480 (2019). I recall that resolution 2480 (2019) is clear in affirming that the authors of delaying tactics are liable to sanctions. In recent months, we have observed a rise in criticism of MINUSMA, the French forces and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. Discontent seems to be growing among the people, who denounce not only the presence of foreign forces but also the absence, ineffectiveness or even illegitimacy of State services. We must rise to meet this challenge. It is the very credibility of our action which is at stake, and as we know, it is above all a boon for the enemies of peace. We already know the answers. We must protect the populations throughout Malian territory; listen to them; offer a desirable future to Malian youth, starting with an education and jobs of quality; assure the provision of basic services to all Malians; and act in favour of justice and against impunity for the perpetrators of crimes. In other words, in addition to the indispensable military response in the immediate future, there is an urgent need to deepen Malian democracy in order to put a brake on the growing attraction of the social model advocated by the jihadists. In this respect, political and administrative decentralization constitutes a priority project. MINUSMA remains the most dangerous peacekeeping operation in the world. We thank the Secretary-General for his candid comments, including on the effectiveness of the Mission. MINUSMA's mandate is clear. To protect civilians, MINUSMA can adopt an offensive stance and anticipate threats. The project of a more mobile, agile and flexible Mission has our full support. Let us now give it the means to achieve that. In conclusion, I would like to say a few words about the visit of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to Mali, which I led in my capacity as Chairman of the Working Group. The Working Group visited Mali from 8 to 11 December 2019. Several members of the Working Group joined the visit. We had meetings in Bamako and Mopti with several national and international interlocutors. It was a productive visit, with a rich programme co-organized by MINUSMA, UNICEF and the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. I thank them for their work. The main issues we discussed included the problem of schools closed due to the conflict, the granting of birth certificates, the adoption of the draft revised child protection code and the signing of an action plan by the Platform coalition of armed groups.
