Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
presenting the Secretary-General's report (see S/2012/45) on the outcome of the United Nations
assessment mission's visit to the Gulf of Guinea
region. We would also like to thank Mr. Abdel Fatau
Musah and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga for the
information they provided.

The Secretary-General's report confirms that the
piracy threat in West Africa is far from being a myth.
There have already been human casualties. We were
shocked by the recent report of the death at the hand of
local pirates of the captain of a vessel who was a
citizen of China. In that regard, there is sufficient cause
for alarm. Of course, the situation has not yet gotten as
far out of hand as it has in the Horn of Africa region.
However, if adequate measures are not taken now to
address the issue, the problem could get out of hand.

We agree with the basic conclusion of the report to
the effect that the region's States and the major regional
organizations should take the lead in addressing the
problem. In that regard, we welcome the joint efforts of
Benin and Nigeria, along with the initiatives of the
Economic Community of Western African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission. We support the early
convening of a regional summit on the problem of
piracy in order develop integrated anti-piracy strategies.

The specific character of the pirate attacks in the
Gulf of Guinea demands that instruments be identified
to prevent them. First and foremost, that means
strengthening control over coastlines by national coast
guards of the region, organizing joint patrols,
coordinating activities and exchanging of operational
information. Provided that they are implemented in a
timely and effective way, we believe that such
measures will suffice to adequately resolve the
problem.
Unlike the situation off the coast of Somalia, it is a
promising sign that those activities will be undertaken
by States with established State mechanisms and with
trained armies and naval forces, as well as with normally
functioning legal and law enforcement bodies that are
capable of independently pursuing and prosecuting
pirates. In that regard, we believe that the role of the
international community is to provide the necessary
material and technical support to the States of the
region, primarily by equipping and training specialists
from their coast-guard services. We agree that the
United Nations can play a decisive coordinating role, in
addition to helping to mobilize international financial
resources to combat the threat of piracy.

