Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, for his briefing to the Security Council. I
would like to recognize and express my appreciation
for the presence of Presidents Thaci and Vucie, who are
in the Chamber today.

As we see it, the main threats to stability in the
Western Balkans are the pending issues related to the
status of Kosovo. They are holding back the European
Union (EU) integration process, which in turn is
the main driver of stability in the region, both for
Serbia and for Kosovo. The focus of the international
community must be on insisting that the parties reach
a comprehensive and legally binding agreement that
contributes to regional stability. The international
community should also focus on offering support to
that process.

With regard to the recent legislation passed by
the Kosovo Assembly on the Kosovo Security Force,
in principle that is a matter for the sovereign State of
Kosovo. At the same time, we - as do others - strongly
encourage Pristina to ensure that the transformation
of its security force over the next 10 years takes place
through a transparent and inclusive process, in line with
the Constitution and in close coordination with NATO
and its partners. It is important that all communities
be associated with that exercise, so as to ensure that
the transition eventually receives overall support in
Kosovo.

Over the past weeks and months, the steps taken
by both sides have not contributed to good-neighbourly
relations and a climate conducive to the normalization
of relations. It is important that all sides refrain from
actions and statements that might increase tensions. We
call on both parties to adhere to regional agreements,
including free trade agreements.

We have recently seen a renewed commitment from
both Belgrade and Pristina to engage in the normalization
dialogue facilitated by the European Union. The
dialogue must continue without preconditions. It is

the only path to a sustainable political and inclusive
solution for the region. In that regard, we welcome the
recent resolution of the Kosovo Parliament establishing
a cross-party team for the dialogue, with the aim of
creating a unified platform. We underline the need for
the full and effective participation of women in the
dialogue, as well as consultations with civil society,
including women's organizations.

The future of both Serbia and Kosovo lies within
the European Union. Our message to the two Presidents
present here is that both Pristina and Belgrade need
to implement commitments and pursue the dialogue
process with constructive engagement and dedication.
Now is the time to show courageous and visionary
leadership. If they put the choice of confrontation
or cooperation to their people, I am sure that the
people will support the latter, as they understand that
cooperation is what is needed to bring about peace and
prosperity in the region.

