Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): My delegation is delighted, Sir, to see you
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. We
wish also to convey our sincere congratulations to
Ambassador Legwaila on his assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. We are
convinced that his wisdom and competence will ensure that
the work of the Council yields fruitful and positive results.
My delegation assures you of its full cooperation.

We wish also to congratulate the previous President,
the Ambassador of Argentina, on the way in which he
conducted the work of the Council in January.

The delegation of Rwanda pays tribute to the
Secretary-General for his excellent report dated
1 February 1995 on the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. II).

We also take this opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Maitre Blondin Beye, for his fine work in the quest for a
just, equitable and lasting peace in Angola.

We warmly welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola as the Council considers the question
of his country. The delegation of Rwanda also welcomes
the members of the ministerial delegation dispatched by
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) on this day,
8 February 1995. The Government of Rwanda knows the
importance of OAU involvement in the settlement of
regional conflicts in Africa. My Government appreciates
the key role of that organization in negotiations between
the various conflicting parties in Rwanda. That is why we
are convinced that, with adequate material and financial
support, the OAU can be an African tool with a role
complementing that of the organs of the United Nations.

In the historic record of cooperation between the
United Nations - in this case the Security Council -
and the Organization of African Unity, 8 February 1995
will stand as a memorable date for present and future
generations because of its special mark on the peace
process in Angola.

The historic content of the report before the Council
enables the delegation of Rwanda to feel the steady wind
of optimism wafting over Angola and over the Council's
work on this item since the adoption of resolution
966 (1994) on 8 December 1994. We note with pleasure
the international community's relief at the positive
outcome of the peace process, a process long hampered
by stumbling blocks that nearly discouraged the architects
of national reconciliation in Angola.

The brother African country of Angola, long the
victim of an unrelenting civil war and of enormously
lethal events, has just provided eloquent proof that it is
always possible to reconcile warring brothers who want
to bury the hatchet the better to work together to build a
peaceful, democratic and prosperous nation.

In that context, my delegation pays tribute to the
leaders of the Angolan Government and of UNITA for
their clear-sightedness, courage and ability to
compromise, which led to the "Acordos de Paz" and to
the signing of the Lusaka Protocol. The whole world now
sees the signing of the Lusaka Protocol as the keystone of
the Angolan peace process.

At a time when the international community has
taken regretful note of the fact that the majority of least-
developed countries and many of the world's conflicts are

 

to be found in Africa, the delegation of Rwanda welcomes
the positive developments in the political situation in
southern Africa: in Pretoria, Maputo and Luanda.

In the case of Angola, we welcome the prospect of a
meeting between President Jose Eduardo dos Santos and
Mr. Jonas Savimbi, a historic meeting that will affect the
future of peace in a country that had long been a victim of
the East-West conflict, conducted through African proxies.
That situation was confirmation of the African saying that
when elephants clash, it is the grass that suffers.

The rebuilding and the socio-economic development
of Angola can never succeed on territory said to hold the
world's greatest concentration of land-mines. The Rwandese
delegation therefore hopes for the very rapid deployment of
UNAVEM. III, which can hasten mine-clearance, and the
demobilization and socio-professional reintegration of
UNITA troops not retained in the national army.
Now that the hour of national reconstruction and of
the strengthening of democracy has come in Angola, the
delegation of Rwanda wishes to commend all those vital
forces that are writing a glorious page in the history of
modern Africa by putting an end to a 20-year-long
fratricidal war.

However late it was in emerging, the example of
Angola will remain memorable in the annals of African
history and of United Nations diplomatic history, much to
the joy and happiness of the Angolan people and of the
international community.

The immensity of the task of national reconstruction
for the socio-economic development of Angola requires the
mobilization of multifaceted assistance from the
international community for that country.

The delegation of Rwanda hopes that the arms
merchants who, from near or far, contributed to the
destruction of Angola will become builders of its
reconstruction and socio-economic development.

It is also to be hoped that the international community
will step up its humanitarian assistance, which will then
quickly become development assistance for the
socio-economic recovery of Angola.

In order to contribute to making irreversible the
coming of the era of peace, stability and democracy in
Angola, my delegation supported UNAVEM. II and on
8 December 1994 expressed a desire for the rapid
deployment of UNAVEM. III.

As regards the principal objectives and mandate of
UNAVEM. III, the delegation of Rwanda supports its
establishment in order to back the parties in their efforts
to restore peace and to achieve national reconciliation in
the country in the spirit of the "Acordos de Paz", of the
Lusaka Protocol and of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

We deplore the delay in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol and hope that the remaining military and
police observers authorized in the framework of
UNAVEM. II will soon be deployed in order to help
monitor respect for the cease-fire.

My delegation, which is optimistic regarding the new
era of peace and political stability in southern Africa,
supports the idea of the rapid deployment of UNAVEM
III and will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution.
