Mrs. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me at the
outset, on behalf of my delegation, to express my
sincere appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for convening this public meeting to hear a
briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qaeda and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities regarding its overall
work. Since this meeting will be the last l20-day
briefing by His Excellency Ambassador Heraldo
Mufioz in his capacity as Chairman of the 1267
sanctions Committee, I would like also to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to him for the
effective leadership and great creativity which he
demonstrated throughout his tenure at the head of the
Committee. I also extend our appreciation to the other
members of the Committee, as well as to the experts,
for their dedication and hard work.

The comprehensive 120-day report just
introduced by the Chairman demonstrates that the
Committee has done extensive work during the period
under consideration. That work includes the recent
visits by the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team to South-East Asia, including
Indonesia, against the background of a previous visit
by the Chairman himself. My delegation is of the view
that those visits have benefited not only the
Committee, but also Member States, by enabling them
to share the experiences and challenges of others in the
implementation of the sanctions. In the case of
Indonesia, the visit was regarded as fruitful in the
sense that it further broadened our cooperation and
collaboration with the Committee. We hope that the
information and concerns of Indonesia communicated
to the Monitoring Team during its visit to Jakarta will
be taken into account in its assessment of the sanctions
regime.

We would like also to commend the Committee
for its recent submission on 26 November 2004 of
technical corrections for 53 individuals and 10 entities
on the consolidated list. The technical corrections will
not only improve the quality of the list but will also
enhance its effectiveness and will minimize or
eliminate mistakes in the effort to apprehend
individuals related to Al Qaeda and the Taliban. In that
regard, we hope that the Committee will soon submit
technical corrections for the remaining individuals and
entities.

Permit me now to briefly describe Indonesia's
recent efforts in combating international terrorism. On
6 December 2004, President Susilo Bambang
Yudhoyono opened the International Dialogue on Inter-
faith Cooperation in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. The
Dialogue was co-sponsored by the Government of
Australia and was jointly organized by
Muhammadiyah, one of the largest Muslim
organizations in Indonesia. The 10 countries of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
along with Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea
and Timor-Leste, participated in the Dialogue. The
main objective of the Dialogue was to promote
understanding and harmony among various faith
communities in our region and serve as a basis for
regional and religious leaders to convey important
messages to their communities concerning mutual
understanding, tolerance and peaceful coexistence. By
promoting understanding and learning from one
another's experiences, the gathering will also foster a
common regional resolve to meet challenges such as
terrorism.

That Dialogue was not the first one initiated by
Indonesia. In February 2004, in the context of fighting
terrorism, and as the country with the largest Muslim
population in the world, Indonesia held an
International Conference of Islamic Scholars to
deliberate on better ways of presenting and projecting
Islam to the outside world; that is, Islam as a blessing
to the whole world, contrary to the way it is being
portrayed. Encouraged by the success of those efforts,
Indonesia has launched a diplomatic initiative, of
holding an Asia-Europe dialogue among civilizations
and religions in Bali, Indonesia, in 2005, within the
context of an Asia-Europe meeting.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the conviction of
Indonesia that terrorism is the problem of every nation,
and that we can best fight and vanquish this menace
through multidimensional and multilateral approaches
based on international cooperation and collaboration
among all relevant parties. Indonesia is one such party,
and, as we have stated in the past, we stand ready to
take the necessary measures and to work with other
States and organizations in order to ensure that
terrorism will have nowhere to hide, and that it will be
defeated.

