Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada wishes to thank
President Arias and Costa Rica for bringing this
important discussion to the Security Council. Canada
applauds the initiative of Costa Rica to ensure that the
Council exercises all Articles of the Charter at its
disposal in the fulfilment of its mandated role in the
larger goal of maintaining international peace and
security.

At a time when existing multilateral disarmament
institutions appear unable to move forward on new
multilateral arms control and disarmament treaties,
Canada would welcome actionable proposals from the
Council relating to Article 26, as proposed in Costa
Rica's concept paper. A more proactive Security
Council role would serve to strengthen our treaty-based
multilateral agreements and bodies and help make them
more relevant and robust.

Greater involvement and leadership by the
Council on disarmament issues would be welcome and
could be significant in helping to overcome serious
challenges in the existing disarmament machinery. The
decade-long deadlock in the Conference on
Disarmament and the significant gaps in consensus
within the Disarmament Commission and the First
Committee - most notably on nuclear issues - speak
to the need for the revitalization of our international
efforts.

That said, leadership by the Council would also
need to be accompanied by more constructive
engagement by all countries. "A system for the
regulation of armaments", as proposed in Article 26,
would require buy-in by the world community as a
whole. We would also note that any decision regarding
renewed activity of the Military Staff Committee, after
a prolonged period of disuse, would require significant
consultation and further study.

Canada also supports the importance the concept
paper ascribes to Member States' abiding by the
treaties to which they are parties, as compliance is a
critical element of any legally binding agreement.
Increased transparency in military expenditures and
arms transfers can also assist in building confidence
measures between States and enhancing security.

(spoke in French)

Finally, Costa Rica's paper highlights the
valuable and cost-effective role of regional
organizations in promoting international peace and
security. So, too, does Canada recognize the need for
greater coordination and support in order for the many
regional agreements to achieve greater effectiveness
and realize potential synergies. Regular, comprehensive
interaction between regional organizations and the
Council would be beneficial in that regard.
In conclusion, Canada will follow with interest
the outcome of today's open debate and appreciates
this opportunity to contribute.

