Mr. llkin (Turkey): Allow me to welcome the
presence of Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mexico in the Security Council this
morning. We very much appreciate her gesture and
desire to attend and preside over this important
meeting. It underlines the importance Mexico attaches
to this issue. Allow me to also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for
all her efforts to protect children against every form of
cruelty and violence. Furthermore, I congratulate
Mexico for assuming the chairmanship of the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict and wish it every success. Last but not least, I
must express our deep appreciation for the extensive
work covered by the Working Group during the
chairmanship of France.

Children are our future. We must protect them
from every danger, at all costs. Yet countless children
all over the world suffer every day from the most
horrible kinds of treatment, being forced to fight as
soldiers and being subjected to unspeakable forms of
abuse and violence. Listening to Grace Akallo and
hearing her moving story, we have been reminded once
again of the grave nature of the issue we are dealing
with today. We fully see once again how important it is
to work unrelentingly against the use of children in
armed conflict and how imperative it is for the Council
to fully assume its responsibilities in this regard. In this
context, the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/ 158)
provides us with a very useful basis to work from. We
fully agree with his observations. We also support his
recommendations.

The loss of the lives of children in armed conflict
not only is a tragedy of the first degree, but also
deprives nations of their future. In addition, minors
who are raped or must face grave sexual violence are
physically and mentally wounded forever. We must
protect and save our young and future generations from
such an intolerable shame and burden. The cultural
values of humanity throughout the world require the
protection of children. No one should feel they can
trample this cardinal right and principle. We have zero
tolerance for the abuse of children under any pretext.

A number of criteria and issues were elaborated
during the deliberations of the Working Group. I need
not go into the details. However, we believe that the
following points should be borne in mind. There are
wide and justified expectations of the work of the
Security Council on all issues and problems related to
children. We all have to encourage and urge States to
continue to cooperate with the Working Group. And we
have to expedite and facilitate the work of our Group
by considering reports in a timely manner.

Turkey is party to each and every United Nations
instrument related to the rights of children. Of course,
these United Nations instruments have become very
much an integral part of our national legislation. We
also support initiatives, and are party to various
initiatives, outside the framework of the United
Nations promoting the rights of children.

We should do everything possible to hold
accountable before justice the violators of children's
rights. There should be no impunity for the criminals
and violators if we are to put an end to these horrific
crimes. There is still a long way ahead of us in
achieving that objective. We must remain committed
and must not refrain from taking the necessary steps, as
appropriate. Turkey is resolved to be an active partner
in this honourable journey.

