Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I too
would like to thank United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights Pillay and Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide
Dieng for their briefings.

The bloody conflict triggered by the political strife
in South Sudan has lasted for almost five months and
caused tremendous civilian casualties and a sharp
increase in internally displaced persons. The security
and humanitarian situation is grave. China is deeply
concerned about the situation. We urge both parties to
the conflict in South Sudan to reach a ceasefire and
end violence immediately to effectively implement
the cessation-of-hostilities agreement and settle their
differences through dialogue.

China supports the political mediation efforts led
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and urges both parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to cooperate with the IGAD mediation efforts and
settle their differences in the framework of negotiations.
We welcome the recent resumption of talks between the
two parties under the auspices of IGAD and call upon
the international community to coordinante with the
IGAD-led mediation efforts, support the expeditious
deployment of IGAD's ceasefire monitoring team,
and leverage its constructive influence through their
respective channels to advance the political talks.

China strongly condemns the violent attack that
targeted civilians, the compound of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and peacekeepers in South
Sudan. China urges the parties to the conflict to protect
the security and safety of civilians, including foreigners
and peacekeepers, and to investigate the incident. We
welcome the despatch of the African Union commission
ofinquiry to conduct on-site investigations.

China is following the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan with close attention and is cooperating fully
with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the
Government of South Sudan to start the construction of
a temporary camp for internally displaced persons in
Juba as soon as possible. We call on the international
community to step up its assistance to South Sudan and
to honour its commitment to helping the people of thye
Sudan to weather the crisis.

Since the outbreak of the crisis, China has worked
hard and contributed constructively through various
means to promote peace efforts and talks. The special
representative of the Chinese Government on African
affairs has repeatedly carried out mediation efforts
between the parties to the conflict and the countries of
the region. China has decided to offer financial support
to the IGAD mechanisms. We shall continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan within our
capabilities.

