Mr. Stagno Ugarte (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to discuss an issue about which almost everything has
already been said. Few situations have attracted as
much attention, led to so many meetings, mobilized so
many actors and generated as much disappointment
and frustration as the situation in the Middle East. We
are definitely facing a graveyard of lost opportunities
in a region of the world that is saturated with history.
However, we must not hesitate; on the contrary, we
must continue to press forward. To that end, we trust
that the debate to which the Russian Federation has
invited us will produced added value.

My country believes that the international
community must insist that the parties most directly
concerned negotiate and accept from the outset that a
final and definitive solution will not give them
everything they hope for or claim, or even what they
believe to be fair. The time has come to relinquish rigid
positions based on the past - a past that no longer
exists for either party, because the greatest injustice is
that which has continued for more than six decades. We
have lived through six decades of misunderstandings,
confrontations, regression and disenchantment,
occasionally interrupted by interludes or some progress
that have led us to believe that peace was still possible.
It has been six decades of intolerance and violence on
both sides that have deprived both peoples of the right
to live free of fear.

We all know that there are many obstacles on the
path to peace; some seem insurmountable and cannot
be overcome. But we cannot gloss over the fact that the
behaviour of either party can affect the behaviour of
the other, although it cannot justify it. Certainly, Costa
Rica does not ignore the mutual interdependence
among all of the fundamental elements of a final status
agreement. Each obstacle and element deserves our full
attention, but first and foremost the attention of the
parties most directly involved: Israel and Palestine.

Costa Rica is convinced that the only possible
peace is one that is agreed between the parties, with the
international community strongly behind them and
watching over the success of the negotiations.
However, the international community must be
committed to a solution, and not consider it an
opportunity to gain diplomatic points, renew past
lustre, or possibly derive some personal profit or even
hold a letter of credit that might be redeemed in some
future game of chess.

While we are all betting on the success of the
Quartet, my country believes that it is time to
recognize that the Road Map is fatally skewed. It is a
Road Map to nowhere. It is an itinerary with stages and
stops, but no clear goal or destination. For that reason,
Costa Rica believes that the entire Road Map process
should be addressed from another perspective - in
other words, start from the perspective of the final
stage. The parameters and outlines of a definitive
solution must be crafted and made known from the
outset with total clarity. The destination should be
recognized as a guarantee for the necessary
intermediate and temporary agreements that will
promote definitive solution and make the process
irreversible. All must be committed to the final goal.
Otherwise, the Quartet will continue, to go in circles
without any sense of direction.

Similarly, given that in the immediate and not-so-
immediate neighbourhood there are so many actors
wishing to obstruct the process, there is no reason to
require that final negotiations resolve issues that are
difficult but not fundamental and that have an impact
on the process while not capable of resolving it. Such
false logic has given those who thrive on intolerance
and violence too many opportunities to sabotage the
peace.

The frameworks of step-by-step negotiations
have been a snare in which hope has often been
trapped. That is why it is doubly important that the
outlines of a final outcome be known in advance. Costa
Rica understood this when on 5 February 2008 it
recognized the State of Palestine, thus paying a
historical debt, in particular because it was among the
33 countries that voted in favour of the partition
resolution (General Assembly resolution 181 (II)). It is
time for the international community - starting with
those 33 countries, several of which are represented in
this Chamber - to recognize the existence of two
States and to support a final, peaceful solution to a
situation that has already generated far too much
intolerance and violence and which urgently requires
closure in keeping with the best interests of the parties.

With such a bold gesture, we would strengthen
the democratic Government of President Abbas and
would place it in a position of greater symmetry vis-a-
vis other parties to the conflict. In that way, on behalf
of the Palestinian people and along with Israel, it would
be in a position to chart the path towards a future free
from violence for its people and for the entire region.
Such a political gesture could become a symbol with
the power to shape reality.

It is time to call the fundamental elements of the
conflict by their proper names, and to support the
parties in reaching lasting, concrete, verifiable and
final agreements. That is the spirit of past efforts that
we must retrieve. We must turn our attention to the
parties concerned and their regional neighbours, who
are the ones suffering the most from the consequences
of the conflict. The more involved the parties
concerned are in defining the elements of peace
initiatives, the greater their commitment to speedy and
effective implementation.

That is a lesson that we in Central America can
vouch for. Like the Israelis and the Palestinians, we
had to undergo suffering to understand that the solution
lay within ourselves and that, in the final analysis, it
takes more courage to agree than to reject. In the
meantime, we must immediately allow and facilitate
unobstructed, continuous and timely access for
humanitarian assistance to the population of the
occupied Palestinian territories. Similarly, we must
reverse the growth of illegal settlements, in conformity
with agreements reached, avoiding any measure that
would alter the demographic character of the occupied
territories or cause deterioration in the living
conditions of the Palestinians.

Also, Palestine must strengthen measures to
combat violence, extremism and terrorism and must
exercise control over its own territory.

In our view, two actors are indispensable in
following up the process: the United States -
particularly now, with a new Administration that
believes in the audacity of hope and that has been
linked to or associated with all efforts to find a
solution- and the moderate Arab countries that are
neighbours of the parties. Some of these countries have
learned from the errors of the past and can become
solid partners for peace. The two countries that have
signed peace agreement with Israel - Egypt and
Jordan - as well as Saudi Arabia, have a great deal to
contribute. That is why Costa Rica considers that the
Arab Peace Initiative is an important contribution in
that regard.

Let me comment briefly on the draft presidential
statement on which we have been working. We will be
flexible in order not to prevent its adoption, but let me
note that we would have preferred clearer and more
resolute emphasis on and support for the Arab Peace
Initiative, and a recognition of the Initiative for what it
is: in Mr. Miliband's words, a "deposit that needs to be
matched" (supra). We would also have preferred more
precise direction for the work of the Quartet and we
would have preferred to somewhat reorder the
paragraphs. But we are satisfied at the acceptance of
our request for the elimination of any reference to a
preparatory process for Palestine to acquire full
statehood: as I have said, my country already
recognizes the State of Palestine.

The time has come to start with the ultimate goal
of two independent States living side by side in peace
and security. The time has come to put an end to the
cruel irony that the only democratic Arab State is living
under the oppression of foreign occupation. The time
has come to put an end to a situation that, if
unresolved, will only encourage extremists and that has
strengthened, among others, the deniers in Tehran.

We will never stop saying that in the Middle East
there can be no final victory of one over the other.
Peace is the fruit of endeavours by moderate voices
that accept the coexistence, side by side, of two
independent States living in peace and security.

