Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Let me join others
in thanking Ambassadors Kim Sook of the Republic
of Korea, Gary Quinlan of Australia and Mohammed
Loulichki of Morocco for their respective statements. I
take this opportunity to commend their efforts and the
activities undertaken by their respective Committees
under their able leadership.

We welcome the holding of this briefing today,
which we believe is timely, ahead of the debate on the
challenges of the debate on the challenges of the fight
against terrorism against Africa to be presided over
on Monday by His Excellency Mr. Faure Gnassingbe,
President of Togo. We believe that the focus on this topic
in the month of May demonstrates the commitment of
Togo and African countries to combat terrorism on the
continent and in every corner of the world.

My delegation welcomes the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's initiative to organize a special event this
year focusing on a key aspect for the Committee's
mandate. We welcome in particular the topics chosen
for the special events - the use of communication and
information technologies, technical assistance to States
in the Sahel and enhancing the capacity of States to
counter terrorism. Indeed, those topics address the main
concerns of the moment in the fight against terrorism.

In the same vein, we express our continued
engagement with international and regional partners,
both bilaterally and multilaterally, to contribute to
enhanced coordination of international efforts to
prevent and combat terrorism.

We applaud the Security Council Committee

established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011), concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, for its continued contribution to the fight
against terrorism. We commend the transparent work
of the Ombudsperson and support the regular review of
the Al-Qaida sanctions list as an essential element for
maintaining accuracy and responding to the changing
nature of the threat. We therefore urge designated
States to cooperate and share information with the
Ombudsperson in order to better serve justice.

We further welcome the listing of Malian terrorist
groups, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa and Ansar Dine, for their close ties with Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb, as well as other individuals
associated with those groups.
We are alarmed by the scourge of terrorism in
Mali and the African continent, and we hope that
the 1267-1989 Committee will plan an important
role in that regard, in full cooperation with national
Governments and with peacekeeping missions, such as
the newly established United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. We encourage
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate to support
and coordinate with the African Centre for Studies
and Research on Terrorism, whose mission is to
strengthen among between African countries in order
to prevent and combat terrorism and to assist in the full
implementation of international conventions relating to
terrorism.

Rwanda is firmly committed to the non-proliferation
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, as they
continue to threaten international peace and security.
We are deeply concerned by information on the use of
chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict, and we hope
that investigations will continue to be carried out in
an independent manner to shed light on this serious
development in the Syrian conflict.

Rwanda is committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and we are encouraged by the
fact that ever more countries are submitting national
reports. We call on the remaining countries to submit
their reports, and we hope that they will continue to
benefit form the support of the Committee and the
Group of Experts in order to ensure that all countries
are on-board by the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), in April next year.

We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of
the 1540 Committee in raising global awareness about
the resolution, in strengthening the capacity of States,
in improving mechanisms for sharing best practices
and in promoting synergy with other international
organizations and United Nations institutions, in
particular the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs.

We emphasize the need to collaborate with regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the African
Union. In that regard, we believe that the practice of
holding workshops on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) specifically organized for African States
must be pursued, as the remaining countries are mainly
on the African continent.

It is encouraging that the three Committees are
closely cooperating on key thematic areas of interest
to all by coordinating on the implementation of
projects, regularly exchanging information and best
practices, as well as improving collaboration with
regional and subregional organizations. We encourage
them to strengthen that cooperation, in particular by
implementing the specific recommendations that
Ambassador Kim Sook presented in his joint statement
on behalf of the three Chairs.

In conclusion, we once again commend the efforts
of the three Committees to enhancing the visibility of
United Nations counterterrorism activities, the fight
against weapons of mass destruction and cooperation
with global and regional organizations with a view to
making the world a safer place.

