The President: I have been informed that our
respected colleague, Ambassador Jorge Navarrete,
Permanent Representative of Mexico, is attending a
Security Council meeting for the last time today before
he leaves for a new assignment. On behalf of the
members of the Security Council, I wish to extend our
appreciation for his invaluable, albeit brief,
contribution to the work of the Council. In bidding him
a fond farewell, Council members and I wish him great
success and fulfilment in his future endeavours.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Threats to international peace and security caused
by terrorist acts

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Belarus, Brunei
Darussalam, Canada, Costa Rica, India, Israel,
Jamaica, Japan, Mongolia, Morocco, Nauru, Nepal,
Pakistan, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Spain and
Uzbekistan in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh), Mr. Ling (Belarus), Mr. Serbini
(Brunei Darussalam), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica), Mr. Sharma (India),
Mr. Lancry (Israel), Miss Durrant (Jamaica),
Mr. Motomura (Japan), Mr. Enkhsaikhan
(Mongolia), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco),
Mr. Clodumar (Nauru), Mr. Bhattarai (Nepal),
Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr. Rivero (Peru),
Mr. Stan'czyk (Poland), Mr. Seixas da Costa
(Portugal), Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Arias
(Spain) and Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) took the
seats reservedfor them at the side of the Council
Chamber

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

It is so decided.

I invite Sir Jeremy Greenstock to take a seat at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Council will hear a briefing
by Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to take the floor.


