Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for a very
comprehensive briefing. Allow me also to welcome
among us Her Excellency Ms. Retno Marsudi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia. We are very pleased
to see her here today.

I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later today on behalf of the
European Union.

Despite our constant calls for de-escalation in the
Middle East, unfortunately, there has not been any
progress at all. On the contrary, we have failed to prevent
further loss of life. We once again call on all sides to
act with the utmost restraint in order to avoid further
casualties. In recent violent episodes, civilians on both
sides, including children, were killed or wounded.

The recent developments in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank remind us how important it is
to continue the de-escalation process. Our priority
is to restore a political horizon for the resumption
of a meaningful peace process. We believe that a
negotiated two-State solution and the resolution of all
final-status issues, including Jerusalem, settlements,
the future of Palestinian refugees, borders and security
arrangements, still remain a realistic way to fulfil the
legitimate aspirations of both parties and achieve long-
term peace.

We appeal to both sides to refrain from unilateral
steps that prejudge the outcome of final-status
negotiations and expect them to demonstrate their
commitment to peace through their action and polices.

In more general terms, let me underline that Poland
supports a two-State solution, under which the national
aspirations of both parties to the conflict would be met,
including the Palestinian right to self-determination
and independence, as well as the Israeli right to
ensure its security and normalization of relations with
Arab States. Unfortunately, so far, we have not seen
significant positive moves towards achieving that goal.

Let me now touch briefly on the situation in the
Gaza Strip, where the political and security conditions
remain volatile. We are particularly concerned about
the humanitarian situation of the 2 million people in
the Gaza Strip.

We believe that only by returning to meaningful
bilateral negotiations, based on the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international law, which
encapsulate the internationally agreed parameters, will
it be possible to bring positive input to the process. That
is the only path towards a two-State solution and the
resolution of all final-status issues. The creation of a
political horizon, as well as an appropriate framework
for the political process, will be possible only by
working together with our regional and international
partners, including the Middle East Quartet.

Unfortunately, the two-State solution seems to be at
risk of fading away. Advancing Israel's settlement plans
has the potential of splitting the West Bank into two
parts, which would make the two-State solution almost
impossible. We are worried also about the looming
possibility of the demolition of Khan Al-Ahmar.
We followed closely the Egyptian-led discussions
on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and hope that
that process will be successful. We therefore urge all
Palestinian factions to work together to achieve the
sustainable development of that process, allowing the
Palestinian Authority to resume its full responsibilities
in Gaza. A single, legitimate Palestinian Authority
could represent an important step towards the unity
of the future Palestinian State and the basis for a
sustainable peace agreement.

Let me underline also the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) in the region. We strongly believe
that stopping UNRWA's important activities could
cause instability and create a vacuum, which would
serve only the extremists. We should do our utmost to
preserve the crucial role of UNRWA in this context.

The stabilization of the Middle East is key to global
security. To that end, as mentioned by my United States
colleague, a ministerial conference devoted to security
in and the stabilization ofthe Middle East, co-hosted by
Poland and the United States, will take place in Warsaw
in February. We believe that the conference will bring
added value to efforts towards peace in the Middle East
by creating a positive vision for the region. We have
invited representatives of more than 70 countries from
all regions of the world. As has already been mentioned,
the conference will focus on a range ofhorizontal issues
that affect the whole region. We do not intend to focus
on particular countries during the conference.

