Ms. Mueller: Every month in Yemen, some 250
humanitarian partners work with the United Nations
to assist 13 million people in the country. We are
delivering the world's largest humanitarian operation
in an extremely challenging environment, in which
things seem to be relentlessly getting worse. That
is why humanitarians have consistently advocated
action on five priorities: first, respect for international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians;
secondly, unhindered humanitarian access; thirdly,
funding for the humanitarian response plan; fourthly,
support for the economy; and fifthly, progress towards
a political solution. If fully implemented, these steps
would immediately and significantly reduce people's
suffering and help set the stage for lasting peace. I would
like to review where these five priorities stand today.

First, I will review compliance with international
humanitarian law and the protection of civilians. Every
month, the Council hears examples of the devastation the
war has brought to civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Attacks continue to cause civilian harm across the
country. Two days ago, artillery shells struck a market
in Sa'ada. Initial reports indicated that that attack
killed and injured dozens of civilians. Two weeks ago,
an attack in Taiz governorate badly damaged a hospital
in the town of Al-Mukha. That was the only medical
facility providing free emergency surgical care in the
area. Its closure deprived local communities of access
to those services until the hospital reopened just a few
days ago. It is a miracle that no one on the hospital
grounds was killed or injured in the attack, which
occurred when patients and medical staff were inside
the compound. Over the past month, we have also seen
reports of fishermen killed by air strikes. Shells have
fallen on civilian homes and sites hosting displaced
families. Landmines and other explosives have also
killed and injured civilians. These events occur with a
regularity that should alarm all of us.
It is not only Yemenis who suffer. Migrants and
asylum-seekers, mainly from the Horn of Africa,
continue to arrive in Yemen. The International
Organization for Migration estimates that more than
160,000 migrants will arrive in Yemen this year. They
face appalling levels of abuse, including rape, torture
and economic exploitation by human traffickers. The
war has not spared migrants and asylum seekers either.
Casualties in the Sa'ada attack earlier this week, for
example, included Ethiopian and Somali nationals. Their
plight is now getting more attention. Despite those and
other incidents, there are also some signs of progress.
There were fewer civilian casualties in October than any
other month this year, while September was the year's
deadliest month for civilians. We hope that the violence
will continue to decrease. We continue to call on the
parties to uphold their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to take constant care to spare
civilians and civilian infrastructure.

The second area of priority action is the obligation
of all parties to facilitate humanitarian relief. Yet
humanitarian access remains an enormous challenge in
Yemen, particularly in areas controlled by Ansar Allah.
There were recently some limited improvements - for
example, Ansar Allah authorities have allowed more
non-governmental organization (NGO) projects to start
over the past few weeks, and we have heard assurances
on several other issues. But, despite those assurances,
Ansar Allah authorities continue to enforce an increasing
number of restrictive regulations on humanitarian
action. Those restrictions regularly hinder assistance
for millions of people. Although partners are still able
to deliver aid, doing so requires constant engagement
at all levels, often resulting in unacceptable delays for
people who need the help.

Although some projects were approved recently,
Ansar Allah authorities are still blocking or delaying
half of all NGO projects in areas under their control.
Needs assessment and monitoring are frequently
blocked as well. In several cases, United Nations
and NGO staff have been forced out of Yemen, often
without cause. All types of humanitarian movements in
the north, including deliveries oflife-saving assistance,
are routinely blocked. Even when movements have been
authorized, partners may still face arbitrary refusals or
delays at checkpoints. Ansar Allah-affiliated authorities
also frequently seek to interfere in humanitarian
operations, including attempts to influence the selection
of beneficiaries or implementing partners.

Ansar Allah authorities are also continuing their
campaign to coerce humanitarian partners into working
under conditions that, if accepted, would contradict
humanitarian principles and almost certainly result
in loss of funding and programmes closing down. We
have also seen an alarming increase in Violence and
harassment targeting humanitarian workers in areas
controlled by Ansar Allah. Over the past three months,
there have been 60 separate incidents of attacks,
intimidation, detention and other forms of mistreatment
of humanitarian staff. In several cases, the looting of
relief supplies and occupation of humanitarian premises
have disrupted critical deliveries of aid and services.

The very serious issues I have just outlined have
all been directly, clearly and repeatedly raised with
Ansar Allah. Although some forward steps have been
taken after continuous engagement, the humanitarian
operating environment in the north remains extremely
constrained. As we begin to think about next year's
humanitarian response plan and our ability to raise
money for it, we sincerely hope that Ansar Allah
authorities will listen and change course in line with
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

On a separate note, we also hope that Ansar Allah
will allow the long-planned United Nations assessment
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker to take place. The FSO
SAFER tanker continues to pose a serious risk of
environmental and humanitarian disaster in the Red
Sea - and such a disaster is avoidable. Our assessment
team remains ready to deploy within three weeks.

Access challenges in Government-controlled areas
are ofa different nature. We continue to seek a faster and
more streamlined approach to Government processes to
approve humanitarian projects, as well as to expedite
humanitarian cargo arriving at the Port of Aden.

The third point I want to highlight is funding for
the humanitarian response plan. As the Council heard
last month from Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
(see S/PV.8642), new funding since September from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates,
Kuwait and the United States, among others, has
enabled agencies to reopen suspended programmes.
That means that children are once again receiving
regular vaccines, health-care centres are receiving
supplies and malnutrition treatment centres are getting
back to work. With the humanitarian response plan now
more than 70 per cent funded, the aid operation is on
a much stronger financial footing than it was several
months ago. We are grateful to all donors for their
continuing support.

The fourth priority is the economy, which is a key
driver of humanitarian needs. Yemen imports almost
everything, including food, fuel and medicine. That
means the exchange rate makes an enormous difference
to people's lives and their ability to access the goods
they need to survive. The rate is currently fluctuating
between 540 and 575 rial to the United States dollar. That
is better than the 595 rate last month, but still more than
twice as high as the pre-crisis level. We continue to call
for a regular programme of foreign exchange injection
into Yemen's economy to stabilize the exchange rate
and help make goods and services affordable.

Last month we also updated the Council on the
impact of severe fuel shortages following the strict
enforcement of Government regulations on commercial
fuel imports. Fuel is essential to transport food to
markets, pump drinking water and power sanitation
systems. Shortages have eased considerably since then,
and fuel prices have come down, although rural areas
are taking longer to rebound. As members just heard
from Special Envoy Griffiths, the parties have also
worked closely with his Office to design a mechanism
that will allow adequate fuel supplies to enter all ports,
including Al-Hudaydah. We commend the flexibility of
all stakeholders on this critical issue. It is essential to
keep supplies of fuel and other essential commodities
flowing. Under-Secretary-General Lowcock was in
the region this week and had positive discussions
with the Government of Yemen on the fuel issue and
the economy.

The fifth and final priority is the need for progress
towards a political solution and, ultimately, peace. We
all agree that Yemen needs a political solution if the
crisis is ever to end. Members also just heard Special
Envoy Griffiths summarize several very encouraging
developments in that regard. We welcome those steps
and join millions of Yemenis in hoping that they are a
sign of even more progress to come.

