Mr. Moragas Senchez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union a few minutes ago.

At the outset, I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for convening
today's debate. I thank the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, and the lead author
of the independent progress study on youth and
peace and security (see S/2018/86), Mr. Simpson, for
their briefings.

Spain is a member of Champions of Youth and is
firmly committed to resolution 2250 (2015), which it
sponsored. We firmly believe that young people have
enormous potential to promote international peace and
security and prevent violent radicalization processes,
to which they are particularly vulnerable. It is for
that reason that my country commends the study and
its recommendations. Spain is developing concrete
measures to ensure that young people have forums and
tools that allow them to play a positive role in prevention
and mediation efforts, the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security and the fight against violent
extremism. The current political, economic and social
challenges we all face further reinforce the importance
of ensuring that young people play an active role in the
promotion of peace, stability and prosperity in their
societies. That is vital in order to build communities
with greater capacity and resilience to respond to
the dynamic nature of radicalization, extremism and
rhetoric that incite hatred and intolerance.

Our young people are extremely vulnerable to
those threats and we must develop innovative policies
and programmes that foster the political participation
and activism of the 1.8 billion young people throughout
the world. To that end, we must speak their vernacular.
It is not enough to provide forums for young people.
They have their own voice and it is essential that they
be heard and that their perspective be included in the
political and social debate. Democracy and human rights
must be strengthened as we combat radicalization and
intolerance. Only in that way can we restore the trust of
young people in institutions and ensure that they work
to improve and strengthen them, thereby granting full
legitimacy to State policies.

Nationally, Spain is strongly committed to
improving mechanisms for young people participating
in public affairs, in particular in public policy review
processes. In that regard and as part of the European
Structured Dialogue for young people, for the first time
the decision was taken to include, along with policy-
makers, the heads of other ministries whose functions
cover key issues that affect young people, such as the
Ministry of the Interior, the Ministry of Justice, the
Ministry of Finance and Public Administration and
the Ministry of Housing. We must underscore the
participation of young people in review processes that
examine progress towards achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which is being implemented in Spain.

Various actors participate in that process, including
young people, through the various participatory
mechanisms. At the same time, action is being taken
to enhance the skills of those working on the issue
of youth, through dual training, so that they can
detect and intervene early to prevent the violent
radicalization of young people, through informal and
formal education mechanisms. We have also been
working in collaboration with youth organizations to
improve employment conditions for young people so
that they can obtain decent jobs, for example, through
the official recognition of skills and abilities acquired
in informal education mechanisms or through various
talent-development initiatives for young people, whose
contribution to society will be key to its development.
In the same vein, Spain launched its Young Talent
Programme this year. The Programme seeks to provide
a positive environment for young people in which they
can develop their talent through the recognition and
support of their endeavours in various areas.

Spain knows that none of this will be achieved
without a gender approach. It is essential that we do
not break the link with the women and peace and
security agenda. There has been a shift from women
being considered as mere victims to being viewed as
vital actors in conflict prevention and resolution and
subsequent reconstruction efforts. Young women have
an enormous potential to contribute to peacebuilding.

At the European level, Spain leads the agenda of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) on youth and peace and security and chairs the
Group of Friends of Youth and Security. In May 2017, an
OSCE conference was held in Malaga, under the theme
"Working with Youth for Youth: strengthening security
and cooperation online". Ministers, other eminent
persons and, above all, more than 200 young people from
61 countries attended the conference. They adopted
the Malaga Youth Declaration, which reflects the
recommendations of resolution 2250 (2015) and makes
a key contribution to the fight against radicalization,
the prevention of extremism, the promotion of tolerance
and the fight against misinformation online.

Spain wishes to do more. That is why it has joined
the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme. We are
committed to strengthening the role of young people in
the implementation and review of Spain's multilateral
policy, as well as to helping inform young people about
issues addressed at the United Nations so that their views
are always taken into account. The implementation of
policies geared towards the greater participation of
young people in various areas in Spain is due not only
to its compliance with certain international obligations,
but also to the firm belief that the participation of our
young people will ensure sustainable public policies.
Young people will not only benefit; they will be key
actors now and in the future.

