Mr. McLay (New Zealand): New Zealand thanks
you, Madam President, and Secretary of State Kerry
for having convened this very important debate. I place
on record New Zealand's continued and deep concern
about the situation in Iraq. Like others, we have been
outraged by the brutal actions of the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We have been appalled by
the loss oflife, the large-scale displacement ofinnocent
civilians and the widespread abuse of human rights, all
of which deserve the strongest condemnation. We have
been shocked by the resulting humanitarian crisis.

Since June, New Zealand has made two
humanitarian contributions, through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
Secretary of State Kerry mentioned earlier, to assist
those displaced by the violence in Iraq. We commend the
efforts of members of the international community that
have provided relief assistance to those in the greatest
need. New Zealand therefore takes this opportunity to
express solidarity with the people of Iraq as they deal
with the crisis.

We specifically offer New Zealand's support to the
newly formed Government of Prime Minister Al-Abadi.
We welcome his stated commitment to an inclusive
Government, which will be fundamental to addressing
the root causes of Iraq's recent internal challenges.

The New Zealand general election takes place
tomorrow, Saturday 20 September. That imposes
constitutional limits on our ability today to respond
further, in the manner of some others. However,
within those necessary constraints, we welcome the
determination of the United States and of others to
address the global threat posed by ISIL and the ongoing
humanitarian crisis in Iraq. We particularly welcome
the support that such an effort has received from
regional players, including the Arab States.

An effective response must have the support of those
of the wider region. If that response is to be enduring,
it must recognize their legitimate interests, not least the
concern voiced by the United Arab Emirates that ISIL
could provide a safe haven for terrorists. In the end,
as emphasized earlier by the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and Lebanon, the evolution of ISIL must be
seen as the result of much broader dynamics and causes
that extend beyond Iraq and affect the entire region.
That means that, in responding to the specific threat
posed by ISIL, the international community must take
account of the impact on the wider region.

Against that background, New Zealand remains
committed to offering the utmost political and
humanitarian support to the people of Iraq as they face
these grave challenges.

