Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by repeating in the Chamber what I said in the
consultations room - we offer you and your mission
our congratulations, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency. We very much look forward to working
with you and supporting you. We also congratulate
our Chinese colleagues for the way they conducted the
presidency last month.

I would also like to reiterate my condolences here
in the Chamber to the United States of America on the
death of George H. W. Bush, who I had the honour of
meeting in the United Nations some 10 years ago.

Turning to today, I would like to thank the Special
Adviser and Head of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant for
his first briefing to the Council since the Team's
deployment on 29 October. I think the Team has made a
very good start and we look forward to its future work
and briefings.

The Special Adviser said that we really ought
to pay tribute to the suffering and the indefatigable
courage of the survivors of Da'esh violence. I think that
is absolutely right. Justice and accountability for the
victims need to be at the centre of our approach, and I
want to commend the new Government of Iraq for its
commitment to supporting the work of the Investigative
Team. We also welcome the continued support of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
for the Team, and I would like to recognize UNAMI's
efforts to facilitate the deployment of the Investigative
Team to Baghdad. It is important that all efforts on the
ground be complementary and avoid duplication, and
we are very pleased that the Team's budget proposal
reflects the importance of all efforts complementing
each other.

We are encouraged to see the work of the team so far
and welcome the fact that there have been contributions
from the Government of Iraq, from UNAMI, from allied
nations and other United Nations bodies in supporting
the Investigative Team.

I think it is crucial that we get these early stages
right, including by establishing a mechanism for
cooperation between the Investigative Team and the
Government of Iraq. That is important for swift and
thorough evidence collection, but it will also help
ensure that evidence is suitable to be used before the
courts. It will, of course, rely on a cooperative and
mutually respectful relationship, which we are sure will
be present.

The United Kingdom very much agrees with the
strategic vision in the guiding principles regarding the
Team's immediate priorities. We were pleased to see a
very strong focus on engagement with the Government
of Iraq. That will obviously be crucial to the success
of the Team's work, and we encourage the Steering
Committee designated by the Government of Iraq to
meet on a regular basis with the Investigative Team,
particularly during these early stages of implementation.

The Special Adviser mentioned the importance of
voluntary contributions to the trust fund established
pursuant to resolution 2379 (2017). I want to echo that
sentiment. We think that should also cover voluntary
contributions to the Investigative Team in the form of
expertise and skills. I would like to pay tribute to Qatar
and the Netherlands for their generous contributions.
We ourselves have already donated to the trust fund and
we remain committed to supporting the Investigative
Team as it fulfils its mandate.

Going back to where I started, justice for victims
remains at the heart of the resolution. It is vital that the
Investigative Team help to secure accountability for the
victims ofthe terrible crimes ofDa'esh in order to bring
closure to those who still suffer - including women,
children and minority communities.

