Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): Together with other
delegations, we voted in favour of the draft resolution
just adopted. Brazil fully supports the important role
being played by UNIFIL in southern Lebanon, in
conformity with its mandate, as established by
resolution 425 (1978), of confirming the withdrawal of
Israeli forces, assisting the Government of Lebanon in
ensuring the return of its effective authority in the area,
and restoring international peace and security.

We encourage the Secretary-General, in preparing
his recommendations with regard to reviewing the
mandate and structures of UNIFIL, as envisaged in
operative paragraph 11, appropriately to take into
consideration, inter alia, the opinions and views of the
Lebanese Government in this matter.

My delegation is gravely concerned at the
persistence of tensions, hostile rhetoric and
skirmishes - some with deadly consequences -
which characterize the situation along the Blue Line.
We regret the fact that such events are continuing to
take place notwithstanding the repeated appeals made
by the Council and by the Secretary-General and his
representatives in that regard.

We call on both parties fully to comply with the
provisions contained in resolution 425 (1978) and
subsequent Council resolutions. We expect Israel fully
to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Lebanon by ceasing its recurrent incursions into
Lebanese airspace, which have proved to entail clear
destabilizing and provocative effects.

For its part, the Government in Beirut must do
more to exert effective authority and control over the
southern part of its territory as well as to reassess its
positions regarding the deployment of its forces along
the line of withdrawal. We also call on both parties to
comply with their obligations in ensuring the safety
and security of United Nations personnel. They must
do their utmost to prevent the recurrence of incidents
such as that of 9 January last.

We take this opportunity to convey once again
our solidarity to France and Sweden and to the
concerned families for the death and injury caused to
two of their nationals. As the Secretary-General
remarks in his latest report, Israel and Lebanon have
been stressing their desire to avoid confrontation. We
urge both of them to live up to those aspirations.

Brazil is genuinely committed to the promotion
of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. We expect the parties, with the support of
the international community, to take advantage of the
present opportunities and to sustain this favourable
momentum.

