Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I wish to thank
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his statement this
morning. My delegation also wishes to thank Mr. Paul
Volcker for the report and for his briefing on the main
findings of the Independent Inquiry Committee on the
oil-for-food programme. In view of the comprehensive
nature of the document we have received, I shall
confine myself to a preliminary reaction.

The complexities involved in executing a
multibillion-dollar programme throughout the better
part of a decade of work recommend careful scrutiny
and consideration of the findings published by the
Committee. We trust those findings will shed light on
the numerous allegations of mismanagement and other
accusations relating to the oil-for-food programme. We
remain hopeful that they can provide definite answers
to doubts and suspicions regarding this matter.
My delegation believes that the report should be
approached in a forward-looking, systematic manner to
promote, on the basis of its findings and
recommendations, the establishment of adequate
oversight mechanisms able to ensure that the
ascertained wrongdoings and mismanagement will not
happen in the future. It must be kept in mind, however,
that the oil-for-food programme was unanimously
established by the Security Council and that it achieved
its aims of providing essential humanitarian assistance
to the needy population of Iraq under international
sanctions and in other difficult situations.

Currently, all attention is directed towards
preparations necessary to make the upcoming high-
level plenary event a success. With little more than a
week to go before the event, we are all engaged in
delicate, complex negotiations to ensure that the
summit's outcome will be commensurate with its
dimensions as the greatest gathering of world leaders,
perhaps in all time. All efforts, therefore, should be
made to ensure that the issuing of the report at this
particular time does not have the unintended effect of
diverting attention away from the high-level plenary
event. Conversely, the imminence of the summit must
also not lead to a less-than-ideal consideration of the
findings of the report itself.

As far as the work of the Committee is
concerned, my delegation is very interested in
receiving the upcoming report focusing on the private
companies involved in the oil-for-food programme.
It will contribute an important - perhaps
indispensable - dimension for the correct assessment
of the shortcomings of the programme.

