Mr. Perera (Sri Lanka): Let me take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your country's assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I also join
other speakers in commending the President for having
convened today's timely and important debate.

Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Sri Lanka reaffirms its steadfast support to the
Palestinian cause. This debate reminds us once again
of the urgency of finding a just solution to the question
of Palestine and addressing the plight of the Palestinian
people. Especially at this time of unprecedented unrest
in the Middle East, when our focus is on the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh and the exigent
refugee crisis in Syria, the world must not forget the
dire humanitarian situation of the Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, especially Gaza, where
conditions are indefensible. We stress the urgency of
leadership to end the marginalization and oppression of
Palestinians in their own land.

Sri Lanka supports the work of United Nations
agencies in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, which keep the majority of the people in Gaza
supplied with the bare necessities, including education.
We reiterate the need for continued funding by the donor
community to enable UNRWA to function effectively.

As Chair of the Special Committee to Investigate
Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the
Palestinian People and Other Arabs of the Occupied
Territories, Sri Lanka is particularly concerned about
the escalating Violence and the number of casualties
that include infants. The root cause for the escalating
Violence is the continuing policy of settlement
expansion and the climate of impunity relating to the
activities of the settlers.

Israel's settlement activities violate international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions,
and exacerbate the incidents of violence in the region.
The international community has repeatedly called for
a freeze on settlement activity. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council,
the Economic and Social Council, as well as the
International Court of Justice, have all unequivocally
condemned the settlement activity as illegal. Ending
such practices, which contribute to human suffering
and continuing friction in the occupied territories, are
essential steps that must be taken in order to improve
the situation on the ground.

Due to the blockade placed on Gaza, approximately
80 per cent of families there are now dependent on
humanitarian aid from the United Nations for their
survival. Unemployment levels remain at around
40 per cent and movement restrictions in and out of
Gaza continue to be a major problem for the economy
and welfare of the people of Palestine. Restrictions on
imports and exports are stifling economic growth. They
need to be lifted within the framework of resolution
1860 (2009), as it would contribute considerably to the
economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being of
its people.

My delegation calls for a just and lasting solution
to the question of Palestine and an end to the suffering
of the Palestinian people. The blockade of the Gaza
Strip is yet another obstacle to peace. More than one
year after widespread destruction in Gaza, thousands
of families continue to live in their damaged homes,
even during the winter months. As ofAugust 2015, only
one third of the $4 billion pledged had been disbursed,
and up to 100,000 Palestinians remained displaced and
living in untenable conditions. Civilians are struggling
for access to electricity, water and health care.

Both parties to the conflict must create the
necessary environment to facilitate peace. There is an
urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures
in support of efforts to resume dialogue and substantive
negotiations. Israel must protect the Palestinian civilian
population in the occupied territories and desist from
actions that are contrary to the established rules of
international law and practice. We are also mindful of
the security needs of Israel. The indiscriminate attacks
against Israeli civilians will lead to a counterproductive
cycle ofviolence. We encourage both parties to exercise
the utmost restraint for the sake of the safety of civilians
and for the greater goal of peace.

It is important to remain engaged in a just and
durable solution to the situation in the Middle East.
Sri Lanka supports the implementation of General
Assembly resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment
of a two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.
The Viability of the two-State solution will depend on
the political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people. We are confident that Palestinian
internal reconciliation efforts will continue. The
progress made by the Palestinian Authority, despite
severe political and economic constraints, is
commendable.

Sri Lanka fully supports the work of United Nations
agencies serving Palestinians, but it is important to
realize that continued indiscriminate attacks against
civilians will only enhance feelings of desperation
and insecurity. The question of Palestine remains a
serious threat to international peace and security.
Therefore, a comprehensive and just settlement of the
Palestinian question is a priority for the international
community. Despite decades of disappointment, we are
encouraged that the people of Palestine have resolutely
sustained their spirit and the strength of purpose to
gain their legitimate rights and have prevailed over
the considerable challenges facing them. We hope that
the Palestinian people will work together to preserve
national unity, which is imperative for the creation of a
fully sovereign, independent Palestine.

Finally, we also welcome resolution 2254 (2015),
which endorses the road map for a peace process
in Syria and sets a timetable for talks. Its effective
implementation will be Vital for the overall situation in
the Middle East.

