Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Let me first express
the appreciation of my delegation to you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the question of Palestine. We
also wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, for his
briefing on the latest developments in the region. In
making this statement, Indonesia associates itself with
the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The Council's debate today provides yet another
vivid reminder of the continuing hardships prevalent in
the occupied Palestinian territory and, not least, of the
paucity of progress in the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Like others, Indonesia remains profoundly
concerned by the depth of the humanitarian crisis that
continues to permeate the Gaza Strip following the
Israeli attacks of December 2008 and January 2009.
While the worst of the military action may have
stopped, the flow of food, medicine and reconstruction
material allowed into Gaza remains grossly inadequate.
The international community cannot allow that
situation to continue. It must continue to speak as one
in demanding that Israel open the border crossings to
Gaza in order to allow reconstruction efforts and access
to much-needed humanitarian supplies to ease the
humanitarian crisis.

The litany of Israeli illegal practices is well
chronicled. Few, however, are as great an affront to the
prospects of peace and as great a hurdle to the peace
process as its illegal settlement practices. Israel
continues to build and expand illegal settlements, in
the process demolishing Palestinian homes and other
structures, confiscating lands and imposing
checkpoints that arbitrarily restrict the movement of
Palestinians. Despite the repeated protests of the
international community, Israel persists in its efforts to
change the character and legal status of East Jerusalem.

Indonesia once again condemns those settlement
policies, which gravely undermine the contiguity,
integrity, viability and unity of the occupied Palestinian
territory and jeopardize the prospects for achieving the
two-State solution for peace on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders through the establishment of a
sovereign, independent State of Palestine with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

While Israel persists in its illegal settlement
activities, Indonesia is encouraged by the ever-
strengthening international consensus rejecting those
activities and demanding an immediate halt to and the
dismantling of those settlements.
09-42592

Indeed, while Israel remains deaf to the
international exhortation to live up to its commitment
to a two-State solution to the conflict, Indonesia draws
encouragement from a number of recent significant
developments. First, there is a renewed sense of
urgency in the intra-Palestinian reconciliation talks,
facilitated by the Government of Egypt. We wish to
underscore the importance of making progress in those
efforts, which are aimed at promoting Palestinian unity.

Secondly, there has been a practical
demonstration of the commitment of the international
community to the cause of peace in Palestine through
pledges of material assistance, as evidenced at the
International Conference on the Palestinian Economy
for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm
el-Sheikh, Egypt, on 2 March 2009.

Thirdly, there has been a stepping up of
diplomatic activity with the objective of restarting
negotiations. In that regard, we acknowledge in
particular the vigorous efforts being made by the
United States and the continued engagement of the
Quartet.

Indonesia, for its part, remains consistent in
calling for a settlement based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Our support of statehood for
Palestine is steadfast - statehood, we wish to
emphasize, with all its attributes.

A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East requires not only a solution to the question
of Palestine, but also progress on the Israel-Lebanon
and Israel-Syria tracks. In that connection, we continue
to demand that Israel comply with the relevant Security
Council resolutions and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967.
Similarly, we continue to be concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land Violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty, in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
we call on Israel to withdraw completely from the
remaining Lebanese occupied land.

