Judge Pocar: Let me first thank all the members
of the Council for the support and appreciation for the
work done so far in trying to meet the deadlines that
the Tribunal and the Security Council set, as early as
2000-2001, for the completion of the Tribunal's work.

The commitment of the Security Council to
support the Tribunal until the work is completed in its
entirety is of the utmost value for us. As the Council
members know, the Tribunal has shown its
commitment to accelerate as much as possible its work,
and we continue to explore all possible, new avenues
and to use all measures available to make full use of
resources in this respect.

In this context, let me come to the question that
you, Mr. President, asked me to clarify. We are now
facing a situation in the next month whereby we could
start a new trial, if we only had the judges to start it.
This is due to the fact that the ad litem judges we
currently have will have to remain until the end of their
trials and the writing of their judgments.

I cannot ask the Secretary-General to appoint a
new ad litem judge until these leave, because the quota
for the judges is currently complete. I cannot put an ad
litem judge on this case because his or her
non-renewable three-year term will expire four, five or
six months later. So, I have to wait until the judgments
are rendered before appointing new ad litem judges.

Thus, I propose that the Security Council allow
the Tribunal to authorize the appointment of additional
ad litem judges on a temporary basis, so that we can
start a new trial. They could then work at least until the
judgments are rendered. We will respect the limit on
the number of judges when, a few months later, the
judgment to be written will be rendered. Thus, this is a
temporary measure to go beyond the quota of 12 ad
litem judges to allow for the starting of a new trial.
This would be possible because we would have a
courtroom available, since, when the trial comes to the
drafting of the judgment, no courtroom is needed.

May I recall that there already exists a precedent
in this regard? In 2005, a newly-elected permanent
judge was appointed two months earlier and then, for
two months, we had an additional permanent judge in
order to allow the timely start of a new trial. This
approach would also allow for the speeding up of the
end of the trials and a greater respect for the deadlines
of the completion strategies. I hope this has clarified
this point.

To conclude, allow me to also express my
appreciation for all the comments that have been made
by the members of the Council on the subject of
capacity-building for national jurisdictions, an activity
that the Tribunal has carried out in these last years in
trying to establish a partnership with domestic courts
and to work more closely with them. We believe that
the real legacy of the Tribunal will be, on the one hand,
in the assessing of international humanitarian law, as
far as individuals responsibility and its observance is
concerned and, on the other, in the continuation of the
domestic courts after the Tribunal will have closed its
doors. It is thus essential that we establish this
partnership in order to bring this about in the future.

