Mr. Ryan (Ireland): Ireland is fully associated
with the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union.

My authorities are deeply dismayed at the latest
surge of violence in the Middle East. They condemn
unreservedly all acts of terrorism and violence. They
particularly condemn acts that take the lives of
civilians and that put the lives of civilians at risk. Such
acts are contrary to international humanitarian law and
are never justified.

A peace process once bright with hope and
promise has dimmed. Acts of violence, a cycle of
reprisal and counter-reprisal, political acts of
extraordinary pettiness all too often seem to be the
order of the day. We cannot allow the hope and
promise once offered by the Middle East peace process
to slip away. The Israeli and Palestinian peoples are
fated by history to live together side by side. Healing
and reconciliation offer the only way forward. The
current cycle of decay, bitterness and acrimony leads
nowhere, but serves to put off the inevitable day when,
by political acts of true courage and imagination, the
two peoples will be able to live together in healing and
reconciliation.

It should be clear to all by now that no solution
will be found through terrorism or any other form of
violence, or through military action. The Israeli and
Palestinian peoples have suffered enough, and it is past
time for the Israeli Government and the Palestinian
National Authority to take the steps that each knows it
must take to bring their peoples' suffering to an end.

The Palestinian Authority must act vigorously
and effectively to bring an end to terrorism. Terrorist
acts are not only wrong in themselves; they will
prolong the suffering of the Palestinian people and will
not bring the achievement of their legitimate
aspirations one day closer. As has been amply
demonstrated, they gave the best possible excuse to
those on the Israeli side who wanted to halt the peace
process and who now wish to prevent its resumption.

The Israeli Government must likewise accept that
the excessive use of force, extrajudicial killings;
attacks on the institutions and infrastructure of the

S/PV.4478

 

Palestinian Authority; and collective punishment,
including house demolitions, economic closures and
the impoverishment of Palestinians, are not only wrong
and deeply unjust in themselves, but can never bring
about the peace and security desired by the Israeli
people. Rather will these acts reinforce the resentment
and alienation necessary to fuel and sustain campaigns
of terror. Again, we draw attention to the corrosive
effect that continued settlement activity has had, and
continues to have, on the peace process.

A peace process involves partnership. Neither
side can choose the partner with whom to deal. There
is no choice. Palestinians have no option but to deal
with the democratically elected Government of Israel,
led by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Likewise, only the
Palestinian National Authority and its duly elected
leader, President Yasser Arafat, can represent the
Palestinian people in the peace process. President
Arafat, through his physical isolation, has been
prevented for many weeks now from travelling and
from carrying out his functions. This policy does
Israeli no credit. It is seen as vindictive by the
international community. It is manifestly counter-
productive and should be brought to an end.

Partnership in a peace process means that even
though the other partner may be, in a sense, an
adversary, one nonetheless acts in a way that will help
him to carry out the tasks on his side necessary to
advance the peace process. Partnership means having
an understanding of the political and other difficulties
faced by the other party. Partnership means carrying
on, despite the inevitable setbacks. The partnership that
was established after Oslo functioned in that way.
Israelis and Palestinians demonstrated that they could
manage it and build on it. The partnership survived
many crises before tragically breaking down.

The minimum level of trust required to restore
and sustain the necessary partnership in the Middle
East peace process clearly does not now exist. To
restore this trust, the sustained and concerted
involvement of the international community is
required. Last Thursday, Secretary-General Annan said
that it was imperative for the Security Council and the
wider international community to work in a concerted
manner with the parties towards a just, lasting and
comprehensive peaceful settlement.

Ireland agrees strongly with the Secretary-
General. We have consistently stated in both private

and public deliberations of this Council that the
Security Council does have a role, and that it should
exercise it with care and balance in the interests of
helping the peace process. It is entitled to a view, and
should be listened to, regarding the implementation of
its own resolutions. It should work, as the Secretary-
General said, in a concerted manner with the parties
themselves, as well as with the others involved, in
particular the members of the "Quartet", which
includes the European Union. The High Representative
of the European Council, Mr. Javier Solana, is in the
region at the moment, working with others to help the
parties to end the cycle of violence and recommit
themselves to the path of political negotiation.

The Secretary-General also referred to new
thinking and imaginative new ideas being proposed
from several quarters. Ireland agrees with him that this
is to be welcomed and that the new ideas should be
considered promptly and thoroughly by the
international community. Prominent among the new
ideas are the reported proposals of Crown Prince
Abdullah of Saudi Arabia. These deserve the most
careful consideration by the parties and all those
engaged in mediation, as well as by the Arab world.
New ideas have also emerged from the ongoing
contacts between Deputy Prime Minister Peres and the
President of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Abu
Ala.

Ideas like these will contribute to developing the
political horizon that is needed to achieve a reduction
in violence and a return to the negotiating table. When
we discussed the Middle East issue here in December
last, all delegations were firmly focused on the
implementation of the Tenet understandings and the
Mitchell report, because these promised a route back to
the negotiating table. However, even though President
Arafat's statement of 16 December was followed by a
significant reduction in violence, that did not prove
sufficient to get the Tenet and Mitchell processes under
way. It became clear at that point that something more
was required, in the Secretary-General's words,
moving beyond a discussion focused on how to pursue
Tenet and Mitchell.

Progress on the political and security fronts, as
well as on the economic front, must proceed in parallel.
The violence between Israelis and the Palestinians does
not exist in a political vacuum. It exists primarily
because Palestinian national aspirations - legitimate
aspirations - have been frustrated.

S/P\'.4478

 

We are all agreed that a reduction in violence is
the most urgent priority. It takes nothing from this
priority to say at the same time that it should be made
clear to the Palestinian people what they can expect for
their political future, and to take steps to help them
back to the road of economic and social development.
This would strengthen the hand of those working to
stop terrorism and end the armed intifada, and it would
weaken the hand of those who claim that Palestinian
national aspirations are more likely to be brought about
by confrontation than by negotiation.

