Mr. Merores (Haiti) (spoke in French): Allow
me first, Madam, to convey my delegation's
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the current month. Allow
me also to convey my delegation's congratulations to
Ambassador Wang Guangya of China, under whose
presidency the Security Council mission, and that of
the Economic and Social Council, were conducted.

Once again, the commitment to assist Haiti in its
process of democratic transition has been most
eloquently demonstrated. The Security Council's
mission from 13 to 16 April - the first Council
mission to Haiti or to Latin America - in conjunction
with the mission of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, attests to the
United Nations family's great interest in the cause of
Haiti. I am pleased once again to welcome that
initiative. On behalf of the people and the Government
of Haiti, I thank the members of the Council, in
particular the head of the mission, the Ambassador of
Brazil, and convey the interest and the hope created
among our people with respect to the awaited outcome
of the mission.

I take this opportunity once again to thank the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for the very difficult work it is doing in
my country. The Mission's presence is essential, and its
role is particularly important in terms of creating
security and in implementing a variety of development
projects, which are most appreciated by my people.

I humbly salute the memory of the members of
the Mission who have died in carrying out their duties.
They have the gratitude of the people of Haiti.

As the Council noted during its mission to Haiti
and as expressed in its report, poverty and
unemployment are at the root of the serious crisis
confronting the country. The Interim Government's
priority remains the holding of free and democratic
elections at the end of 2005. However, in addition to
the elections, my Government intends to lay the
foundations for the socio-economic development of a
modern State, a task that requires the long-term
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community.

That is why the Interim Government endorses the
recommendations of the report, which notes that Haiti
is at a decisive turning point in its history. The report
states that the United Nations can help Haitians
achieve their goals of stability and peace, and lay the
foundations for sustainable social and economic
development in full respect for the sovereignty of
Haiti.

In that context, I am pleased to announce a set of
measures that my Government will take in the
framework of the elections and the efforts already
agreed to create a stable environment conducive to the
elections.

In fact, since April, the Haitian National Police,
in conjunction with MINUSTAH, has been successfully
carrying out a series of operations to gain control of
some leaders of armed and dangerous gangs that
sought to defy the State's authority. On 7 May, the
police dismantled gangs that organized the kidnapping
of persons in the metropolitan area and released
hostages. To combat that phenomenon, the Haitian
National Police and MINUSTAH have just created a
coordinated cell to combat kidnapping, and the
Government reaffirms its commitment to combat all
forms of insecurity.

Simultaneously, the Government of Haiti is
working to restore the State's authority throughout its
territory, regaining control of police stations that
previously had been illegally occupied by groups
claiming to be demobilized soldiers.

Also in the framework of preparations for the
elections, it is encouraging to note that electoral
registration has begun, advancing the electoral process
to the next stage, following the announcement of
elections, their timetable and the previously established
plan for operational activities and the consultations
held between the Government, on the one hand, and the
Provisional Electoral Council, the Organization of
American States and MINUSTAH, on the other.

Similarly, mindful that national reconciliation and
dialogue are essential for the long-term political
process, the head of State has officially initiated a
national dialogue, which we deem to be a key element
of the political transition. According to the wishes of
the provisional President of the Republic, this will be
an open dialogue, excluding no one, addressed to all
political forces and all civil society groups that have
renounced violence.

The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme should be mentioned
in that context. The Government is firmly convinced
that the programme is absolutely crucial for attaining
the goals it has set, and its commitment to achieving
them cannot be doubted. However, the Government is
aware of the fragility of that issue and intends to
manage it the most rational way.

An official commission was created to implement
the DDR programme. However, the funds required to
carry it out exceed available government funding, and
pledged contributions for those activities remain
limited. Making a reality of pledges made in
Washington and Cayenne is essential for making
progress on that programmes.

The Interim Government wishes to reaffirm its
commitment to working for the respect of human
rights, mindful that the three pillars of development,
security and human rights are crucial for sustainable
development. The Government thus endorses the
recommendations of the Secretary-General contained
in his report in document A/59/2005, entitled "In larger
freedom: towards development, security and human
rights for all".

However, the Government remains alive to
comments and criticism from human rights
organizations and is aware of certain deficiencies in the
judiciary and in the police. It is working with the
international community to rebuild and strengthen
State institutions. The Government is not evading the
necessary reforms of the police and the judiciary; it
intends to do everything it can to carry them out. I
would point out the placatory policy of the
Government, which in recent months has taken steps to
reach out to certain dignitaries of political parties.

The Government once again reiterates its desire
to combat all violations of human rights and intends to
adopt all necessary measures to end impunity. It is
resolutely committed to guarantee the security and
safety of the people, to dismantle armed gangs and
reintegrate them into civilian life, to reorganize the
National Police, to adopt urgent measures to combat
impunity in all its forms, and to embark on judicial
reform, mindful of the promotion of and respect for the
rights of all of citizens.
We regret the words of some who call into
question our determination to complete this exercise,
which will guarantee compliance with the rights of all
citizens. Particularly with regard to the situation of
Mr. Neptune, the Council will recall, I am sure, the
explanations that were given by the President of the
Republic himself - which were very clear - in the
Palais National during the audience that he accorded to
members of the Council and to members of the
Economic and Social Council delegation.

With regard to the Security Council mission, I
wish to reaffirm here that the Interim Government
resolutely intends to organize the elections by the end
of the year and definitely will hand power over to the
elected President. In order to do this and to lay the
foundations for the development of the country, the
ongoing assistance of the international community and
of MINUSTAH will remain essential. Accordingly, we
hope that MINUSTAH's mandate will be renewed in
due course for not less than one year, pursuant to the
recommendation of the Security Council mission and
previous speakers.

I would like to refer to the Economic and Social

Council and once again to thank it for its involvement
in the long-term development process in Haiti. The
mission of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group that visited the
country last month, in parallel to the Security Council
mission, was eloquent testimony of its great interest in
the economic future of my country. I would like, on
behalf of the Government and people of Haiti, to thank
the members of the Group - in particular its leader,
the Ambassador of Canada - for the very outstanding
work done in so little time and for the clear interest
that they all expressed in the cause of the development
of Haiti. They saw at first hand the enormous
challenges confronting both the Interim Government
and the Government that will emerge from the
forthcoming elections, and above all the very close
links between peace and development. They also saw
the enormous interest their mission aroused in a people
that is seeking a better future and the commitment of
the authorities of the Interim Government to work to
that end.

The finding of the mission that Haiti is far from
attaining the Millennium Development Goals without
major long-term assistance from the United Nations
system and the international community merits the
attention of all of us. The serious deficiencies in areas
such as education, infrastructure, energy, roads,
agriculture and the environment, and the weakness of
the administrative capacity - these are well-known to
the Interim Government, and it is precisely in order to
deal with them that the Government appealed to the
Economic and Social Council to assist it and future
Haitian Government in the ongoing and the necessary
future efforts to that end. This is definitely an
enormous and daunting challenge, but it is not an
impossible challenge.

On the strength of the clear determination of our
people to overcome the trials arising from the
vicissitudes of our history, and on the strength of the
unconditional support of the United Nations and the
international community - and once again the Haitian
Government renews its gratitude for the help
received - Haiti remains convinced that it will emerge
tempered by this crisis and that it will regain the place
rightfully assigned to it by destiny.

