Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like at the outset to thank the Permanent Mission of
Sweden for convening today's important meeting on
the theme "Protecting children today prevents conflicts
tomorrow". I also thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their outstanding briefings.
We also thank Ms. Londofio for her briefing, in which
she shared her own personal experience.

At the beginning of my statement, I would like
to share our immense pride and joy at seeing the
successful collaboration between the Sudan and the
United Nations result in a joint action plan to put an
end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict. This plan has allowed the Sudan to be removed
from the Secretary-General's list of countries where
children's rights are violated and where children are
being used in armed conflict. This success would not
have been possible without the remarkable cooperation
and tireless work of the Government of the Sudan,
Ms. Gamba's Office, in particular her direct supervision
of the implementation of the plan, and UNICEF.

During the period of implementing this plan, in
November 2017 my country received a delegation
from the Security Council, headed by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden, Chair of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and comprising
other members of the Security Council as well as
representatives of the Office the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict to witness that experience. The delegation
was also able to observe the progress made in the
implementation of the plan on protection of children in
armed conflict.
Alongside the Sudan's efforts in the area of child
protection, which we cannot outline in detail here owing
to time constraints, I would like to note that late this
year the Government of the Sudan and the Office of the
Special Representative, together with African regional
organizations, intend to launch a regional campaign
based on the initiative Ms. Gamba outlined during her
latest visit to the Sudan. The Government of the Sudan
has also established mechanisms at the local level for
reporting cases of child-soldier recruitment and grave
violations against them. We respond to these reports
through competent mechanisms such as the National
Council for Children, the police, the courts and even
specialized tribunals for Darfur. The Government of
the Sudan has also expressed its willingness to make
progress in future cooperation with the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. A
meeting was held in Khartoum with countries members
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
discuss issues related to child protection.

We will work in the near future to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations and its agencies,
as well as with international partners, so that Sudan
can be the first country to convert a successful action
plan with the United Nations into a long-term national
action plan to prevent all serious violations against
children. We hope that other parties will be inspired by
our initiative and follow in the Sudan's footsteps.

