Allow me first to thank Mr. Voronkov and Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly for their very enlightening briefings. They have shown, if proof were needed, that, more than a year after the adoption of resolution 2482 (2019), on the links between terrorism and organized crime, much remains to be done to overcome those two scourges, which are linked and mutually reinforcing. Today, there is an undeniable overlap between criminal and terrorist groups, the nature and extent of which varies in different parts of the world. Both terrorism and organized crime often recruit from within the same populations, particularly in prisons, where radicalization is a scourge. They use the same routes and often the same means of communication to carry out their activities, particularly on the Internet, with the use of the darknet. France's commitment to fighting terrorism and organized crime is unfailing and our mobilization is on all fronts, from preventing radicalization to combating the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes, for which we are proud to have launched, with New Zealand, the Christchurch Appeal, which already brings together some 50 countries and organizations with the major Internet companies. One of our top priorities remains the fight against the financing of terrorism. The growing exploitation by terrorist groups of funds derived from criminal activities is well documented and the sources of funding are unfortunately numerous: kidnappings for ransom, the illicit trade in arms, exploitation of oil and cultural property, drug trafficking, human trafficking and piracy. Evil must be dealt with at the root by drying up the sources of funding for terrorist organizations, which use all the contemporary tools at their disposal. Resolution 2462 (2019), on combating the financing of terrorism, clearly identifies the risks posed by the links between terrorist financing and organized crime in different regions of the world, and calls on States, in close cooperation with relevant regional organizations and the United Nations, to redouble their efforts to address these links. On this basis, we need to adapt our legal and operational frameworks to improve the transparency of financial flows, strengthen information-sharing and develop cooperation with the private sector. International cooperation - among States and within the United Nations - is more necessary than ever. I am delighted to see Mr Voronkov and Ms. Waly together in the virtual gallery today. Their joint presence shows the good and essential cooperation between the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of Counter-Terrorism. I would also like to commend in this regard the essential work of INTERPOL in promoting information exchange and enhancing trust between operational partners. States need to use INTERPOL's databases and other tools with greater frequency. I would like to conclude by recalling that the fight against terrorism, as well as the fight against organized crime, must be conducted in full respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law and international humanitarian law. The fight against impunity is also a priority. Those who have committed atrocities abroad must never, wherever they go, be allowed to go unpunished. In this regard, cooperation between intelligence services and judicial authorities is essential to neutralize the threat and to deliver justice.
