Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Mr. Farid
Zarif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for the update. I also thank Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, for their
statements.

Over the past few years, we have witnessed many
positive developments in the region. The historic
Agreement between Belgrade and Pristina was one
of the most salient examples of that progress. Its
successful implementation will have a positive effect
on the normalization of relations between Kosovo
and Serbia and on overall stability in the region. We
strongly encourage Belgrade and Pristina to continue
to work hard in translating the agreements into results
on the ground and building trust between communities.

Lithuania welcomes the smooth conduct of the
parliamentary elections that were held throughout
Kosovo in June, including in the north. The elections
were transparent and well-organized and consolidated
the progress made in the 2013 municipal elections. The
voter turnout all over Kosovo, including among the
Serbian community in the northern part, was high. We
would like to express our hope that the Government will
be formed as swiftly as possible and that it will respond
to the expectations formulated by the population during
the elections, in particular with respect to strengthening
the rule of law and economic development.

We welcome the accession of Kosovo to the Venice
Commission. Kosovo will benefit from that membership
in terms of a further strengthening of democracy.

Kosovo has the right to ensure security within
its own territory. The International Security Force in
Kosovo continues to contribute to the maintenance of
peace and stability on the ground, while the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) plays
a key role in the consolidation of the rule of law. We
welcome the extension of the EULEX mandate for
another two years.

The lack of security affects the functioning of
institutions and international actors and people's day-to-
day lives. We look forward to a thorough investigation
of the incident of 19 September 2013, when a EULEX
Lithuanian officer was killed. We call on the respective
authorities to find the perpetrators and bring them to
justice.

We welcome the decision to create the specialist
court on war crimes to look into cases stemming from
the work of the Special Investigative Task Force and the
statement of findings (S/2014/558, annex II) presented
by its Chief Prosecutor, Mr. Clint Williamson. We
commend Mr. Williamson's efforts in carrying out
difficult and important work and the cooperation by
the partners, including the Government of Kosovo. The
investigative work should continue. We expect that the
specialist court will be fully functional in 2015 and will
bring those responsible for crimes against humanity
and war crimes to account and ensure belated justice
for victims and survivors.

The support of the international community in
guiding the transformation process in the Western
Balkans proved to be vital. Kosovo seems to be a good
example of how important results can be achieved when
there is concerted action among different international
donors and actors.

Finally, given the progress thus far, my delegation
believes that there is a need to review the current
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) reporting cycle in the Council, with
a view to reducing its frequency and considering the
drawdown in UNMIK in view of the developments on
the ground.

