Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join colleagues in welcoming Mr. De Mistura to the
Council and in thanking him for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2008/ 19). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his
presentation on behalf of the Multinational Force in
Iraq, to which the United Kingdom remains the second-
largest contributor.

The United Kingdom reaffirms its support for the
work of Mr. De Mistura and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in the
implementation of the Mission's expanded mandate, as
set out in resolution 1770 (2007). We welcome in
particular the intensive dialogue that UNAMI has
pursued on the subject of Kirkuk, helping the main
political stakeholders to forge a preliminary consensus
on the way ahead. We encourage Iraqis to work closely
with UNAMI to ensure that the process to agree upon
the future status of disputed areas is transparent and
inclusive and that it promotes stability in Iraq.

As the Secretary-General has set out in his report,
UNAMI and United Nations agencies have undertaken
to work more coherently in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and development aid. In that
context, we look forward to the launch of the United
Nations consolidated appeal to provide support to
vulnerable groups.

As Ambassador Khalilzad reported, on
16 December 2007 security responsibility for Basra
province passed from the Multinational Force to Iraqi
control, thereby completing the transfer of security
responsibility in the four southern provinces of Iraq
previously under the security control of the United
Kingdom-led multinational division. That was a major
step forward and reflected the confidence of the
Multinational Force and the Government of Iraq in the
growing capacity of the Iraqi security forces, as well as
the improving trend in the security situation in Basra.

The overall level of violence in the south-east has
dropped in recent months. But there was an outbreak of
violence and loss of life in Basra and Nasiriyah on
18 January, which we condemn. Those attacks were
intended to create disorder in the cities, and there can
be no justification for them. The British Government
congratulates Iraqi security forces in their handling of
the violence. That was their first major test in Basra
since the transfer of security responsibility to Iraqi
control. They acted professionally and with confidence
and determination.

We emphasize that handing back lead
responsibility for security in Basra to the Iraqi
Government does not mark the end of the United
Kingdom's involvement in Iraq but, rather, moves our
relationship with the Iraqi Government and the people
of Iraq, and of Basra in particular, into a new phase. We
will continue to support the people and the Government
of Iraq as they forge a more secure and prosperous
future based on principles of democracy and national
reconciliation. We welcome UNAMI's plans, as set out
by the Special Representative, to re-engage in Basra
and to re-establish a presence there, and we will support
the mission as it does so.

As the Secretary-General's report sets out, and as
Ambassador Khalilzad and the Special Representative
have emphasized, the second half of 2007 saw
welcome progress in terms of Iraq's security, in part as
a result of the Iraqi population's rejection of extremism
and extremist groups. To be sustained, that progress on
security will have to go hand in hand with progress on
political reconciliation. Each is indispensable to the
other. Iraqis should drive reconciliation forward. The
international community will stand by them to help
facilitate and support it.

We continue to encourage Iraq's political leaders
to work with each other in a spirit of collegiality and to
build on existing agreements, to strengthen
participation and decision-making, to improve the
performance of Government and to facilitate the
passing of laws. To that end, we welcome the approval
by the Council of Representatives of the revised law on
de-Baathification and the law on pensions as steps very
much in the right direction. We echo, however, the
Secretary-General's observation that more needs to be
done to meet the challenges of reviewing and adopting
a constitution acceptable to all Iraqis and passing
legislation on provincial powers, elections and
hydrocarbons. Success in those areas will require
leadership from the Government of Iraq and the
willingness of all political parties to work effectively
together in the national interest within the Council of
Representatives.

On the contribution of the region to supporting
progress within Iraq, we commend the agreement
reached at the Iraq neighbours meeting in Istanbul in
November to establish an Iraqi-led support mechanism
for the neighbours process, with United Nations
support. The support mechanism now needs to begin to
work as soon as possible to help to translate the
commitments made by participants in the neighbours
process into concrete outcomes. I might say that that
applies in particular to countries from which insurgents
continue to pass into Iraq.

At the international level, the United Kingdom
remains committed to supporting Iraq through ad hoc
forums such as the expanded neighbours' ministerial
process and the European Union.

