Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Koenigs, for his briefing on the situation in
Afghanistan, and congratulate him on his excellent
work at the head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). UNAMA plays an
invaluable role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan,
and we hope that it will continue to extend its
assistance to all Afghan territory so as to bring peace
dividends to a people that has known very little peace
in recent decades.

We note with concern that acts of violence carried
out by insurgents and terrorists have increased since
2006 and are clearly linked to criminal activities,
institutional corruption and illegal drug trafficking. The
Government of Afghanistan, with the ongoing and

tireless support of the international community, must
exercise firm political resolve to prevent further
backsliding in terms of security. In that respect, we
commend and support the Secretary-General's
recommendation that Afghanistan and its neighbour
Pakistan implement a joint strategy on cross-border
peace and security.

Since our debate earlier this year, the security
situation in the region has improved. It may be
necessary, inter alia, to consider altering the strategy
by which the international community is carrying out
its mission. For example, in fighting insurgents and
terrorists, the international forces execute a great many
aerial attacks that have claimed high numbers of
innocent civilian victims. It would be appropriate to
find alternatives to that and any other policy that
undermines the support and good will of the Afghan
people for the presence of the international community.

We agree with the opinion expressed in the
Secretary-General's report that re-establishing lasting
security is a prerequisite of development and requires a
multidimensional strategy coordinating military,
police, political, and economic and social development
activities. UNAMA and the International Security
Assistance Force, as well as the coalition forces in
Operation Enduring Freedom, in close coordination
with the Government of Afghanistan and the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, are key
components of that strategy.

