Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers,
particularly Special Representative Yamamoto, for
updating the Council on the latest report (S/2018/539)
and for all of the work that he and his team are doing in
challenging circumstances.
This feels like a moment of opportunity
for Afghanistan. Recent events, including the
unprecedented ceasefires and the preparations for
upcoming elections, give us all reasons to be cautiously
optimistic. We must do everything we can to make
the most of this opportunity to end the violence.
President Ghani's offer to the Taliban of talks without
preconditions and the ceasefires over Eid al-Fitr are
most welcome. The extraordinary images of soldiers
and Taliban fighters embracing in the streets of cities
across Afghanistan gave hope to millions of Afghans
that an end to the conflict was achievable. The Afghan
Government has shown an impressive commitment to
peace. Now we need a similar commitment from the
Taliban. The Taliban has to decide if it wants to be part
of the future of Afghanistan. That seems to be what
many of its fighters want. It is what the Afghan people
want. It is time for the Taliban's leaders to show true
courage and true leadership and to work for peace. Of
course, the only solution to the conflict is an Afghan-
led and -owned political process.

There are now four months to go until Afghanistan
holds parliamentary elections in October. We welcome
the progress so far on key electoral reforms and thank
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for supporting the Afghan Government in
its preparations. Boris Johnson, the British Foreign
Secretary, was in Kabul only yesterday, where he said
that we encourage UNAMA to keep up the pressure on
the Afghan Government and its electoral management
bodies in order to ensure credible, inclusive and
on-time elections. The United Kingdom and the wider
donor community are also playing their part. We are
encouraging the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission to deliver
elections on time, with a focus on reducing the
opportunities for fraud. We are particularly concerned
about the fact that key positions in the Election
Commission remain unfilled, and we call on the Afghan
Government to appoint a new chief executive officer
and provincial Complaints Commission commissioners
without delay.

After the elections, the conference on Afghanistan
to be held in Geneva in November will be an
opportunity for donor countries and the Government of
Afghanistan to take stock of the progress that has been
made since 2016, and to ensure that the Government is
on track to deliver on its reform commitments. It will
also be an opportunity for the donor community and
the Government to consider the future of international
support beyond 2020.
At this moment of potential change, we should
reflect on the progress that has been so far, particularly
on the rights of women and girls. That is a personal
priority for Britain's Foreign Secretary, who met with
Afghan girls participating in a United Kingdom-
funded sports education programme during his recent
trip. Over the past six years, United Kingdom aid
has helped 300,000 marginalized Afghan girls into
education and trained more than 10,000 teachers. But
there is some way to go to reach our goal of 12 years of
quality education for all girls. The United Kingdom is
contributing almost $1 billion in development funding
in Afghanistan between 2016 and 2020. We will
continue to work closely with our Afghan partners to
promote opportunities for all Afghans.

I began by saying that this felt like a moment of
opportunity for Afghanistan. There is a prospect of
peace. Elections are coming that can help support peace
and social stability. Let us stand beside our Afghan
partners at this moment. Let us stand beside the Afghan
people as they determine their own future.

