Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank our briefers for their insights. We appreciate Martin Griffiths' update on the prisoner release agreement. That is an important achievement made possible by his tireless efforts, together with those of the International Committee of the Red Cross. We very much hope to hear more positive updates on the parties' implementation of those commitments in the coming days and weeks. Despite the promises the agreement holds, I am deeply concerned that progress on the political front is stalled because of the Houthis' failure uphold their commitments. Their continued offensive on Ma'rib demonstrates they are not interested in a political process and only want more years of war for the people of Yemen. Ma'rib is home to many of Yemen's internally displaced people and has become a refuge for Yemenis fleeing fighting throughout the war. The Houthi assault on that refuge is deeply concerning, and we call on them to cease that action immediately. We are also extremely concerned about the recent intensified fighting in Al-Hudaydah and offer our condolences for the lives lost. Only a political solution will bring stability, peace and prosperity back to Yemen. Yet, sadly, the Houthis have been content throughout this conflict to lose tens of thousands of fighters on the battlefield. Of course the Houthis are not doing it alone; Iran's continued exports of weapons to the Houthis, in contravention of the arms embargo, have been extensively documented, including by the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2020/531) on resolution 2231 (2015). Iran's role in this conflict, which defies Security Council sanctions, is serving no other purpose than to worsen this humanitarian tragedy and prolong the suffering of millions. This horrible destabilizing situation has persisted for years. If Council members truly seek a mediated settlement to this conflict, then they must join the United States and others in calling on Iran to cease all support for the Houthis immediately. As the world tries its best to end this war, Iran's provision of lethal aid and training to the Houthis is doing nothing but ensuring endless war. It must stop now. I would also like to speak further about the SAFER tanker, which, despite the concerted efforts of Martin and his team, continues to threaten the Red Sea and the people of Yemen with catastrophic consequences, including severely reducing the import of commercial food and humanitarian aid; lasting environmental damage; and economic degradation. Last month, during the General Assembly's high- level week, the Council's five permanent members plus Germany, Sweden and Kuwait called on the Houthis to urgently facilitate unconditional and safe access for United Nations experts to conduct an assessment and repair mission. The Council, too, has been calling on, urging, pressing and admonishing the Houthis to do this for months. And still the Houthis stall. They set out new demands, conditions and obstacles for the United Nations experts - those who possess the expertise and resources necessary to avert a serious disaster. That the Houthis are willing to risk catastrophe for millions of Yemenis - who rely so heavily on food, fuel and other goods imported through Red Sea ports - to gain political leverage demonstrates the cynicism and heartlessness of the Houthis' leadership. Why would anyone expect any differently, given how the Houthis continue to obstruct international humanitarian assistance to Yemenis desperately in need? The Houthis' recent shutdown of Sana'a international airport obstructed movement of the life-saving humanitarian supplies and essential personnel that are required in the most densely populated areas of Yemen. Those Houthi actions halted the import of 2.4 million doses of oral polio vaccine for their own areas, as well as more than 200 metric tons of medical supplies related to the coronavirus disease. A temporary reopening of the airport is not a sustainable reprieve. We urge the Houthis to end their brinksmanship and reopen the airport to United Nations flights on a permanent basis. This Houthi obstruction is unconscionable, particularly as Yemenis face the additional threats of rising prices and food insecurity. We cannot and should not be silent in the face of such unprecedented intransigence. With famine a realistic prospect in Yemen in the event of prolonged food-import disruption, we encourage all donors to provide resources for ongoing and emerging needs now. All parties to the conflict, especially the Houthis, must enable actors to implement critical life-saving programmes. I would also like to take a moment today to express our gratitude to our partners in Oman, Saudi Arabia and the Government of the Republic of Yemen, particularly the Sultan of Oman and the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, for helping the United States facilitate the release of two United States citizens in Yemen and the return of the remains of another United States citizen. The Trump Administration has made bringing home Americans held hostage or wrongfully detained overseas a top priority, and we will never waver in our commitment to them and their families. I thank the countries that have joined the United States in supporting the World Food Programme, as it plays a critical role in Yemen, providing 13 million people in the country with emergency food assistance and 1.1 million children and women with nutritional support. The World Food Programme urgently needs assistance to continue its life-saving efforts. The United States provides 43 per cent of the World Food Programme's budget, and we are grateful for others stepping up. Finally, in my previous remarks before the Council, I called on the Houthis to immediately release wrongfully detained Yemeni citizen Levi Salem Musa Marhabi (see S/PV.8757). Levi's health continues to decline in detention, where he remains wrongfully held despite a Houthi "court" ordering his release in September 2019. We call on all Houthis to respect religious freedom, stop oppressing Yemen's Jewish population and immediately release Mr. Marhabi.
