Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for his high-quality presentation to the
Council, which has helped us to understand the most
recent developments in the region of the Sudan.

In our statement today, Cote d'Ivoire would like to
focus on two key points: the peace process in Darfur and
the status of implementation of the recommendations
emanating from the report on the strategic review of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2017/437), as dealt with in the
joint review of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, in particular the implementation of phase
one of the reconfiguration of UNAMID.

Although my delegation welcomes the improvement
in the security situation, characterized by a significant
reduction in the number of clashes between the
Sudanese Government and armed groups in Darfur,
since the extension of the unilateral ceasefires by
the protagonists and since the weapons-collection
campaign, we nevertheless remain concerned at the fact
that little progress has been made in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which
remains a useful political framework to address the root
causes of the conflict and to give the people of Darfur
the possibility of enjoying the dividends of peace.

Cote d'Ivoire fears that the current political
deadlock will bring to nought the efforts made to
date to find a way out of the crisis and that we will
see a return to the previous situation, which caused the
mass displacements of people that we are seeing once
again today.

My delegation believes that peace in Darfur must
include national reconciliation, a permanent cessation
of hostilities and an inclusive political dialogue. We
therefore call upon all of the parties involved to involve
themselves in a genuine effort to restore peace, in the
interests ofthe well-being ofthe people and the stability
of the entire region.

With regard to the implementation of the
recommendations of the strategic review, particularly
with regard to phase one of the reconfiguration of
UNAMID, my delegation would like to welcome the joint
assessment of the United Nations Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
My delegation would like to stress two ofthe points
listed in paragraph 6 ofresolution 2363 (2017), of29 June
2017, with regard to the joint assessment: the progress
achieved in the implementation of phase one of the
reconfiguration of the hybrid force and the cooperation
of the Sudanese Government with UNAMID.

With regard to the first point, my delegation
welcomes the fact that phase one is functioning well. It
has resulted in the closure of 11 sites and the reduction
in the number of military personnel to 11,395 from
15,845 and of police officers to 2,888 from 3,403. The
Ivorian delegation welcomes the fact that the Sudanese
Government has allocated sites to be used in the
establishment of the Jebel Marra task force, which, in
our View, is a way to build capacity in UNAMID as it
carries out peacebuilding activities in the Sudan.

With regard to the second point, in a spirit of
constructive cooperation, my delegation would like to
invite the Government of the Sudan to allow UNAMID's
troops to move freely, in accordance with its mandate,
and facilitate the administrative procedures required to
conduct its activities.

