Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have the
honour to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Sudan Sanctions Committee, covering the period from
8 December 2017 to 14 March 2018. I am pleased to
deliver this first briefing as Chair of the Committee
back to back with Mr. Mamabolo's briefing on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), which will help increase synergies
between the Committee and UNAMID.

On 28 December 2017, under the stewardship of
my predecessor, Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko of
Ukraine, the Committee met to hear a presentation by
the Panel ofExperts on its final report (see S/2017/1125)
and to discuss the Panel's recommendations. I will not
repeat the findings of the final report, given that it was
transmitted to the members of the Council immediately
after the Committee's meeting. On the following day,
the Committee issued a press release with a summary
of the meeting.

Let me now turn to the three recommendations
addressed to the Committee in the final report of the
Panel of Experts.

In recommendation (a), the Panel of Experts
proposed that the Committee continue to monitor the
presence and activities of Darfuri rebels in Libya and
South Sudan. As a follow-up to the recommendation,
the Committee agreed to encourage the Panel ofExperts
to continue to cooperate with other relevant sanctions
committees and their panels of experts. The Committee
also agreed to consider organizing joint meetings with
other committees as necessary.

With regard to recommendation (b), the Panel of
Experts informed the Committee on 30 January that the
proposed amendments to the sanctions list contained
in the final report had inadvertently omitted identifier
information and subsequently provided the Committee
with revised proposed amendments. Such amendments
to the list and the names of three individuals are
currently under consideration by the Committee.

With regard to recommendation (c), on 30 January the
Committee sent a letter to the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan, encouraging the Government of the
Sudan to instruct its border control agency to monitor

the cross-border movement of the individuals listed.
On 2 February the Committee held its fifth meeting
with the Sudan and States of the region to discuss the
implementation of the measures. The Sudan and eight
States of the region - the Central African Republic,
Chad, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Libya, South Sudan and
Uganda - participated in the meeting. It focused on
the final report of the Panel of Experts. Following a
briefing by the Panel on its final report, the Sudan and
States of the region shared their views on the findings
of the Panel. The States invited also stressed their
commitment to the implementation of the Council's
resolutions. The Committee and the States invited
agreed to build on the spirit of cooperation through
constructive dialogue. A summary of the meeting was
made available in a press release issued on 8 February.

During the Committee meeting on 2 February, I
informed it of my intention to conduct a visit to the
Sudan in April. I had discussed it informally with the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan and received a
positive response. That will be the third Chair's visit to
the Sudan, following the first one in January 2014 and
the second in May 2017. The draft terms of reference of
the visit were approved by the Committee on 12 March.
It will now await the consent of the Government of
the Sudan.

On 22 February, the Committee received a letter
from the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
proposing five individuals to serve on the newly extended
Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2400 (2018), of
8 February 2018. The Committee had no objections to
four of the candidates proposed, but the fifth candidate
was placed on hold by three members of the Committee.
On the same day, the Committee received from the
Panel of Experts a draft implementation assistance
notice on the requirements for end-user documentation
under resolution 1945 (2010). The notice was prepared
as a follow-up to recommendation (a) of the first report
of the Panel of Experts. The proposed notice is now
under consideration by the Committee.

The Committee received two quarterly updates
from the Panel of Experts during the reporting period,
on 6 February and 12 March, and an implementation
report from a Member State. The Committee issued its
annual report for 2017 as document S/2017/1081, which
is available on the Committee's website.

