Mr. Pleuger (Germany): At the outset, I should
like to join other delegations in expressing my
condolences to the Republic of Korea on the occasion
of the tragic events of last week.

I should like to thank the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Timor-Leste
(S/2003/243) and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno
for his presentation. We commend the excellent work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, Kamalesh Sharma, and his staff, and
we congratulate the people of Timor-Leste and its
representatives for the positive achievements in Timor-
Leste thus far. Furthermore, Germany welcomes and
supports the efforts of the Government of Timor-Leste,
under President Gusmao, assisted by the United
Nations, to consolidate the still-fragile political
institutions and to ensure and uphold democratic
institutions and the rule of law while building the new
nation.

In spite of the achievements of the past three
years and continued progress, there are still major tasks
to be accomplished in the months and years ahead. One
of the most challenging issues is the building of the
Government of Timor-Leste's own capabilities in the
field of the military and the police. The urgency of that
task was underlined by the rampage in Dili on 4
December last year.

I think we all agree that the security situation in
Timor-Leste remains of major concern for the
Government and for the international community, as
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. Our own
assessment is that the security situation has indeed
deteriorated to some degree in the past three months.
However, such incidents have been of a comparatively
rather small scale and have involved only a limited
number of perpetrators. Furthermore, we are aware of
rumours suggesting that former militias and armed
groups may be trying to undermine the stability of the
new nation, but so far, there seems to be little evidence
for those rumours.

We have given careful thought to the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General's
report, in particular the proposal to maintain the current
strength of the peacekeeping contingents through
December 2003 in response to the recent problems in
the security sector. I should like to point out that the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor (UNMISET) gives the police - not the
peacekeepers - the prime responsibility for handling
internal security incidents. We are not convinced as to
the value of that proposal and, for the time being,
would rather stick to the plan as provided in resolution
1410 (2002).

Under the UNMISET mandate, peacekeepers
should function only as a backup if police capabilities
are insufficient or exhausted. We are not convinced that
that is indeed the case today. We should therefore like
to raise a question as to whether it would not be
possible to focus all our efforts on the strengthening of
the capabilities of the police force of Timor-Leste by,
inter alia, reorienting the police training programme in
the light of the new challenges that have emerged in
the past months. In that context, we are prepared to
consider a recent proposal for a pause in the planned
drawdown of the police component. However, we
should like first to have a broader discussion on the
shortfalls of the current police training programme, and
we should like to learn about the possible additional
costs involved in that.

Furthermore, with regard to the peacekeeping
force itself, we wonder whether it would not be
possible to reorient the force to better meet existing
challenges instead of maintaining the number of troops
at a higher level than had originally been planned for.
Peacekeepers could, for example, be redeployed from
low-risk to high-risk areas, and their mobility could be
increased.

In conclusion, we are not convinced whether it is
already necessary at this point to leave the path decided
upon in resolution 1410 (2002) last year. We should
like further to discuss and analyse the situation and see
all alternative avenues explored before we change
existing resolutions.

I should like to emphasize, however, that our
clear objective remains a stable and democratic Timor-
Leste, independent of international assistance. We must
therefore keep our strategy under constant review in
order to ensure that the success story that is so close
will materialize.

