I wish to thank Estonia for organizing an open high-level video-teleconference meeting on this particularly important issue. Cyprus fully subscribes to the statement of the European Union and would like to add the following remarks. Over the past seven decades, international humanitarian law has established a comprehensive legal framework for the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. As the Secretary-General mentions in his latest report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2020/366), despite the stated commitment, by a chorus of Member States, to international humanitarian law and the protection of civilians, the reality on the ground tells a vastly different story. As the report indicates, in the past year there were instances in which parties to conflict sought to respect international humanitarian law in their operations, but there were also countless situations to the contrary, where the rules of international humanitarian law and international human rights law were regularly flouted. Civilians bear no responsibility for a conflict, but they pay the highest price. They are the most vulnerable populations in the world and, on top of that, are even deliberately targeted. Death, injury, violence, including sexual violence and rape, forcible displacement as a direct consequence of war, disease, hunger, socioeconomic adversity and lifelong trauma make up a non-exhaustive list of the fate of civilians in armed conflict. The coronavirus disease crisis has only exacerbated their vulnerability and precarious situation. It is widely understood that the main obstacles to better protecting civilians in armed conflicts primarily relate to the ways in which international humanitarian law is implemented, a general lack of respect for the rules by parties to conflicts, and a lack of accountability when these rules are ignored. As a victim of foreign aggression, Cyprus is all too familiar with the long-lasting effects and consequences of conflict on civilians - not only due to civilian fatalities and the physical, psychological and sexual violence suffered by its civilians during armed conflict, but also due to the egregious violations of their human rights and the ongoing violations of international humanitarian law, with the enforced disappearance of civilians and the refusal to reveal the fate and whereabouts of the missing, all with complete impunity. My country would like to especially emphasize the humanitarian tragedy of missing persons, including civilians, who disappear during armed conflict after being seized by enemy troops, never to be seen again. Despite the strenuous efforts of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the special commissions designed to uncover the fate and whereabouts of missing persons, many of them are never found and their loved ones are left searching for them for decades. Many ultimately perish, with no information as to what happened to them. All parties should ensure respect for international humanitarian law relating to missing persons and should take all measures to account for those reported missing and to uphold the right of their families and loved ones to be informed of their fate and whereabouts. To this end, the Republic of Cyprus supports by all means possible the Committee on Missing Persons, set up in Cyprus in 1981, which has led to the identification of hundreds of missing persons, and stresses the importance of enhancing the Committee's work with regard to the many more hundreds of missing persons whose fate has remained unknown for so many years, including through obtaining full access to all relevant archival information by all parties, as well as possible burial sites. As the Council has already called for this, most recently in resolution 2506 (2020), it should follow up with more robust demands. We believe that the Security Council should be at the forefront of effectively ensuring better protection for civilians by insisting on compliance with international humanitarian law, addressing impunity, improving access for, and the safety of, humanitarian personnel and, of course, redoubling its efforts to prevent conflict and uphold the prohibition of the use of force. These principles should also permeate the Council's cooperation with other international and regional organizations, since they have a significant role to play in crisis management and operations not only for compliance with international humanitarian law principles, but also in establishing safe and secure environments, positive civil-military relations and humanitarian support, as well as the efficient and effective delivery of humanitarian aid, medicines, equipment and supplies. With regard to impunity, I would like to reiterate that Cyprus is a staunch supporter of accountability, and to recall that the Council has the power to refer cases to the International Criminal Court, thereby closing a significant vacuum that existed prior to the Rome Statute. Finally, the Republic of Cyprus, as a host country of a United Nations peacekeeping force since 1964, wishes to stress the importance of the protection of civilians as part of United Nations peacekeeping mandates, as outlined in the policy on the protection of civilians in United Nations peacekeeping, and follows the developments on this important aspect with great interest. As the primary responsibility to protect civilians always lies with the host countries, the Government of Cyprus is ready to cooperate with the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, if necessary, within the framework of the latter's mandate, to support the Government's efforts and policies to protect civilians within the territory of Cyprus.
