Mr. Kogda (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
I would like, first of all, on behalf of my delegation,
to extend to you, Madam President, my sincere
congratulations on your country's accession to the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
holding this debate on the future of the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction regime on the occasion
of the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1540 (2004). Allow me also to
pay warm tribute to the Chair, members and experts
of the Committee establishsed pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for their tireless efforts in promoting and
raising awareness on a future world free from the fear
of nuclear disasters.

Resolution 1540 (2004) recognizes the strong
commitment of the international community to provide
an effective response to the threat of the proliferation
of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons facing
the world, through the implementation of appropriate
measures and devices to prevent the acquisition or
misuse of such weapons by non-State actors or terrorist
groups. Designed as a flexible tool for cooperation,
the resolution has the advantage of allowing each State
to assess its own actions for the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and to then consider the
necessary means to achieve the desired progress.

While progress has been made since the adoption
of the resolution, even if the ultimate goal is still far
from being achieved, several challenges remain.
Those include the universalization of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
setting deadlines for the total elimination of chemical
weapons, and the convening of a conference to bring
about a zone free of nuclear weapons in the Middle
East, in accordance with the action plan of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

In addition to those challenges, we must condemn
the continuing desire to acquire and develop nuclear
weapons, the stagnation of the disarmament mechanisms
and the lack of consensus on starting negotiations
on crucial treaties, such as those on military fissile
material, the prohibition of nuclear weapons and
negative security assurances.

Today, as in the past, although it does not possess
weapons of mass destruction, Burkina Faso still strives
to uphold and ensure compliance with resolution 1540
(2004). That is why during its term as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council in 2008 and 2009,
Burkina Faso spared no effort to promote the ideals of
resolution 1540 (2004) through several initiatives.

Burkina Faso has submitted reports to the 1540
Committee and received its members and experts from
10 to 16 November 2013 to assess the implementation
of the resolution and to identify opportunities for
capacity-building so as to strengthen existing capacity.
The visit allowed the Committee's experts to observe
Burkina Faso's true commitment to fully respecting
resolution 1540 (2004), as reflected, inter alia, in
its accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention, as well as 12 of the 18 international
instruments for combating terrorism. In addition, the
members of the Committee welcomed the existence
of monitoring and control mechanisms, relevant legal
and regulatory frameworks and appropriate security
and safety measures. I wish to reiterate the gratitude
of the authorities of my country to the Committee, in
particular the experts for their professionalism and
clear cooperation. That contributed to the success ofthe
visit, whose conclusions, we hope, will lead to follow
up on the ground and technical cooperation.

The coming of a world free of nuclear weapons, far
from being a utopia, is within the realm ofpossibility, as
long as we can outlaw the famous doctrine of strategic
deterrence, which functions as an alibi for nuclear
proliferation.

In conclusion, my delegation takes the opportunity
provided by this commemorative meeting to remind
us all of the importance of demonstrating openness,
mutual trust, transparency and genuine political
will in the service of establishing conditions and
dialogue frameworks conducive to disarmament and
non-proliferation.

