Mr. Pronk: Last Friday I was able to introduce
the report (S/2005/57) before the Council relating to
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the
north and the south (see S/PV.5119). In that report and
in my introduction, Vice-President Taha and
Mr. Garang were congratulated on that great
achievement. A number of suggestions are also made
with regard to carrying out the mandate of the United
Nations mission foreseen to carry out the tasks the
parties envisioned for the United Nations in the peace
agreement.

Today I would like to confine myself to the
second report (S/2005/68), which is before the
Council; the report on Darfur. Members will remember
that half a year ago the Council adopted its first
resolution on Darfur, resolution 1556 (2004). Since
then, monthly reports have been submitted to the
Council on the progress, or lack thereof, regarding
security and the humanitarian situation in Darfur, and
regarding the political talks. After half a year, it is
appropriate to look back and try to review and evaluate
the present situation in the longer-term perspective.
That has been done in the report. I would like first to
summarize the findings.

Over the past six months, performance by the
Government of the Sudan in complying with its
commitments and obligations has been uneven.
Humanitarian access in Darfur has improved due to the
lifting last summer of restrictions on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. However, action on human
rights, in particular measures to end impunity, have
fallen short of what the Government agreed to and
what the Security Council has demanded. The
Government has shown willingness to make progress
in the political talks on Darfur. However, fighting on
the ground continues and the ceasefire has not been
kept. Those responsible for atrocious crimes on a
massive scale still go unpunished. Militias continue to
attack, claiming that they are not party to any
agreement. The Government has not stopped them.

Over this period, the rebel movements have
become less cooperative in the talks. They too have
breached the ceasefire time and again. Their attacks on
police increased and often seemed intended to invite
retaliation. Those attacks and provocations have, at
times, impaired humanitarian access. Later, the attacks
on the police diminished. However, some rebel groups
have impeded humanitarian work by looting cars and
trucks and by putting pressure on, or even abducting,
national staff of humanitarian organizations. Many of
those actions have severely reduced delivery of
assistance. The number of civilians affected by conflict
has continued to grow at a rate that has outpaced the
ability of humanitarian agencies to provide for all of
their basic needs. Inability to reach those in need is
due, in large part, to the fighting, but it is due also to
rising banditry and to interference from armed forces
on both sides. Humanitarian workers are increasingly
subjected to threats and intimidation by forces from
both sides, in addition to facing random danger from
military action, banditry and armed robbery. This is a
dismal picture.

Undoubtedly, the situation is not as bad as during
the first half of 2004, when large-scale killing and
mass displacements took place. Undoubtedly, the
Government has kept quite a few of its promises.
Pressure from the international community and the
presence on the ground of African Union military
observers have had some effect, but not enough.

What is the reason for this stalemate? Have we
not done enough? Did we do the wrong things? Or is
the conflict so complicated that reaching peace requires
much more time? The conflict in Darfur is very
complicated. It has political, economic, environmental
and cultural dimensions. It is more than a civil war
between a Government and rebel movements. It also
encompasses a multitude of tribal conflicts - inter-
tribal, as well as intra-tribal and clan fights. It certainly
has some of the characteristics of a confrontation
between Arabs and Africans. History has seen that
confrontation flare up more than once. But it is also a
struggle for survival between economic lifestyles -
peasants and nomads - and the borderline between
those two is not the same as that between Arabs and
Africans. The economic struggle has environmental
dimensions. There is population pressure and economic
pressure - related to cattle raising, for instance - and
competition for ever scarcer resources, such as land
and water.

To that extent, the Darfur conflict is not new. The
economic struggle is age-old, and the cultural clashes
in Darfur are likewise. It has some of the
characteristics of a class conflict, with age-old rulers
who claim to own their servants, whom they consider
to be inferior. It is not a confrontation between
religions, but fundamentalist religious groups have
severely exacerbated the conflict. It is also a political
conflict between elites and the deprived, between
traditional leaders and the new generation contesting
their authority, between leaders who arose from within
their communities and an administration that has been
appointed by the State in an effort to modernize
administrative rule and to consolidate power.

The conflict in Darfur is also the result of a
failure to ground the Sudanese State - which came
into being after independence from colonial rule - in
the democratic thrust of the whole nation. The Sudan is
not a failed State - far from it. It is, as yet, a failed
nation, or an adolescent nation, or many nations
together in one huge territory, held together by force.
The Darfur conflict resembles the conflict between
north and south, the conflict in eastern Sudan -
exposed last week in a violent eruption in Port
Sudan - and the conflicts in the north, in Kordofan,
and in central Sudan. All of these were economic,
cultural, sometimes religious, sometimes ethnic or
tribal, and resource-driven, as well as political. And all
of these conflicts are compounded by power games and
bad or less-than-democratic governance. No wonder
that progress has come very slowly, if at all.

During the past six months, some progress has
been made. But often it was like taking two steps
forward and one step back, and often it was worse: one
step forward, two back - a net regression. In my
statement to the Council on the November report, I
spoke about the risk of sliding back into lawlessness
and anarchy. In December, the Government took
matters into its own hands by declaring a road-clearing
operation in south Darfur that took the character of an
operation to cleanse the whole area - 20 kilometres to
the left and to the right of the roads. One result was the
breakdown of the talks. Another result was that the
clearing operation generated a climate that made the
militia that got involved feel that they could get away
with murder - attacking villages on a large scale,
openly declaring that they would not stop before
having attacked all of them.

The Government did not stop them. Perhaps the
Government lacked the capacity to do so. The militias
are strong and well organized, and there seems to be a
sort of invisible hand behind their actions. There are
forces in the back in the Sudan - not inside the
Government, yet powerful - that have the capacity to
spread terror on the ground, waging war against
innocent people, women and children, who are
denounced as different and told to leave the places
where they were born and live and never come back.

The Commission of Inquiry has come to the
conclusion that it is not genocide. But the Commission
has also concluded that the mass violations of human
rights were no less serious than genocide. The
Commission also stated that the atrocities that started
in 2003, which it was entrusted to investigate,
continued during the investigation period itself. That
means that it will be difficult to declare that the
wrongdoings are a thing of the past and that everything
is different and better now. That is not the case at all.
The mass killings have stopped, but the pattern has not
changed: attack, counter-attack, collective punishment,
retaliation and systematic violence - less between the
combatants themselves than against the people.

During my visit to Darfur 10 days ago, I saw the
dramatic consequences of the tribal or ethnic cleansing
of dozens of villages carried out by the militia during
the month of January. The cleansing has continued,
carried out by third forces, and these have not been
stopped. They can be stopped only by a third party
force. After six months, we can only come to the
conclusion that the Government has not stopped the
violence; it has not brought the perpetrators of the
violence - the instigators, not the petty combatants -
to justice. After six months of going to and fro, we
must conclude that there is a stalemate. We urgently
need a breakthrough.
Any lasting solution requires political
negotiations in good faith between the parties that are
determined to represent the interests of the people,
however different their perception of these interests
may be. The good news is that the Government has
shown a willingness to negotiate - toughly, but
seriously - on the basis of principles concerning the
sharing of power and wealth that resulted in the
Naivasha Peace Agreement. The Government recently
confirmed its commitment to such talks. President Al-
Bashir and Vice-President Taha - again today - have
made it quite clear that the objective is peace through
negotiations, in Darfur and elsewhere in the Sudan.

The other good news is that quite a few leaders of
the rebel movements really do care about the people
whom they claim to represent. Undoubtedly, there are
warlords among them; undoubtedly, they are divided
among themselves for ideological, political and tribal
reasons or because of the internal struggle for power.
However, I have encountered rebel leaders who care.
They are sceptical and full of mistrust, but they care
about their people. That is the basis for serious talk.

In my previous presentation to the Council, I
made a number of proposals to render the talks more
effective, for instance by delinking the security talks
from the political ones and by strengthening the
powers of the ceasefire institutions. I call on the parties
to study seriously such proposals or to find other ways
that guarantee that these talks get a serious chance to
succeed.

There is more good news. The Comprehensive
Peace Agreement between the north and the south has
been signed and seems to be holding. That augurs well
for an effort to extend its spirit to Darfur and to apply
time, energy, experience and negotiating capacity to
the Darfur conflict.

Finally, there is another piece of good news. The
peace support force of the African Union (AU) is doing
a good job. I have met highly professional military
personnel who are dedicated to their mission,
committed to assisting the victims of war, willing to be
proactive and to take risks, not staying in their barracks
or behind their desks noting and reporting what has
gone wrong, but going out in order to prevent things
from getting worse. The troops sent by the African
Union are so good that we need many more of them.

Members of the Council will remember that I
have more than once referred to the need to deploy a
robust third party force - big, broad and quick. The
mandate of the AU force is broad enough, and its
interpretation by the commanders on the ground is
flexible and creative. But the force is not big enough,
and its deployment is too slow. Even if we had all the
planned troops on the ground in Darfur towards the end
of February, it would not be sufficient to stop the
violence. We need a robust third party force from
outside to stop a ruthless third force from within. We
need them in any area where violence has taken place
and where violence may erupt. I repeat what I said last
month: we need them in and around all camps of
displaced people - 1.5 million people, a huge number
to protect - on all roads along which commercial,
humanitarian and civilian transportation takes place, in
all zones to be demilitarized, in all areas where the
displaced and refugees will have to return in order to
secure their lives, their land and their property. That is
a huge task that requires a robust force - one that is
trusted by the victims.

But protection by deterrence cannot be achieved
by a force consisting of 1,000 or 3,000 military and
police, however well qualified and dedicated they may
be. We need many more, and we need them fast.
Without them, political talks will continue to be
frustrated by developments in the field, by manipulated
insecurity and by violence that undermines the
credibility of the negotiating parties. We will have to
break through that vicious circle of violence on the
ground, talks in jeopardy, renewed violence,
breakdowns in talks and so on.

Quiet on the Darfur front can make that happen. I
appeal to all parties concerned - the African Union, as
well as members of the Security Council - to find a
creative way to expand the present third party force
into one that can stop all attacks.

Peace will take a long time. The Peace
Agreement, followed by better governance, will not be
sufficient; it will have to be followed by many years of
sustainable development, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
reconciliation and reform, just like in southern Sudan.
Although a peace agreement will not be sufficient, it
will be necessary. We cannot solve the problem
overnight, but we should be able to stop the violence
and the suffering within the shortest time possible.
That is why very close cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU is required to ensure that the
robust third party force can stop anybody, can halt any
force or agent displacing or killing innocent people. A
robust third party force is a buffer between the parties
and, also, between combatants and civilians.

With the help of such a third party force, the
international community could enable the parties in the
Sudan itself to achieve a peace agreement. There has
been political momentum since 31 December 2004. In
Nairobi, the Peace Agreement, to which we just
referred, was signed after 10 years of negotiations. In
Darfur, it should be possible to reach such an
agreement after 10 months, starting in February, with
the adoption of a declaration of principles, an agenda
and a road map for talks ending by the close of 2005.
Vice-President Taha alluded to this.

This would mean that on the Sudan's day of
national independence - 1 January 2006 - the Sudan
could be one of the first countries in Africa to look
back in peace on half a century of independence after
colonial rule: a fully sovereign nation, living in peace.
That is a much more rewarding achievement than the
independence of a State torn by internal wars that
threaten the future of the nation, the State and the
people.

