Mr. Zarif: It is with great regret that I feel obliged
to begin my remarks today by addressing briefly
the incidents that took place in and around Kosovo
during the past 36 hours, near the villages of Orlovac
and Kushtove, resulting in at least three fatalities,
including a Serbian police officer, and gunfire injuries
to three others. While law enforcement agencies and
international presences are still determining the
details, preliminary information suggests that armed
persons involved in illegal wood-cutting were likely
responsible for the incidents.

Such tragic outcomes unfortunately occur when
serious criminal activities are being pursued. However,
in sensitive areas such as the location of those
incidents, great care should be taken not to give reign
to speculation of political motives, so that professional
agencies may do their work and those who commit such
crimes and violence are brought to face justice. I wish,
in this same light, to express my deepest sympathies to
the family of the Serbian police officer who fell in the
line of duty.

Turning to the latest report (S/2014/558) before the
Council today, I Wish first of all to congratulate the
Kosovo voters, institutions and political leaders on the
successful conduct of the general elections on 8 June,
which were held for the first time throughout Kosovo
under a unified legal framework and in a peaceful and
well-organized manner. I also wish to acknowledge the
constructive role played by the leadership in Belgrade in
encouraging Kosovo Serb voters to fully participate in
the elections. I commend the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the European Union
(EU) for the important role they played in facilitating
the organization of the elections and in enhancing their
overall transparency and accountability. In order to
capitalize fully on the success of that process, I have
joined many others in urging political leaders in Kosovo
to treat the formation of Kosovo's next Government as
the most pressing imperative.

The Constitutional Court, in its decision published
on Tuesday, has ruled as unconstitutional the election
of the Assembly President on 17 July, and asked the
Assembly to complete its constitutive session and to
elect, as soon as possible, an Assembly President and
Deputy Presidents in compliance with the Constitution
and the Assembly's rules of procedure. Moving forward
expeditiously in the wake of that decision will best
serve the interests of the people of Kosovo and will
be a further manifestation of their maturing political
processes.

As the Council is aware, Belgrade and Pristina have
made great strides since last year towards normalization
of relations, including through their constructive
participation in the EU-facilitated dialogue. In May,
the adoption of municipal statutes by the Serb-majority
municipalities in northern Kosovo marked a significant
step forward. Both sides are aware that commitment
to full implementation on the ground of the First
Agreement of Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations of 19 April 2013 can be validated only
through their concrete and visible actions. In that
context, making progress on the formation of the
association/community of Serb-majority municipalities
will serve as an essential factor for sustaining the
positive momentum and promoting the prospects for
further normalization. I hope that members of the
Council will unanimously encourage both parties to
resume their high-level meetings as soon as the next
government is in place in Pristina.

Unfortunate acts of violence and lawlessness,
committed during the demonstrations on 22 June in
South Mitrovica, highlighted the volatility which still
characterizes the north-south divide in the Mitrovica
region. Misguided behaviour in this case did not
inflame wider tension, thanks in great measure to the
professional and effective intervention by the Kosovo
police, as well as the Kosovo Force, with the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on
stand-by as a reserve capacity. Yet close vigilance
remains necessary to safeguard the achievements and
continuing progress of the dialogue.

I take this opportunity once again to urge all
parties to address issues related to the main bridge
of Mitrovica - and any other disputed construction
work - through respectful dialogue. The 8 July and
11 August meetings on the subject between Kosovo's
Minister for Environment and Special Planning and
the mayor of North Mitrovica, as well as the 22 July
meeting of the EU-facilitated working group on the
matter, marked such constructive steps. Alongside
these, all local channels of communication and contacts
should be fully utilized in order to address the issues on
the ground that directly affect the everyday lives and
perceptions of local communities.

In northern Kosovo, arrest warrants recently
requested by a EULEX prosecutor and issued by a
EULEX pre-trial judge in the Basic Court of Mitrovica
against the current and former mayors of Zubin
Potok have significantly added to the unease in local
sentiments against EULEX. Although critical of those
recent developments in their joint statement of today,
the mayors and members of the four northern municipal
assemblies have expressed their readiness to continue
cooperating with EULEX.

As I continuously stress the crucial importance of
respecting judicial independence, I cannot but note that
public confidence in the system will be enhanced greatly
when justice is perceived to be conducted professionally

and expeditiously. In that respect, I am pleased to see
that the trial of five Kosovo Serbs charged with war
crimes and murder began its proceedings on Tuesday at
the Basic Court in Mitrovica after an extended period
marred by unhelpful speculations.

Ofgreater and long-term importance for the process
ofjustice and reconciliation in Kosovo was the 29 July
statement of findings (S/2014/558, annex II) made by the
Chief Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task Force.
Although the filing of further indictments will await
the establishment of a specialist court, the statement
itself represents another milestone in strengthening
the rule of law and an historic opportunity for further
healing of the scars of war. Immediate responses
from all quarters to the Chief Prosecutor's statement
have been encouraging. The Kosovo authorities have
recently reiterated their commitment to continuing
full cooperation with the Special Investigative Task
Force. Once fully functional, the Assembly of Kosovo
is expected to move expeditiously to pass the necessary
legislation to ensure the court becomes fully operational
early next year.

With regard to further progress in determining
the fate of missing persons, exhumation works at the
Rudnica stone quarry in Serbia's Raska municipality
were concluded on 22 August in the presence of Kosovo
Government forensic observers, supported by EULEX,
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
International Commission on Missing Persons and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I wish to acknowledge with great
appreciation the efforts of both Belgrade and Pristina
to ensure a non-politicized professional operation. As
we prepare to commemorate the International Day of
the Missing Persons tomorrow, I reiterate my call on all
parties to continue the work in this same manner and
to respect the suffering endured by the families of the
victims.

The reporting period showed that the
interconnectedness of ongoing crises throughout the
world is also affecting Kosovo. I wish to applaud the
initiative by President Jahjaga and the effective action
taken by the Kosovo police and security bodies to tackle
trends of violent extremism and prevent participation of
some Kosovars in the conflicts in Syria and Iraq. During
this summer, large-scale police operations resulted in a
significant number of arrests of persons suspected of
supporting extremist organizations or participating in
these foreign wars. I also wish to commend the close
engagement of the Islamic community of Kosovo and
its leaders, as well as the public stand taken by other
religious and secular leaders, to distance themselves
entirely from such extremism.

During the reporting period, UNMIK has continued
to focus its resources on strengthening reconciliation
efforts among the communities throughout Kosovo.
The Mission successfully completed its 2013-2014
confidence-building measures programme and is
now taking further initiatives on the foundations
of the implemented projects. We are engaging our
international partners to facilitate and support similar
initiatives throughout Kosovo, in particular in the
north.

However, I must sound a note of concern regarding
the protection of cultural and religious heritage in
Kosovo. Despite numerous announcements made by
the municipal authorities, the council for the protection
of the historic village of Hoca i Madhe/Velika Hoca
has not been established yet. In addition, the illegal
construction in the special protective zones - including
that surrounding the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization World Heritage
site of the Visoki Decani monastery - continues to
undermine our reconciliation efforts on the ground.
Resolute and effective enforcement measures against
such activities have yet to be taken by the concerned
Kosovo authorities.

Since the last report, little progress has been
observed with regard to the returns and reintegration
process of internally displaced persons (IDPs), with
35 percent fewer IDPs returning to Kosovo between
January and July 2014 compared to the corresponding
period last year. The hostile local protest of yesterday
against an approved visit of IDP pilgrims to Mushtisht
in order to mark the 28 August Orthodox feast was
deeply disappointing. I was grateful, however, to note
the strong and prompt public response was issued
by the Minister for Communities and Returns in the
immediate aftermath of this incident. I also welcome
the recent decision to postpone the eviction of around
50 Kosovo Serb IDPs from a collective centre in
Sht'e'rpce municipality, and I continue to encourage the
authorities in Pristina and in the municipality to find
durable solutions for this problem. Overall, greater and
proactive efforts are needed to address the rights of
IDPs before and after their return.

UNMIK fully supports the commendable work of
the EU and High Representative Ashton in facilitating
the high- level political dialogue and the implementation
of its historic agreements, which has significantly
enhanced the EU strategic perspective ofboth Belgrade
and Pristina. In this light, I wish to note the initialling
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
between the EU and Kosovo in Brussels on 25 July. The
commitment to the EU path being shown throughout
the region continues to be a driving force for positive
political, institutional and socioeconomic changes.
This is essential as well to fulfil the Council's objective
of finding a peaceful settlement of the Kosovo issue.
UNMIK remains wholly committed to performing its
mandate in the furtherance of this objective.

I conclude my remarks by expressing my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to all members ofthe Council
for your continuous support of UNMIK's work. The
period ahead will bring further challenges that will
require your continuing active engagement with both
parties to encourage full implementation of the 19 April
2013 Agreement and to support the work of the Special
Investigative Task Force and the establishment of the
specialist court. UNMIK will continue working closely
with local and international partners to support all vital
processes in accordance with its mandate, exerting
its efforts in support of the political progress being
achieved and helping to reduce and redress the short-
term challenges as and when they appear.

