I thank the Council for this opportunity and wish to make a few points I believe to be relevant to our purpose. The first is to congratulate the President on her country's accession to the presidency of the Security Council, and to commend her on her leadership during this high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict. I also extend special greetings to the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations family as we mark the seventy-fifth year of the formation of this pre-eminent multilateral Organization, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Platform for Action, as well as the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. Those milestones offer an opportunity for reflection. My hope is that this reflection will further pave the way for increased women's leadership and strengthen our efforts to protect traditionally marginalized and vulnerable groups - often women, children and persons with disabilities - trapped by conflict. Unfortunately, some conflicts are so protracted that we have seen multiple shifts in the parties concerned, and many people have been born and died without experiencing what it is to be a child or an adult with fulfilled aspirations and rights. Instead, their lives have often been defined, shortened and narrowed by conflicts they had no part in creating. It is time to take bold action, because unless we do so now we will lose many more lives, many others will sustain life-changing injuries and millions more will be forcibly displaced. We must find a way to end this cycle of immeasurable loss and human tragedy. The truth is that unless we put an end to these ongoing conflicts, there can be no semblance of a just compact between these States and their peoples nor any possibility of addressing the inequalities and injustices that have often fuelled the conflicts - both prerequisites for developmental transformation. Even worse, that opportunity may be lost for generations to come. That is also why I could not agree more with the Secretary-General that "[t]he most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflict" (S/2020/366, para. 67). That brings me to my second point. A conflict averted often does not make the headlines, but it saves lives and livelihoods. In that connection, nothing should weigh more heavily on our collective consciences or on the desk of the Council than the urgent need to stop ongoing conflicts and preventing new ones. I know that preventing a conflict is never easy, and yet our collective experience shows that it is less costly, if not easier, than ending one. Consequently, whenever peacekeeping mandates need to be changed, we must change them. When missions need to be reassessed, we must reassess them. When the Council needs to be broadened and strengthened to reflect the changing reality of our world, we must adapt and reform it. When individual members are holding the Council back with their narrow self-interests and using the veto power in ways unintended, we must find a workable formula to preserve the collective interests of all. What we simply cannot do is resign ourselves to a sense of hopelessness by settling for and accepting the continuation of numerous situations of prolonged carnage. After all, the United Nations and its many organs, especially the Security Council, represent hope for peace. Seventy-five years ago, our nations acted with courage to end a global war. The Council now represents the hope and aspirations of the global community for international peace and security. We must find the political will and commitment that has been long absent and we must act now. Today, our world is beset with more conflicts, the growing threat of violent extremism and a young population that is increasingly less hopeful about the possibility of living in peace. We simply cannot continue this way. It is time for change. I understand that the United Nations cannot end all conflicts alone. It requires a multitude of actors and commitments, including the involvement of women through the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which remains a key ingredient for peace. But I also know that the role of the Security Council is pivotal, especially one that is more representative of all the peoples of the world so as to be more effective in ending and preventing conflicts. As a Liberian, I am grateful to the Security Council and the larger United Nations for supporting the interventions that helped to broker and bring peace to my country. However, in my country, like in many places of ongoing conflict, the fault lines and signs were visible for many years. Simply put, protecting human rights, ending impunity and engaging in preventive diplomacy are crucial to stopping conflicts before they rage into full conflagrations. We must not ignore the many signals today or delay necessary action to prevent conflict. Finally, the coronavirus disease pandemic - with more than 5 million infected and more than 300,000 deaths worldwide - is a painful human tragedy. I extend my deepest condolences to all who are grieving for loved ones, and pray for a speedy recovery for those infected. Yet, even in this period of sadness, we are reminded of many important lessons that may help us prevent conflict and war. The first is that women's leadership and participation in gender-balanced governance have often made the difference in this fight. Secondly, we must remember that the virus is a pandemic. Only regional and global solidarity can protect the whole world from further tragedy. From global health and human development to peace and climate change, we need more multilateralism, not less. Only by working together can we overcome our common challenges and make the world safer, better and more peaceful. Thirdly, excluding impoverished nations from ongoing medical research and the development of needed cures does not mean that wealthier ones can continue to live in a protected bubble. Fourthly, we face an urgent need to reset the world to higher standards of international cooperation and peace as the most enduring and sustainable path to successfully confronting our common challenges, ending ongoing conflicts and preventing future ones. This pandemic has humbled us all and it represents our greatest test in living memory. The truth is that it is not beyond our ability to pass this test. However, how we pass it will redefine the course of human history. Let us not fail - for our own sake and that of posterity. I do not know how many will be infected, how many lives will be lost or where growth projections and human development indices will be when this pandemic ends. But I do know - as if further proof were needed - that we are more connected and interdependent than we have allowed ourselves to believe and that we have committed to acting together. As others have mentioned, I also know that the world and life as we know it will change. It is now upon us to ensure that those changes are for the better, for the good of humankind. Indeed, we face the test of a lifetime. May we find the courage, as we did in 1945, to find the answer of a lifetime.
