Mr. Rostow (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking the Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), Ambassador Denisov,
and Executive Director Ruperez for their briefings and
leadership.

These quarterly public meetings help ensure that
counter-terrorism remains at the top of the Council's
and the broader United Nations agenda. This practice
should continue.

On 8 October last, Ambassador Danforth spoke
of the spate of horrific terrorist attacks against innocent
civilians. The landscape he described was not a pretty
one. The attacks continue despite the international
community's efforts to thwart them. The day before the
Security Council adopted resolution 1566 (2004), in
which it delivered its strongest condemnation of the
intentional targeting of civilians, more than 30
vacationing civilians were murdered in a horrific
terrorist attack in Taba, qupt. A week before that, the
world saw the deliberate murder of 34 children and
seven adults in a terrorist attack in Baghdad, and a
terrorist attack at a Shi'ite mosque in Pakistan where
dozens of worshippers were killed. Finally, on the day
of the resolution's adoption, terrorists in Iraq beheaded
a British civilian hostage.
Strong United Nations resolutions and statements
from the floor condemning terrorism and pledging
action are meaningful only if they are by followed up
with action by all States. Only through concerted and
coordinated action will we win the war on terrorism.
To that end, my delegation calls upon all States and
organizations to look at what they have done to
contribute to the fight against terrorism and see where
they can do more. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
must do the same. Deeds matter more than words. This
global fight can be won only with the unrelenting
collaborative efforts of all States Members of the
Organization and of all other international bodies.

Despite the repeated calls by the General
Assembly and the Security Council for States to join
the 12 international terrorism instruments, only 57
States are parties to all 12, and 47 are parties to six or
fewer of those instruments. Given that these
conventions help facilitate cooperation among States to
fight terrorism, no one should be satisfied with the
current participation levels. We can and must do better.
Resources exist to help, particularly the Terrorism
Prevention Branch in Vienna. We encourage States to
take advantage of those resources.

For those States that are party to a regional
terrorism convention but not yet parties to all of the 12
international conventions, we reiterate what the
Council said in resolution 1566 (2004): joining
regional conventions cannot be viewed as an
alternative to joining the international ones.

Some regional conventions would seem to justify
attacks against civilians, depending on the political,
philosophical, ideological, racial or ethnic motivation
of the perpetrators. This is contrary not only to the text
and spirit of resolution 1566 (2004), but also to the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In
resolution 1566 (2004), the Security Council
unanimously endorsed the proposition that the
deliberate targeting of civilians is simply unjustifiable
by any cause. Until everyone accepts this proposition,
we shall not see truly universal collaboration against
terrorism - indeed, we shall not see the end of
terrorim.

The United States is pleased to see that the
revitalization of the CTC is nearing its final stages. We
urge both the Secretary-General and the General
Assembly to take the necessary action to ensure that
the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate is up and
running as soon as possible. An effective Executive
Directorate lies at the heart of improving the CTC's
ability to monitor States' efforts to implement their
obligations under Security Council resolution 1373
(2001), to identify gaps in States' capacities, and to
work with assistance providers to fill those gaps. We
encourage States to take advantage of this opportunity
and to reach out and invite Executive Director Ruperez
and his colleagues to visit.

As the Counter-Terrorism Committee begins its
fourth year of work, it should feel proud of its
accomplishments: more States than ever before have
the necessary legal and executive machinery in place to
combat terrorism; more States and organizations than
ever before are engaged in the global counter-terrorism
campaign, and this global campaign is better
coordinated than ever before. Yet there is much more
to do, and we must all do our utmost together in
fighting terrorism.

