Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me first of all to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your excellent leadership of the work of
the Security Council. I also wish to congratulate
Ambassador Lavrov on the results achieved under his
presidency in the month of June.

Allow me also to join the Council in expressing, on
behalf of the Government and the people of Argentina,
the strongest repudiation of the tragic attacks in Jerusalem
this morning. We offer the people of Israel our sincere
feelings of solidarity.

By adopting the draft resolution that is to be put to
the vote, we will be renewing our assistance to Haiti for
institutionalization and democratization. The report of the
Secretary-General attests to the contribution of the United
Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UN SMIH) to the
political stabilization of Haiti. Nonetheless, we believe
that the attainment of that objective will not depend only
on the new United Nations presence, but also on the will
and determination of all Haitian political forces. In this
regard, the statement just made by the Ambassador of
Haiti gives us cause for optimism and peace of mind.

The deployment of the United Nations Transition
Mission in Haiti will require two kinds of effort: one
economic and the other political. First and foremost, our
delegation wishes to thank the Member States that are
voluntarily contributing money and personnel, especially
the United States, Canada and countries from the
developing world, to make this new Mission in Haiti
possible. We also wish to state our willingness to rejoin
this effort whenever necessary. Secondly, we wish to
express our appreciation for the understanding displayed
by the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of
China in overcoming their reservations on the
continuation of an international presence of this new type
in Haiti.

Less than two weeks ago, through a presidential
statement, the Security Council said that civilian police in
peacekeeping operations carry our indispensable functions
in monitoring and training national police forces, as well
as in restoring civil order, supporting the rule of law and
fostering reconciliation at the national level. It also
pointed out the capacity of civilian police in such
operations to prevent and contain conflicts and
consolidate peace. We hope that these conclusions will
now be borne out once again in Haiti.

Finally, we wish to congratulate the office of the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations for
its effective efforts in making progress on this important
issue, both in Haiti and at Headquarters.

 

