Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom):
Mr. President, let me start by welcoming your presence
with us, which underlines the importance of the debate
on this subject, and by thanking your team for the very
careful way in which they have prepared for these
discussions.

I thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe and the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council for their insights and, if I may,
align myself with what the German Ambassador will
shortly say on behalf of the European Union.
I wish first to recognize that, for many countries,
the transparent, well-regulated exploitation of natural
resources is the engine of economic growth and
represents opportunity for their populations. That is
very welcome, but it is not the responsibility of this
Council. What we think is right is that the Council
should examine the links between natural resources
and conflict, which are real and varied, and opine on
that link.

Natural resources may cause conflict by being a
target for rebels or aggressors. They may sometimes be
the trigger for violent disputes over economic
advantage. Poor governance of natural resources has
been shown to increase the likelihood of conflict by
making Governments less reliant on revenue from
income tax. This may weaken the responsiveness of a
Government to the needs of their population. And, in
some circumstances, natural resources may sustain
existing conflicts by being a source of financing for
belligerent groups. The issues are complex, as this
Council has recognized in its discussion of specific
country cases previously.

The United Kingdom is committed to taking
action to address these relationships at a number of
different levels. The United Kingdom Government
paper entitled "Preventing Violent Conflict", which
was issued in April of this year, committed us to

"work with the international community to tackle
the common factors behind instability and violent
conflict, including the trade in conflict resources,
whether timber, diamonds or other minerals".

And, in London, a cross-Government task force is
coordinating our actions on these areas.

We also support existing efforts, such as the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and the
Kimberley Process, each previously addressed by
colleagues. And we provide bilateral support for
capacity-building projects for the mediation of
resource disputes in various countries and regions,
including in Ghana, Nigeria and the Middle East.
These regulatory approaches are important in
promoting transparency and accountability, but the role
of natural resources in conflict goes well beyond the
use of finance to support warring parties. Links
between natural resource revenues, bad governance and
violent conflict need to be tackled primarily through
the reform of political systems and structures of
governance. This requires responses tailored to
individual situations, involving Governments, the
international community, the private sector and civil
society, and we should base those responses on further
analysis of how natural resources affect and influence
the action and capabilities of all parties.

We believe that there is a need for a coherent
international approach in each situation. And we
welcome the language in the proposed presidential
statement to be adopted at the end of today's meeting,
which echoes this point.

We also need to consider the role of the Security
Council in this context, both in enhancing the work of
others to prevent conflict by addressing the issue of
governance and in taking the lead to restore peace and
security when conflict has occurred. When the Council
prepares the mandates and activities of peacekeeping
operations, we believe that it should assess the role of
natural resources in the conflict and the destabilization
that may arise as a result of misuse and competition.
That dimension should be considered, and the Council
should decide whether or not it is relevant in the
context of a proposed mandate for a peace support
operation.

The Security Council is therefore required, we
believe, to make an assessment of the role of natural
resources in the conflict, to discuss appropriate actions
to take, and to examine the impact of missions
themselves. This is not Council encroachment. The
economic benefits of developing resources are not for
the Council - let me repeat - but, as appropriate,
they would be for the Peacebuilding Commission and
other bodies, which could consider the contribution
that resources make.

A permanent centre of expertise within the United
Nations on issues related to conflict and natural
resources might indeed be a useful way of bringing
more coherence and defining a clearer policy
framework for United Nations action.

We believe that these pragmatic steps could
enhance the role of the Security Council in
coordinating and enhancing international action.
Furthermore, the Council should continue to work on
these issues following our debate today.

