Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, your personal presence here as Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Peru to guide the Security
Council's deliberations bears witness to the importance
that your country attaches to the topic that brings us
here today: children and armed conflict. We can thus
only thank you for having come.

In the short span of three months, the Security
Council is now holding its second debate on this matter
of great concern. This clearly shows how interested
this body is in the situation of children affected by
conflict throughout the world. I take this opportunity,
first of all, to welcome the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2006/826) and to convey our appreciation for the
already palpable results of the activities undertaken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. We are grateful to her
for her illuminating briefing to the Council on the
situation of children, not only in countries figuring on
the Council's agenda, but also in other situations of
concern.

I cannot fail to mention the extremely important
role of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF),
the United Nations system specialized agency that has
always played its part in helping children. I would like
to convey our great thanks to Ms. Ann M. Veneman, its
Executive Director. Nor can we can fail to pay tribute
to the non-governmental organizations for their
untiring efforts in the field to defend children, as
Mr. Gabriel Oling Olang of Save the Children has
described today.

It is with genuine interest that my delegation read
the report of the Secretary-General. My country,
having experienced recurring civil wars, understands
the full scope of the consequences of armed conflict on
the vulnerable group of children, for whom the right to
protection is a universal legal requirement - just as
they have a natural right to life and all the care that that
involves.

My delegation notes with satisfaction that in the
context of the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005), monitoring and reporting mechanisms are
being created in a growing number of countries. That
was made possible thanks to cooperation between the
United Nations and Member States, regional
organizations and non-governmental organizations. The
progress achieved in the first phase of implementation
of this mechanism in the seven priority situations -
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cote
d'Ivoire, Somalia, the Sudan, Nepal and Sri Lanka -
is encouraging, despite the excessive spread of conflict
situations, which in Africa has increased the likelihood
of abuses involving children.

In that connection, in 1990 our continent adopted
the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the
African Child as a common position at a time when the
World Summit for Children was convened here in New
York, and following the General Assembly's adoption
of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (General Assembly resolution 44/25).

A periodic assessment of developments in these
situations and the progressive extension of the
mechanism to other situations is therefore necessary.
The difficulties encountered in implementing this
initiative must be overcome. I am referring, inter alia,
to those related to access by personnel of the United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations; a clear
distribution of tasks among the United Nations and
outside partners; an understanding of the role of child
protection specialists within United Nations entities;
and making resources available for the implementation
of long-term intervention programmes for children
affected by conflict.

These mechanisms are the first link in a chain and
the starting point of a process, the purpose of which
should be the crafting and implementation of action
plans with target dates to prevent or put an end to the
recruitment and use of children as well as other
violations against children in situations of armed
conflict or post-conflict situations.

My delegation notes that here, despite progress
by certain States that have committed themselves by
taking concrete measures for the implementation of
national action plans, much remains to be done. But we
can welcome certain cases, like that of Cote d'Ivoire,
where we see an actual example of children being
handed over, once demobilized, to UNICEF, and a
prohibition of recruitment into armed forces or groups.

We therefore encourage other Governments not to
remain at the stage of mere commitments, but to ensure
that those commitments are met without further delay
through the adoption of concrete measures to prevent
or put an end to child recruitment, if necessary,
considering sanctions against recalcitrant perpetrators
of those criminal practices.

The same applies to sexual exploitation and abuse
by peacekeeping personnel of the United Nations. It is
regrettable that, despite all the efforts made, such
abuses continue to come to light. My delegation
reaffirms its commitment to the zero-tolerance policy
advocated by the Secretary-General in his report
following the 2005 World Summit.

Turning to experience acquired in terms of child
protection, we can now take note of the importance of
the role of child protection specialists in two main
areas: data collection for the purpose of monitoring and
reporting of information; and ensuring the
mainstreaming of child protection issues in
peacekeeping missions, through training programmes.
But improvements are needed in order to ensure that
the efforts of child protection specialists are effective,
and to enhance the overall impact of their activities.

My country remains devoted to the concept of the
responsibility to protect, enshrined at the September
2005 World Summit. We support the recommendations
of the Secretary-General, for instance, when he
suggests that the Security Council give equal care and
attention to children affected by armed conflict in all
situations of concern and, in addition to the issue of the
recruitment and use of children, to attach the same
importance to other types of grave violations, such as
murder, maiming, rape and other serious sexual abuses,
kidnapping and so forth.

We believe that particular attention should be
focused on Darfur to ensure that the parties, whether or
not they have signed the Peace Agreement, understand
their obligation to spare children and undertake
concrete commitments to that end. We expect the same
from the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) in northern
Uganda, as a logical consequence of a crisis in which
children have suffered an ordeal that they should never
have had any connection with, either as involuntary
participants or as innocent victims.

Turning to the international community, what the
national Governments and the United Nations and its
partners must do is to ensure the availability of
sufficient resources and financing for the successful
reintegration and rehabilitation of all children
associated with conflict, to craft relevant and effective
initiatives to support such efforts in order to make sure
of their success and long-term viability.
Finally, we can only reiterate to the Members of
our international Organization that are party to the
relevant international or regional conventions the need
to secure a safer and more peaceful world for
tomorrow that will not allow itself to associate

children- the hope of humanity - with morally
reprehensible initiatives. Like a mirror that magnifies
both the good and the bad practices of adults, children
will reflect only what they themselves have
experienced in these conflict situations.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
the French delegation, not only for what it has done at
the head of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflicts, but also for having drafted the presidential
statement, which we unreservedly support.

