Mr. Gillerman (Israel): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you very much for your condolences, which I
know are heartfelt and sincere, as are, I know, the
condolences expressed by my colleague from
Liechtenstein.

Mr. President, allow me to thank you for your
leadership of the Council during this rather busy month
of October and for having convened this extremely
important meeting.

The statement I had prepared for this meeting is
before the Council. However, even as we speak, five
Israelis lie dead and 33 others, badly wounded, are
being rushed to the hospital after terrorists struck
again, this time in the market of the city of Hadera in
central Israel, in a suicide bombing by a 20-year-old
Palestinian.

I will therefore - with your permission, Mr.
President - forsake my statement and not read it out
at this time of great grief and stark reality. Indeed, the
bloody scene in Hadera, the body parts and the
bloodstained streets speak far louder than any words or
statement could. Indeed, anyone who expects Israel to
re-embark on the road map must realize that so far,
unfortunately, the road in Hadera is the real map - a
map of blood, terror and pain.

Terror for Israel - as is the case, unfortunately,
for so many others around this table - is not a
technical matter. It is far too real, far too ominous, far
too deadly and far too daily an occurrence. In fact,
Israel has experienced more than 25,400 terrorist
attacks in the past five years alone. I repeat: 25,400
terrorist attacks in five years. That exceptionally high
number, however, reflects only attacks that have
actually been carried out. The number of attempted
attacks is exponentially greater. We cannot overlook
the attacks that are attempted but which, for some
reason, fail. Those that are carried out overwhelm the
headlines by nature of their imagery and the sheer
horror they represent, as witnessed today in Hadera.
Nevertheless, for every terrorist attack carried out,
there are nearly five attempted attacks. Just think of it:
if we did not manage to thwart them, we would have
not 25,400 but 125,000 terror attacks in five years.
There is such a miniscule distance between those that
are successful and those that, for a technical reason,
fail. Life and death depend on the smallest of fractions:
a second, an inch, a glance.

Responsibility for that heinous crime has been
claimed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, whose
headquarters, like those of a dozen other terror
organizations, is in Damascus, Syria, and Syria is a
country that has been harbouring, financing and
initiating terror throughout the region and the world.
We have not yet heard any condemnation from the
Palestinian Authority. But even if we do, words are not
enough. We expect deeds, not words, and resolute
action against terror now.

Talking of words, the words of the President of
Iran, voiced so loudly only yesterday, as he called for
Israel to be wiped off the map, are being implemented
in Hadera today with such grim immediacy. It is words
like Iran's, terror-harbouring and terror-abetting like
Syria's and inaction like that of the Palestinians that
the Committees must address.

Terror is the first world war of the twenty-first
century and, today more than ever, we must all
mobilize our forces to fight that pandemic. We must do
so to save not only lives but also the very foundations
of our civilization.

