Ms. Bellamy: The draft resolution before the
Council today represents another step forward in
making the world a safer place for every child.

As all of us are only too well aware, and as the
Secretary-General noted, today's debate on children
and armed conflict was to have been convened almost
exactly two months ago, in the midst of the General
Assembly special session on children. The world is a
very different place because of what occurred on 11
September, but, as the Secretary-General has observed,
we can take heart in the international community's
strong reaffirmation of collective action in defence of
that most basic of human rights - the right of all
people to live in peace and security.

Today's draft resolution builds upon the two
previous measures on the issue - resolution 1261
(1999) and resolution 1314 (2000) - as well as the
Council's earlier resolutions on protection of civilians;
on women, peace and security; and on the threat of
HIV/AIDS. These measures are a testament to what the
United Nations does best - changing attitudes through
incremental development, establishing standards for
what is right and just, and making their implementation
obligatory.

The issue of child soldiers is a prime example. As
recently as five or six years ago, understanding and
awareness of the issue were limited. Recruitment of
children was usually carried out with little or no notice
and often with complete impunity. Since then, the
world has received the important contribution of our
good friend Graca Michel. I understand the Council has
received her latest publication, which I commend to
members for reading. The world also now has in force
an international legal standard, as Olara mentioned -
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child 4 which raises the age of recruitment and
prohibits the involvement of children under the age of
18 in hostilities.

The recruitment of children is defined as a war
crime in the Rome Statute for the establishment of an
International Criminal Court. Under the terms of the
draft resolution before the Council, those who recruit
or use children in violation of international obligations
will be brought to the attention of the Council by the
Secretary-General, who would be called upon to
prepare reports as necessary.

This is a crucial step in the campaign to end the
recruitment of children for armed combat and their use
as soldiers. It is a sign of serious and continuing
commitment, and it certainly is our hope that all
members of the Security Council will continue to
demonstrate that commitment by urging all States to
sign and ratify the new Optional Protocol.

Let me also commend the members of the
Council and especially you, Madam President, for
inviting a young person from Sierra Leone to address
us today. Alhaji Sawaneh's presence is a reminder not
only of the suffering that children endure in armed
conflict, but also of the contribution that they can make
by participating in the realization of their own rights.

As the Council is aware, access to children
caught up in situations of conflict remains a major
problem. Most child fatalities in armed conflict occur
not as a direct result of violence, but because children
are denied access to such essential services as health
care, food security and clean water.

I know that this fact was underlined earlier this
year, when many Council members visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and saw evidence to
back up a study that showed that of the approximately
2.5 million civilian deaths above the million deaths that
might have been expected to occur in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, one-third
were children under the age of five.

Resolution 1314 (2000) called for unhindered
access to children affected by armed conflict. Today's
measure would reiterate that call with renewed urgency
and make explicit reference to internally displaced
populations. We thank the Council for endorsing this
imperative in its resolution, and we urge you to keep up
the pressure in all country-specific undertakings.

Today's draft resolution also calls upon parties to
armed conflict to collaborate in days of immunization
and other opportunities for the safe and unhindered
delivery of basic necessary services. This year,
UNICEF, the World Health Organization and its
partners have been able to carry out successful national
immunization days for polio eradication in countries
such as Angola, Somalia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Sierra Leone, Sudan and, just last week,
Afghanistan.

In so doing, we have been able to show that even
conflict need not be an obstacle to fundamental
development imperatives where the political will
exists. But let us not forget that these are partial steps
towards securing full, safe and unhindered access to
children in situations of conflict.

In this connection, I want to point out that later
today, UNICEF and the Federation Internationale de
Football, joined by the Secretary-General, will launch
an initiative to dedicate the 2002 World Cup to
children. Part of this effort will be to call upon warring
parties around the world to take special measures
during the time of the World Cup to ensure
humanitarian access to children.

Let me also say how gratifying it is to see the
issue of HIV/AIDS addressed so forthrightly in the
draft resolution. The call to ensure that all
peacekeeping personnel receive appropriate guidance
and training is a vital follow-up to resolution 1308
(2000). And the request that the United Nations system
integrate HIV/AIDS awareness, prevention, care and
support into humanitarian programmes is both
appropriate and timely.

Clearly, we have an immense task before us. We
know from surveys on the ground in conflict-affected
countries that levels of awareness of HIV/AIDS and
how to prevent it are quite low. We know, too, that girls
and women in conflict situations are extremely
vulnerable because of sexual violence perpetrated by
armed forces and rebel groups, camp police and
displaced men and boys. Research has shown that, in
conflict areas, men and boys often talk about violence
against girls and women as normal and acceptable
behaviour.

In line with the draft resolution, UNICEF will
continue to seek to protect children from all forms of
sexual violence and to include HIV/AIDS education as
part of all emergency education programmes, with
particular attention devoted to the needs of
demobilized child soldiers.

In Afghanistan, the international community is
confronting a crisis in which the survival of millions of
children and women hinges on an immediate and
coordinated response. Our folks on the ground recently
estimated that without an adequate humanitarian
response, over 100,000 children could die during the
winter - which is why we are urgently seeking short-
term assistance in the form of continued funding,
access to those in need and security for humanitarian
staff.

But much more is needed if we are to ensure the
long-term well-being of the children of Afghanistan
and the sustainable protection of their rights. A
major priority for us will be education, making certain
that girls, as well as boys, have access to schooling as
soon as possible.

In post-war situations - and even during the
worst times of conflict - education provides an
environment of relative stability and normalcy for
children. It offers an alternative to recruitment. And in
affording them opportunities to learn, education gives
children a chance to gain basic skills that will allow
them to work, to contribute to society and, in time, to
support their own families.

Other key priorities are child protection in all
areas of recovery, with an emphasis on landmine
awareness - Afghanistan is probably the most heavily
mined country in the world - and the full participation
of women in peace-building efforts.

The Council's draft resolution pledges to put
children at the centre of recovery and rehabilitation
efforts, and whether in Afghanistan, Sierra Leone or
the Great Lakes region, I can assure you that we and
our partners, both within and outside the United
Nations system, will do everything to make that a
reality.

The work of UNICEF is inspired by a vision of a
world where leaders use their power and influence to
assure that every child grows to adulthood in health,
peace and dignity. It is a goal set out in the draft
outcome document for the Special Session on Children,
which will likely convene in May 2002 - a document
in which you, Madam President, have played a crucial
guiding role in your capacity as Chair of the
Preparatory Committee, and for which I want to take
this opportunity to extend on behalf of UNICEF our
heartfelt thanks.

The central message of the draft outcome
document from the Special Session is a challenge to all
of us to assert leadership for children in every sphere
of life. I believe that, in the resolution before you
today, the Security Council has again risen to that
challenge and, in so doing, affirmed that together we
can truly change the world with children.

In conclusion, it is my pleasure to introduce the
next speaker, Alhaji Sawaneh of Sierra Leone. He is 14
years old. He became a child soldier after being
abducted. He spent two and a half years with the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), where he
commanded one of several child combat units. He was
later cared for by the group of Caritas Makeni. He has
a very special and important perspective on the issue of
children and armed conflict, including - as I pointed
out before - not only the problem but the enormous
and largely untapped contribution that young people
themselves can make.

