Mr. Lacroix (Spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to provide the Security Council with an update on the
Secretary-General's 30-day report and on the situation
in South Sudan. Iwill begin by sharing some information
on the deployment of the Regional Protection Force
(RPF), to complement the information that has already
been provided to the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

The deployment of the Regional Protection Force
is under way. We expect the main body of the Rwandan
infantry battalion to complete its deployment in
November. The Ethiopian battalion advance party has
started arriving in Juba and its deployment is expected
to be completed by 20 October. The main body's
road move from Addis Ababa to Juba will commence
in the latter part of October, subject to clearances
by the Kenyan and Ugandan Governments. Despite
various bureaucratic delays, we continue to engage
with the Government on a regular basis to expedite
that deployment. We strongly believe that enhanced
cooperation with the Government on the issue remains
critical for the RPF to implement its mandate.

The security situation in the country remains a
cause for serious concern. During the past month,
the security situation in the greater Upper Nile has
deteriorated, with reports of clashes in northern Jonglei
and the eastern Upper Nile between the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and the pro-Machar forces of
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement in Opposition
(SPLM-IO). On I October, the SPLM-IO reportedly
attacked Waat in Jonglei to seize control of the town.
Since that attack, there have been reports of intense
fighting, which has led to heavy casualties on both
sides. Meanwhile, fighting continues for the control
of Pagak. The continued presence of opposition forces
in Nhialdu and other locations in Unity state is likely
to invite SPLA counteroperations, thereby leading to
more internally displaced persons being displaced
towards the Bentiu protection of civilians site.

The security situation in the Equatorias also
remained precarious. In Western Equatoria, there was
an increase in incidents against non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). Some NGO staff members
travelling between Tambura and Yambio were robbed
by armed assailants along the road. The compound of an
international NGO in Yeri, approximately 50 kilometres
north-east of Mvolo, was broken into by armed
perpetrators on 26 September. Furthermore, Mudubai
village, approximately 50 kilometres north-east of
Maridi town, was also attacked by armed assailants on
28 September. Four civilians were reportedly abducted
and tukuls were burned down. In southern Central
Equatoria, SPLA soldiers allegedly killed two civilians
in Abuwa Boma, near Ombaci town.

All of those incidents should be cause for grave
concern, given the imminent start of the dry season,
which traditionally leads to increased levels of Violence
with improved mobility across the country. The human
rights situation in the country remains extremely
concerning. Extrajudicial killings of civilians,
arbitrary arrests and detentions, the repression of free
speech with impunity, and the harassment of political
opponents continued throughout the reporting period.

As submitted to the Security Council, within the
tense security environment, the Government's security
institutions continue to restrict freedom of movement for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. Similarly,
opposition forces have also restricted access in areas
under their control. I would therefore strongly urge
the Security Council to pronounce itself, highlighting
that the Government's continued violations of the
status of forces agreement and restrictions imposed by
opposition forces are both causes for grave concern.

Overall, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate, with continued insecurity and an
increasingly challenging operating environment.
Despite a highly effective humanitarian operation
that has reached millions with life-saving assistance,
humanitarian indicators are likely to deteriorate
further unless there is a reduction in conflict and
improved access.

More than 2 million people have fled since the
start of the conflict in 2013. More than 1 million are in
Uganda, with thousands fleeing in recent months from
the counties of Yei, Kajo Keji, Kapoeta North, Mundri
West, Morobo and Maridi. Others have fled to Ethiopia
and the Sudan, most recently following clashes in
Upper Nile. In addition, another 1.9 million people
are displaced within the country. While a significant
portion of the population is already displaced, either
inside or outside the country, further displacement can
be expected and any significant return of refugees or
internally displaced persons remains unlikely. With
the return of the dry season towards the end of the
year, population movements - particularly refugee
outflows - are likely to reaccelerate.

The number of humanitarian access incidents has
grown in recent months. In August, for example, over
100 incidents were recorded and more than half of them
involved violence against personnel or assets. Two aid
workers were killed in August and one in September,
bringing the total number killed this year alone to 18.
Aid workers have been detained on several occasions,
and humanitarian supplies have been regularly looted
from vehicles or compounds. Bureaucratic impediments
imposed by the Government have also become more
constraining, including the imposition of higher taxes
and fees that particularly impact NGOs.

In our View, Juba remains focused on the national
dialogue process as a vehicle to move the process
towards elections, with an overall aim to end the
transition period. The National Dialogue Steering
Committee has reached out to some opposition parties,
as well as to civil society organizations. However, the
credibility of the process remains in question, owing
to significant opposition groups being so far unwilling
to join, against the backdrop of the concurrent SPLA
military operations.

With regard to the revitalization forum announced
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), the Government has only given a conditional
response. IGAD has begun consultations and held
meetings with opposition figures, including Riek
Machar in South Africa, who have all declared
cautious support for the process. An IGAD Foreign
Ministers meeting was also held with President Kiir
and his Cabinet on 13 October, during which the latter
reportedly committed to supporting the revitalization
forum, while requesting a series of clarifications on its
objectives that IGAD agreed to address in writing. I
would like to emphasize the criticality of this initiative.
I urge Council members to use their leverage on all
parties and encourage them to engage in this process
meaningfully and without any preconditions.

With regard to the political process itself, I would
like to re-emphasize a few principles. The conflict
in South Sudan is a direct outcome of a prolonged
disproportionate access to power and wealth in the
country. All future dispensations, therefore, must rest
on the principle of inclusivity that leads to equitable
power- and wealth-sharing. Similarly, South Sudan has
been held hostage to personality politics and conflicts
as far back as we can remember. All processes and
international support must strive to build institutions
so that politics shifts from ownership by individuals
to those institutions that must be accountable to the
people of South Sudan.

I would like to reiterate that the conflict in
South Sudan is a man-made conflict for which the
leaders of South Sudan bear a direct responsibility.
The dire economic situation and continued conflict
in the country have come together to inflict a very
heavy price on the South Sudanese population. They
deserve better. The same leaders who are responsible
for the conflict can also bring the country back from
the impending abyss. All that is needed is genuine
political will to halt military operations, peacefully
negotiate and make the compromises that are necessary
to achieve sustainable peace in the country. As I
mentioned earlier, the IGAD revitalization forum will
provide an ideal opportunity for that. I would also urge
the Security Council to pronounce itself in that regard.
It is critical that the leaders of South Sudan hear the
international community's unified demand for what is
expected of them.

