Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): Since this is the first time I
have addressed the Security Council under your
presidency, Mr. President, let me first of all congratulate
you on your assumption of your high office. I am
confident that under your talented and able guidance the
Council will be able to fulfil its responsibilities
successfully. I would also like to express my admiration
for your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, for the excellent manner in which he conducted
the affairs of the Council during his presidency.

The agreed basic principles signed today in Geneva
undoubtedly open a new opportunity to bring an end to
the bloody conflict and acts of horror, genocide and
"ethnic cleansing" that have made Bosnia into a
shameful mark on the conscience of the world and on the
capacity of the United Nations to deter and roll back
aggression.

If this window of opportunity has opened today, it is
due in large, even full, measure to the Vigorous action and
air strikes against Bosnian Serb positions. Only these
strikes, and the underlying resolve, have removed the
threat of further Serb attacks of the type that we had
witnessed earlier, not just in the marketplace of Sarajevo
and in Tuzla, but, indeed, all over Bosnia and
Herzegovina over several months and years.

Pakistan, along with many other countries, had
repeatedly urged that such robust military action should
be taken right at the outset. Had that been done, and had
the unjust arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina
been lifted then, perhaps today's agreement would have
seen the light of day earlier and much pain, suffering and
shame would have been averted.

 

We hope now that this resolve ol' the United Nations
and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) will
continue to manifest itself. Only then will there be a chance
of ensuring that the political settlement of which a
foundation has been laid today will be just, ran and
durable. without acquiescing in any Way to the criminal and
aggressive actions that we have witnessed in the past.

Only thus will the United Nations be able to defend the
principles of its Charter and the content of its resolutions
and decisions.

