Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation voted against the
draft resolution (S/2017/884) that was submitted by
the United States on the technical extension of the
mandate of the United Nations-Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It is regrettable that
the authors have chosen a path of confrontation and
division in the Security Council. That is exactly the
kind of politicization that we have been talking about
today and, incidentally, that same cynicism that the
representatives of the United States have talked about.
We want to emphasize that we too are very concerned
about the use of chemical weapons in Syria. In response
to the representative ofthe United Kingdom, I can affirm
everything that Foreign Minister Lavrov has said, whom
he quoted today, for which I thank him. Every incident
should be investigated and the perpetrators found and
punished. Speaking for ourselves, that is what we are
working to achieve. But what do those words have to do
with today's meeting?

I want to emphasize that today's vote is also
meaningless because it will not affect the fate of the
JIM. in any way. It will go on functioning as it did
before. We will return to the discussion of the question
of its extension.

(spoke in English)

We have not stopped it, as the representative of
Great Britain said. We have not brought it to an end.

(spoke in Russian)

Since it is possible that some here were not listening
very attentively to my statement, I will quote myself
again:

"Today's decision will in no way affect the future
of the Joint Investigative Mechanism. The way
it functions up to 17 November is the way it will
continue to function".

In response to my friend and colleague from
Uruguay, who is concerned about the fate of the
unfortunate JIM. staff, we will of course be sorry for
them, if need be, although nothing has happened to
them yet. But the JIM. is not a charity for the support
of its employees' families. It is dealing with something
rather more important, and the tasks ahead of it are
considerably more important than that, although it is of
course important too. We will have time to worry about
the fate of the families of employees. There is no need
to insist on it right now.

I found it amusing today that not one but several
delegations read out prepared statements condemning
some countries' use of the veto. Did they know in
advance that we would exercise the right of veto today?
That only confirms that today we have been witnessing
a staged performance with a single goal, that of
pillorying one particular country. Incidentally, I have
a request for those who talk to the journalists at the
stake-out after today's meeting, which is to ask them
to please not distort our position. I have already been
obliged to repeat myself, and I will say once again that
we have not shut down the JIM, we simply have not
made a decision about its extension today, and we will
return to the issue.

Just one more thing. It is regrettable that today's
meeting was held at all. But it is clear that whoever
requested it knew what the scenario would be ahead of
time, and that their aims were certainly not what they
declared them to be in their statements. We will return
to the question of extending the mandate of the JIM
after the release of its report and a calm discussion in
the Security Council of its content and conclusions. We
will see what kind of mandate it should have in order
to ensure that it performs its work objectively and
professionally and so that we do not have meetings like
today's in the future.

