Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for managing the work of the Security Council for this
month. I also express our satisfaction about the recovery
of Mr. Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, to good health. We are pleased to see him back
at work.

I have noted from the statements of some of my
colleagues - particularly those from the delegations
of the United States, Britain, France, Belgium and
Germany - that they are now speaking as if they were
the Special Envoy. They have drawn up a new road map
for him, one that has nothing to do with the road map
that he follows and was agreed upon by everybody.
The new road map is full of landmines in the shape
of preconditions and was presented in a rude way that
does not respect the mandate of the Special Envoy. In
fact, it violates his mandate and its provisions, thereby
obstructing the Special Envoy's noble mission.
The only path, the most effective and the least
costly, to end the suffering of the Syrian people is for
the States that sponsor terrorism to recall their monsters
from Idlib and Al-Hol camp, which is being run by the
occupying United States forces in a dear part of my
country. I ask them to take back their monsters and put
them in their civilized caves in Europe, Britain - as
Britain is no longer part of Europe - Australia, the
United States, Turkey, the Caucuses, the Gulf, Tunisia,
Egypt, Jordan and Central Asia. Then the bloodshed of
the Syrian people will stop and my country - all of it,
not just Idlib - will enjoy peace and security.

Terrorism in the caves of Tora Bora led to the attacks
on New York on 11 September 2001. Terrorism in the
caves of Idlib led to the killing of tens of thousands of
Syrians in Aleppo, Hama, Latakia and throughout the
Syria. Therefore, no one can blame us when we exercise
our sovereign right to combat terrorism.

As we are speaking about terrorism, I mention
the International Centre for Counter-Terrorism in The
Hague, the Netherlands. According to the Centre, there
are nearly 4,300 European terrorists fighting in Syria
and Iraq. The "moderate armed Syrian opposition" has
been genetically modified. First, they were Europeans,
then became Syrians and now, members ofthe moderate
armed Syrian opposition. Of those 4,300 European
terrorists, 2,838 are from Belgium, Britain, France
and Germany. Four European countries sent us almost
3,000 terrorists. These statistics are not accurate, as
they are European statistics. The Syrian Government's
figures are much bigger. The number of Belgian
terrorists in Syria today who are fighting the Syrian
Government is 400. Fighting what? They are fighting
the Syrian Government.

1 would like the Belgian representative to ask my
dear friend and Belgian colleague, Ambassador Jan De
Ruyt, who was here in 2011, what I said to him back then,
when the crisis first started in Syria. I told him that we
had detected the first foreign terrorist in Syria. He was
a sniper, attacking Syrian soldiers and policemen in
Homs. He was Belgian. The very first foreign terrorist
detected in Syria was from Belgium. I encourage the
Belgian representative to ask his colleague Ambassador
De Ruyt. We could speak at length about this matter.

It has become the regular approach of certain
speakers in the Council, and has occurred in 62
meetings prior to this one, that with every victory of
the Syrian Arab Army in confronting the hordes of
global terrorism, they launch campaigns of lies in order
to defame and mar the image of the Syrian State. The
Council will recall that, when Homs was liberated,
some claimed the use ofwhat was then called exploding
barrels. Regarding Al-Qusayr and Qalamoun, on
the Syrian-Lebanese border, lies were spread about
forced evictions and demographic changes. When
the eastern neighbourhoods of Aleppo were liberated
there were claims of siege, starvation and obstructing
access to medical supplies. When the eastern Ghouta
villages were liberated lies were fabricated about the
use of chemical weapons. Now we hear other claims
about targeting medical and educational facilities and
services in Idlib and its outskirts.

All those claims are baseless and simply part of the
unjust and aggressive political architecture of terrorism
that has been targeting my country for the past eight
years. I assert before the Council that the Syrian Air
Force and the friendly Russian Air Force do not attack
civilian targets. Instead, they attack only terrorist bases
and centres, unless one considers the bases and centres
of terrorists as sanctuaries of worship, kindergartens
and centres that promote international humanitarian law.

Moreover, there are not 3 million Syrians in Idlib.
That number is misleading and incorrect. Idlib does not
hold 20 per cent of Syria's population. It is, instead,
a small province in Syria, compared to Syria's other
provinces. The number of residents living in Idlib is no
more than 1 million.

Earlier this month, I took part in the thirteenth
round of the Astana meetings, which were held in Nur-
Sultan, the capital of Kazakhstan. That round of talks
concluded in the adoption of an important declaration
that reiterated a strong commitment to the Syrian Arab
Republic's sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as
continued cooperation with the Syrian Government until
the terrorist organizations in Syria are totally eliminated.
The declaration also rejected the separatist agendas that
aim to undermine the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Syria. Moreover, the declaration reiterated adhering
to international resolutions pertaining to putting an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan - first and
foremost resolution 497 (1981).

In that context, my delegation would like to thank
the delegations of Russia and Iran, as well as the host
State, Kazakhstan, for their contributions to ensure the
success of that round of talks. We emphasize the need
to not prejudice this track because, as enjoys broad
support and consensus, especially from the Syrian
people, who are primarily concerned with determining
their own future. We also stress the need to not obstruct
this track for any reason.

What is astonishing here is the provocative measure
by the United States and Turkey, which coincided with
the final meeting of the Astana round of talks, taken
directly after the final declaration was issued, as
thankfully mentioned by our Russian colleague. They
have taken that provocative measure aimed at creating a
new reality on the ground in the areas illegally occupied
by the forces of those two States.

That provocative measure took the form of
a statement issued by those two parties on an
agreement to establish a so-called safe zone on Syrian
territory - I repeat: on Syrian territory, not in Florida,
Texas or Istanbul. My country categorically rejects
that agreement, as it constitutes a blatant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic, which has been affirmed by all Security
Council resolutions on Syria. It is also a blatant violation
of the principles of international law and the Charter
of the United Nations. This United States-Turkish
agreement has further exposed those two countries'
partnership in the aggression against Syria and the
manoeuvring and deceit governing their policies.

We are facing a dangerous reality in which two
antagonist countries are supporting terrorism in my
country and overtly negotiating encroachment over the
territories of a third State - my country, Syria - while,
at the same time, the Security Council, through 20
resolutions, has confirmed its firm commitment to
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The United States delegation
supported those 20 resolutions, which were adopted
unanimously. Can the Council therefore let us know
what position it takes vis-a-vis the hostile behaviour
of the United States and Turkey in entrenching
the occupation of part of my country? Is there any
justification for the Council's silence on the blatant and
public violation of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations?

Certain all-too-familiar Member States strive
to exhaust Council members by sometimes calling
for almost daily meetings, providing false witnesses,
proposing draft letters, statements and draft resolutions
and establishing committees, such as the one recently
set up to investigate claims that hospitals and medical
centres are being targeted, based on so-called open-
source accounts that are both misleading and unfounded.
All such efforts are meant to level accusations against
the Syrian Government and tarnish its reputation,
rather than to rely on the documented information that
my Government provides to the United Nations. In that
regard, I thank Mr. Lowcock for putting himself today
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs in the service of the agendas of the antagonist
countries vis-a-vis my country.

Israel's participation in this terrorist architecture
was demonstrated in the recent Israeli attacks on the
territories of three Arab States, namely, Syria, Iraq and
Lebanon, which were supported by the United States
Secretary of State in a manifestation of the United
States-Israel partnership aimed at continued instability
and insecurity in the region to serve Israeli interests.

The Polish presidency thankfully held a meeting
on 20 August regarding the challenges to international
peace and stability in the Middle East (see S/PV.8600),
during which most speakers confirmed that Israel's
occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
and its aggressive policies are the root cause of
those challenges. In the light of the firm statements
delivered by dozens of speakers, we would assume that
there is no place for further political illiteracy in this
international Organization.

Certain speakers mentioned today the current
situation in Idlib. In that regard, I would like to confirm
that my Government has demonstrated the patience
of Job, opted for political solutions and has provided
sufficient time, as it has always dealt seriously with
all attempts to restore calm. It has abided by such
initiatives to safeguard the lives of Syrian citizens and
end the actions of those who trade in the pain and blood
of Syrians throughout Syria.

As I said, we recently witnessed that seriousness at
the thirteenth round of the Astana talks, in which the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic participated and
where we adopted a final communique, which was very
constructive. But that communique was completely
rejected, while I was in the middle ofa press conference
at Astana. I was reading out an official statement
on behalf of my Government after the meeting's
conclusion, and the agreement was broken and rejected
within half an hour of its adoption. Who broke that
agreement? Turkey, the terrorists and the sponsors of
the terrorists in Idlib.

Terrorist organizations and their sponsors have
chosen the military solution through their continued
targeting of civilian areas in Aleppo, Hamah, southern
Idlib and Latakia where hundreds of innocent victims
were killed and thousands were injured. This has met
with silence by the co-penholders on the humanitarian
issue, who failed to say a single word to condemn it in or
outside the Council. Rather, the co-penholders talk only
about confidence-building measures with the terrorists,
thereby disregarding the fact that the Western-backed
terrorist groups have killed a large number of those
whom they kidnapped and were holding hostage.

Furthermore, out of concern for the safety of its
citizens, my Government recently announced the
opening of a humanitarian corridor in the city of Souran
to enable civilians who wish to leave the areas in which
terrorist groups are present in the northern rural Hamah
area and southern Idlib for areas in which the State is
present. We are working on meeting the various needs
of those civilians in terms of food, shelter and medical
care. Moreover, my country has agreed to send an entire
hospital of the International Committee of the Red
Cross to the Al-Hol camp. It seems the news of sending
an entire Red Cross hospital to the Al-Hol camp has
not reached Mr. Lowcock. My country's Government
strongly rejects the claims in the report of the Secretariat
(S/2019/674) aimed at besmirching its reputation and
spreading false and unfounded accusations involving
the targeting of civilian infrastructure in Idlib.

The twenty-fourth report (S/2019/570) of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
asserts that

"[Idlib] contains the greatest concentration of
terrorist elements anywhere in the Levant and Iraq
and is described as 'the world's biggest dumping
ground for foreign terrorist fighters'."(S/2019/570, para. 2)

I repeat, Idlib is "the world's biggest dumping ground
for foreign terrorist fighters". Those are the words
used by the Security Council's Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.

The report continues, stating that the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham is the sole and effective party controlling
armed and unarmed activities in those areas. It is no
secret to anyone that the Astana agreement on the
de-escalation zones does not cover the armed groups that
had been designated by the Security Council as terrorist
entities. Furthermore, the Astana agreement stipulated
a series of obligations, including those requiring the
armed groups that signed the agreement to dissociate
themselves from terrorist organizations, especially
Da'esh, Jabhat Al-Nusra and all their affiliates.

The Astana and Sochi agreements also reaffirmed
the right of the Syrian Government and its allies to
confront the terrorist organizations regardless of what
they called themselves. In that regard, we reaffirm
that the armed entities present in Idlib, such as Jabhat
Al-Nusra, Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, Da'esh, the East
Turkestan Islamic Movement, Huras Al-Din and Jaysh
Al-Muhajireen Wal-Ansar, among others, are all armed
terrorist groups. The efforts of the States sponsoring,
recycling and presenting them will not succeed
in projecting them as the moderate armed Syrian
opposition. Moreover, with the support of our allies,
we will not stop defending the lives of our citizens
and combating terrorism. Standing alongside Syria
today represents the true measure of credibility with
regard to the war on terrorism. By the way, the Huras
Al-Din organization, which is sponsored by United
States intelligence, is also funded by the Kuwaiti
Salafist movement. I would like to draw the attention
of our colleague the Ambassador of Kuwait to that
piece of information. Huras Al-Din - Guardians of
Religion - is a terrorist organization run by United
States intelligence and funded by the Kuwaiti Salafist
movement. I would ask him to investigate that.

In conclusion, the Government of my country
values the efforts of the Special Envoy and reiterates
its readiness to continue working with him in order to
ensure the success of his mission, which is to facilitate
an intra-Syrian dialogue that is Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led, without any foreign intervention. However,
ensuring the success of the Special Envoy's work
requires putting an immediate and unconditional end
to illegal foreign presence on all Syrian territories. It
also requires a full and effective commitment to the
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian
Arab Republic. It also entails support for the efforts
of the Syrian Government and its allies in combating
terrorism and meeting the basic needs of the Syrian
people, promoting reconstruction and facilitating the
return of refugees, instead of laying down conditions
as we heard today. That has to be done by offering
genuine, not promotional, humanitarian assistance and
funding the humanitarian response plan, which only
received 27 per cent of the funds to date despite the fact
that we are in the last third of the year.

Moreover, we stress the need to lift the unilateral,
coercive economic measures that have been imposed on
the Syrian people. They constitute economic terrorism
that complements the terrorism carried out by terrorist
organizations. They represent a cheap and useless
attempt at extortion. Its most recent manifestation
came through an announcement by the United States
Administration to impose sanctions on firms and people
participating in the Damascus International Fair.

