Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I wish to welcome you warmly, Sir, and
to express our pleasure at seeing you personally preside
over this important meeting of the Security Council,
which your country recently joined. I wish to commend
Ambassador Mahbubani and his team, who have
skilfully and competently guided the work of the
Council since the beginning of this month.

I also wish to congratulate your country for
choosing the issue of strengthening cooperation with
troop-contributing countries for our debate today. This
is an issue which has assumed increasing importance
recently in the light of the various reports on
peacekeeping operations that were issued last year and
that have elicited great interest within the United
Nations, the most recent of which was the Brahimi
report. These reports unleashed a certain momentum to
improve United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Strengthening consultations and cooperation with
troop-contributing countries is among the required
tools for attaining that objective.

The document you have offered us in connection
with this debate, for which we thank you, places the
issue of strengthening cooperation with troop-
contributing countries in its historical context,
identifies areas for such cooperation and suggests
specific points on which our debate might focus today.
Participation in this debate by States that are not
Security Council members and that contribute troops is
significant.

Tunisia is a troop-contributing country and, since
the 1960s, has participated in several United Nations
peacekeeping operations in various regions of the
world. We share many of the views and ideas expressed
this morning by troop-contributing countries.
Troop-contributing countries play an essential
role in the implementation on the ground of the
mandates of peacekeeping operations created by the
Security Council. Their soldiers have been increasingly
called upon to fulfil complex and dangerous mandates.
Thus, the Security Council's decisions in this area have
consequences for those countries, most of which are
not members of the Council and hence not involved in
drafting the mandates assigned to their contingents.

Experience has shown that the absence of
consultations and cooperation with troop-contributing
countries can create serious difficulties, and even
embarrassing situations, in the implementation of
mandates, as was clearly described this morning by the
representatives of troop-contributing countries. Those
countries have continuously called for significant
improvements in the consultation process. The recent
tribulations of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone have been frequently cited as an example of
situations that may arise from the absence of
cooperation and consultation with troop-contributing
countries.

The debate of recent months within the United
Nations on peacekeeping operations has made us even
more aware of the urgent need significantly to
strengthen consultation and cooperation between troop-
contributing countries, the Security Council and the
Secretariat. The Brahimi report stressed the value of
institutionalizing such consultations. In his report on
implementing the Brahimi report, the Secretary-
General fully agreed with the view of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations on the need to
strengthen consultations between troop-contributing
countries and the Security Council, inter alia, through
new procedures and mechanisms. Tunisia fully
supports that recommendation and, during negotiations
in the Council on resolution 1327 (2000) on the
recommendations of the Brahimi report, advocated the
Council's endorsement of the institutionalization of
consultations with troop-contributing countries and the
convening of meetings with them at their request. In its
decision, however, the Council did not go so far as to
institutionalize consultations.

Nevertheless, we welcome the compromise
arrived at by the members of the Council, which we
consider to be a first step in the right direction. The
General Assembly, for its part, supported strengthening
consultations and we feel that the time has now come
to implement these decisions.

In accordance with resolution 1327 (2000), the
Security Council must hold private meetings with
troop-contributing countries, including at their request,
before drafting a mission mandate and throughout its
implementation. We see such meetings as ad hoc
meetings in which there is genuine dialogue among
Council members, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat on a given peacekeeping operation so that
information and views can be exchanged before the
Council takes any decision on the operation and its
mandate. At these meetings, the Secretariat would
inform the Security Council and the troop-contributing
countries of the mission's scope and any potential
risks. Such meetings could address the question of the
security and safety of personnel, an issue that was
stressed by several speakers this morning. In this way,
troop-contributing countries will be able to assess the
situation and their views will be taken into account.

We see this format as a first step that could be
followed by other, larger steps. The Permanent
Representative of Jordan suggested this morning that, a
year from now, the Security Council hold another
debate on strengthening consultations with troop-
contributing countries and we support that suggestion.
A second debate could provide us with an opportunity
to assess the implementation and value of the format
agreed on by the Council.

Moreover, the holding by the Secretariat of
regular informational meetings for troop-contributing
countries and the conveying of timely, relevant and
comprehensive information regarding personnel on the
ground will make it possible for those countries to
follow the development of a peacekeeping operation at
every stage.

The Security Council should continue to hold
meetings with troop-contributing countries before the
departure of a Council mission so as to consult with
them about the objective of the mission. A second
meeting should be devoted to dealing with the results
of the mission. Last year, the Council held public
meetings to discuss the results of some of its missions.
The participation of troop-contributing countries and
other Member States of the Organization at such
meetings provides for greater transparency in the
Council's work and also serves to broaden and take
into account the views of other States Members of the
United Nations.

It would be useful for the Security Council,
troop-contributing countries and the Secretariat to hold
an assessment meeting at the conclusion of a
peacekeeping operation to draw lessons from the
operation and to identify the strong points and the
lacunae in its management, which will help to better
prepare future operations.

I would also like to stress the importance of
consultations between the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries in the preparation of guidelines
for peacekeeping personnel. Such consultations can
help ensure the effective implementation of approved
guidelines.

Meaningful dialogue and cooperation at all stages
of a mission will make it possible for all parties
concerned to take their decisions with full knowledge
of a given situation, strengthen mutual trust and
encourage Member States to contribute more to
peacekeeping operations. This is a matter of
developing a true partnership that can ensure the
success of peacekeeping operations.

These are some of the issues that could be dealt
with in consultations with troop-contributing countries.
But there may also be other consultations held in
different formats according to how things develop in
the future.

In addition to the principles that have always
guided them, to succeed, peacekeeping operations must
count on several elements. Those include clear
mandates, adequate resources, consultation, and
cooperation and coordination at all levels. Today's
debate will certainly contribute to finding ways to give
new impetus to cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.

