Mrs. Telalian (Greece): We welcome today's
joint briefing, and we would like to express our
appreciation to the Chairpersons of the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Committee established
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) -
Ambassador Cesar Mayoral, Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj and Ambassador Peter Burian - for
their tireless efforts to improve the work of their
respective Committees.

At the outset, I would like to associate myself
with the statement to be made later on in the debate by
the Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of
the European Union.

The fight against terrorism is an ongoing process,
as terrorism continues to pose a serious threat to our
security, to the values of our democratic societies and
to our rights and freedoms. The indiscriminate killing
of civilians can never be justified, even by the
worthiest of causes, and there can be no impunity for
such criminal acts.

The United Nations plays a leading role in
containing terrorism and in legitimizing a robust
multilateral response to this phenomenon. However, in
order for such a response to be effective in the long
run, it has to be consistent with the very nature of
democracy, the rule of law and respect for universal
human rights and freedoms.

In the fight against terrorism, a clear definition of
terrorism is necessary to provide legal and moral
clarity and to create conditions for real unity in the
global struggle against this scourge. For this reason, we
strongly urge the Ad Hoc Committee on terrorism,
which is meeting next week, to make a real effort to
finalize the negotiations on the comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, so that this
convention can be adopted during the sixtieth session
of the General Assembly.

Likewise, we support the adoption and
implementation of a comprehensive United Nations
strategy to fight terrorism, based on the elements
proposed by the Secretary-General.

We welcome the efforts made by the Al-Qaida
and Taliban Sanctions Committee to improve the
quality of its List and to revise some of its Guidelines,
taking into account the recommendations of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team.
We hope that the Committee will soon finalize the
revision of its Guidelines concerning listing and
delisting requests. We urge the Committee to continue
its consideration of this issue, taking also into account
important work that has been carried out outside the
Committee in this respect. In our view, the
incorporation of international due-process standards
within the listing and delisting procedures will increase
the effectiveness of sanctions and the credibility of the
Committee. In this connection, we would like to
reiterate our position concerning the need to establish a
mechanism to review, as a last resort, cases of
individuals and institutions claiming to have been
wrongly placed or retained on the watch-lists of the
Committee.

We welcome and support the eighteenth work
programme of the CTC for the coming three months.
With the valuable assistance of a fully staffed Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), which has
recently been declared operational, the Committee will
be better able to pursue its mandate in the future. We
thank the head of the CTED, Mr. Javier Ruperez, and
his team for their continuous efforts in support of CTC.

The elimination of the backlog of State reports is
a positive development, since analysing State reports
intensifies the dialogue with the States concerned and
improves their ability to implement resolution 1373
(2001). The CTC should continue to carry out this
dialogue with the same cooperation, transparency,
even-handedness and consistency in approach. We are
pleased that the CTC has decided to streamline its
reporting procedures, which will allow it to have a
more substantial interaction with States.
Another positive development is the elaboration
by the CTC of policy guidelines concerning its role in
facilitating the provision of technical assistance by
donor States to States in need of such assistance, after
identifying and prioritizing such needs. The
implementation of these guidelines should be a high
priority for the CTC.

The Committee has carried out a number of visits
in Member States with their consent; these are useful in
allowing the Committee to better assess the situation
on the ground and identify existing implementation
gaps. The Committee should now focus on the proper
follow-up to these visits.

Now that the CTC has taken important steps that
will allow it to carry out its important mandate, it is
significant that the Committee take a more active
stance on human rights issues by addressing these
issues in the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). In this regard, we believe that
the Committee should complete at the earliest its
discussion on how to strengthen the human rights
perspective in its future work.

We welcome the progress made by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), particularly in examining State reports.
We urge late submitters to fulfil their obligations and to
fully cooperate with the Committee. Likewise, we
consider that the establishment of a legislative database
concerning legislative and other measures relevant to
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is a
useful development that will enhance transparency and
will provide practical guidance to States in
implementing the aforementioned resolution.

We also thank the Committee for its close
cooperation with the CTC and the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee. Despite the different
mandates of these Committees, we believe that better
coordination and interaction among them will
maximize their effectiveness and will also assist States
in better implementing the aforementioned resolutions.

We attach great importance to the work carried
out by the 1540 Committee - namely, to ensure the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, their
means of delivery and related material. As the current
mandate of this Committee comes to an end, we would
like to support the prolongation of this mandate in
order to allow it to accomplish its task.

