Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): On behalf of the
States members of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), I thank the Security Council for convening this
briefing dedicated to the Joint Force of our regional
organization. I also offer my profound thanks to

Secretary-General Guterres for his biannual report
(S/2018/1006) to the Security Council.

Six months ago, I provided the members of Security
Council with an overview of the situation in the Sahel
(see S/PV.8266). Since then, we have seen an increased
level ofinsecurity in certain G-5 Sahel countries that is
cause for alarm. On 29 June, a terrorist attack destroyed
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force's headquarters in Sevare,
Mali. That event marked a halt to the operationalizing
of the Joint Force, which enjoys the logistical support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

The Joint Force is clearly facing new challenges,
including a lack of equipment, shortcomings at the
logistical level and a lack of financing. Nevertheless,
progress has been seen in the establishment of the
compliance framework through the implementation
of mechanisms aimed at ensuring respect for human
rights and international humanitarian law. That work is
being carried out with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and MINUSMA
and is focused primarily on the police component of
the Joint Force and on monitoring operations and
investigations to identify those responsible whenever
an incident occurs.

A regional conference on impunity, access tojustice
and human rights in the context of emerging threats
to peace and security in West Africa and the Sahel
was held in Niamey on 10 September, which further
demonstrated the critical importance accorded to
respect for human rights in the comprehensive approach
put in place to respond to the crisis in the Sahel.

Concerning the financing of the Joint Force, I must
speak frankly about the gravity of the situation. On
23 February, the international high-level conference on
the Sahel held in Brussels concluded with pledges. To
date, we are far from the €414 million that were pledged.
We have received the equivalent of €17.9 million in
equipment, services and valuable technical assistance
from partners, such as the African Union and the
European Union. However, the G-5 Sahel trust fund
received pledged money only from and Rwanda and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union. I am
pleased and grateful to announce that yesterday the
United Arab Emirates disbursed €10 million to our trust
fund. On behalf of the people of the Sahel, in particular
the G-5 Sahel, I thank that country.

At the initiative of the President of the Niger, His
Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, no effort has
been spared to ensure the efficient management of the
funds that have been received. The G-5 Sahel Council of
Ministers has adopted the statutes guiding the support
committee for the trust fund. Based in Nouakchott,
that structure will facilitate the disbursement of the
trust fund's resources and will be operational in the
coming weeks.

With regard to the command of the Joint Force,
a new duo - Brigadier General Hanena Ould Sidi
of Mauritania and General Oumar Bikimo of Chad,
appointed by the Heads of State - has taken office.
They are at the helm of an arrangement consisting of
the Headquarters, now in Bamako, and three forward
command posts located in the west, the centre and the
east. Upon assuming office, the new leadership began
work on improving stewardship of the Joint Force and
preparing for new operations. The Force has already
conducted six operations. However, our brave troops,
who stand ready to sacrifice themselves, will not be
able to achieve results without the timely provision of
the necessary means.

As you have emphasized the important role of
multilateralism in conflict resolution, Mr. President,
the Sahel is experiencing a multidimensional crisis
that illustrates the relevance of such an approach.
Environmental and socioeconomic challenges make up
the backdrop to which many factors undermining our
stability have been added. Some G-S Sahel countries
are facing high levels of tension leading, inter alia,
to the closure of schools, health-care facilities, police
stations and courts. A large segment of young people,
who make up the majority of the population, finds
itself totally helpless, and unfortunately sees only two
obvious options for the foreseeable future - either to
flee through illegal immigration, with all the horrors it
entails, or to embrace the hollow causes championed by
terrorist groups that are only too happy to profit from
the surrounding misery, while promising remuneration
gleaned from the many forms of trafficking in which they
engage. Given such a situation, it must be acknowledged
that its development will lead to a further deterioration
on the ground if we do not begin to take the appropriate
measures and provide the necessary resources. That
should be a cause of great concern that we might meet
again in this Chamber in a few months' time to discuss
a response to a security and humanitarian crisis of a
much greater and tragic scale.

How can we initiate multilateral action to effectively
support regional efforts? The G-5 Sahel has seen many
disparate interventions in the areas of migration,
security, humanitarian assistance and development.
Given the magnitude of crises, let us go beyond calls
and other warnings. Let us ensure that the funding
of multilateral institutions is commensurate with our
security and development needs. Let us skilfully use
our resources to avoid a Vicious circle the harmful
consequences of which will represent an even greater
future challenge.

You have called for a return to the fundamental
principles of the United Nations, Mr. President.
Accordingly, courageous decisions must be made
to support some Member States. As the Chairman
of the G-5 Sahel stressed a few days ago at the Paris
Peace Forum,

"We are unable to rally international solidarity

to achieve sustainable multilateral support for

the Joint Force, which was established to fight
terrorism and organized crime".

In keeping with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres's
call, I therefore add my voice to those of many Heads
of State and representatives of our peoples to request
that the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel be mandated under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. Such a
decision would consolidate the legitimacy of our efforts
and give meaning to the shared responsibility in the fight
against the hydra-headed terrorist threat. My presence
here attests to the importance of the Sahel in preserving
the geopolitical balance of the world. Let us therefore
formalize the international community's attention.

As you so rightly pointed out recently, Mr. President,
while the world finds itself confronted with multiple
new and extreme crises, causing regions that have
long been stable to totter, on the African continent,
including in the great Sahel region, a nexus of five
devoted countries has courageously united in the face
of adversity to prevent the ship from sinking. Those five
countries are struggling to hold on despite everything
and to work within their limited means to meet all
those immense security and development challenges.
Those countries require a greater level of tangible
solidarity on the part of the international community
in confronting challenges, the successful outcome or
failure of which - no one in this Chamber should be in
doubt - will have significant repercussions far beyond
the borders of Africa. There is still time to take all the
necessary measures and to finally act accordingly.

Lastly, I should like to highlight the recent work
of the G-5 Sahel in the area of development - the
only solution that can ensure long-term stability in
the region. We are currently organizing the first G-S
Sahel donor and partner coordination conference to
be held on Thursday, 6 December, in Nouakchott. A
portfolio of 40 structure-related projects constitutes the
first phase of the priority investment plan planned for
the period 2019-2021. We welcome the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the implementation of
which we discussed with key stakeholders of the United
Nations system at a retreat held in Dakar last week.
Our discussions with the Sahel Alliance are under
way, and we signed a memorandum of understanding
on 30 October in Niamey to implement an emergency
development programme, in particular concerning
water issues. All of that, however, is inadequate for
meeting the €l.9 billion needed for development,
especially given that the sum of €414 million euros for
security enhancement has failed to materialize.

I therefore solemnly call for increased investment
in the Sahel. All forms of financing to promote
prosperity are an investment in preventing insecurity.
For that reason, less than a month before the crucial
conference that is take place, I left Nouakchott to be
speak before the Security Council. Let us act quickly
and effectively in the conviction that doing so is in our
common interest.

