At the outset, allow me to congratulate the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, commend the Russian presidency of the Security Council, and express my country's appreciation for your constructive work in the Security Council. In view of today's discussion concerning the situation in the Middle East, it is worth pointing out that the most significant causes of instability and ongoing conflict in the region are the Israeli occupation of Arab territories and the denial of the rights of the Palestinian people, alongside the aggressive and expansionist policies enacted by the forces of regional chaos, which have founded and deployed armed extrajudicial militias, intervened in the internal affairs of States and fomented sectarian strife. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has consistently supported the Palestinian people as it seeks to exercise its rights. The centrality of the Palestinian question is a key point of Saudi Arabian policy, as is the right of the State of Palestine to exercise sovereignty over all the Palestinian territory occupied in 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif. At the same time, Saudi Arabia is committed to peace as a strategic choice and to reaching a solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with the internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which my country proposed in 2002. My country condemns the ongoing Israeli violations and categorically rejects all the futile and illegal Israeli policies, practices and plans aimed at expanding settlements, entrenching racial discrimination and erasing the national identity of the Palestinian people, including, most recently, the decision taken by Israel to build some 5,000 new settlement units in the West Bank. The Security Council must urgently fulfil its responsibility by bringing a stop to the ongoing Israeli acts of aggression and ensuring that the relevant international resolutions are implemented, including by ending the Israeli occupation of all occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan and Lebanese territory. The Houthi coup militias continue to demonstrate their extremist designs on the Yemeni people, which is in the sixth consecutive year of a disastrous war. The evidence is clear. The coup militias have continued to ramp up their military campaign, using missiles and drones to target my country, and they have rejected every ceasefire initiative. They have also used the oil tanker FSO SAFER as a bargaining chip with which to extort the international community, ignoring the threat which the tanker poses to the marine environment and international commercial navigation lines. Saudi Arabia supports the efforts of the United Nations to finda comprehensive political solution in Yemen, in accordance with resolution 2216 (2015), the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference. It urges the Security Council to assume its responsibility by ensuring that its resolutions on Yemen are implemented, and by working to bring an end to the destructive interference of Iran in Yemeni affairs. Iran has provided military and material support to the Houthi militias in order to foment conflict and advance its expansionist project in the region. Iranian officials have boasted of their support for the Houthi militias. Most recently, Iran sent an ambassador to the militia, which is not recognized. Our experience with the Iranian regime has taught us that piecemeal solutions and appeasement will not put a stop to its threats to international peace and security. My country has tried to make peace with Iran. Over the decades, it has engaged with Iran in a spirit of goodwill and openness. It has hosted Iranian leaders on several occasions in order to search for solutions that would make it possible to foster neighbourly relations and mutual respect. Time and again, the world has seen the regime reject those endeavours and persist with its policies of sabotage and its acts of destruction in order to undermine the security and stability of regional States. The end goal cannot be dialogue for its own sake; it can only be dialogue for the sake of effective solutions. That can happen only if Iran takes measures to instil confidence in its intentions and actions; if it undertakes to respect international laws and instruments and the resolutions of the Security Council; if it refrains from intervening in the internal affairs of neighbouring States; and if it stops supporting armed groups and militias.
