Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this open debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2015/453), as
well as Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the Advisor of Oxfam for their briefings
this morning. We also wish to congratulate you, Sir, as
well as the the delegations of Egypt, Japan, Senegal and
Ukraine, on your elections as members of the Security
Council. We also express our appreciation to the five
outgoing members.

The horrors of conflict and war, whose brunt is
borne by civilians, serve to underscore the importance
of putting an end to violations of moral standards and
legal norms of war. The international community has
been making every effort to protect civilians in armed
conflict and to promote human rights and the dignity
of the human person, in accordance with international
humanitarian law. In spite of the major achievements
in that regard, we continue to see grave violations
and many crimes against civilians, in defiance of the
determination of the international community and in
blatant disregard of the results of violating international
humanitarian law.

The ongoing illegal Israeli practices in the
occupied Palestinian territories are flagrant violations
of internatinal humanitarian law and human rights
law. Those practices also undermine the two-State
solution, agreed upon by the international community.
We therefore call on the Council to provide protection
to the Palestinian people, put an end to violations of
their rights and implement the relevant resolutions on
Palestine.

The continuing, systematic crimes by the Syrian
regime and its allies gainst innocent civilians in that
country, including the siege of towns, the starvation of
civilians and indiscriminate bombardments with barrel
bombs, are crimes against humanity and violate the
Council's resolutions on Syria. The entire world has
seen the scenes coming from Madaya of starving and
dying people. The Syrian regime is trying to intimidate
Madaya and making its population choose between
starvation or bowing to a regime that continues to kill
its people. Given the situation of those in besieged
areas, we call on the Security Council to take every
measure to deliver emergency humanitarian assistance,
including via air and land, to all besieged areas, and
implement paragraph 6 of resolution 2258 (2015).

Impunity for perpetrators of such grave violations
has serious consequences - the violation of
international instruments serves to weaken them and
is detrimental to the image of the United Nations.
Impunity emboldens perpetrators and leads to further
violations. We must therefore make collective efforts to
protect civilians and hold perpetrators to account.

Finally, we reiterate our support for all measures
taken by the Security Council to protect civilians. And
we underscore our respect for international instruments
agreed by the international community.

