Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the presidency
of the United Kingdom for highlighting the importance
of protecting cultural heritage as an imperative for
humankind. We also convey our appreciation to the
co-facilitators, France and Italy, for their efforts on
resolution 2347 (2017), just adopted, which we were
pleased to co-sponsor. We also welcome the briefings of
Under-Secretary-General F eltman, UNESCO Director-
General Bokova, Mr. Fedotov and General Parrulli.

We are witnessing the greatest threat to cultural
heritage since the Second World War. Today, more than
55 cultural heritage sites are in danger of destruction in
armed conflicts - 21 ofthem located in the Middle East
and Northern Africa, in particular Egypt, Iraq, Palestine,
Yemen, Libya and Syria. That unprecedented scale of
attack constitutes cultural cleansing. Kazakhstan, as a
member of the World Heritage Committee, welcomes
the international community's efforts and initiatives
to protect those sites. We co-sponsored the decision
of the 199th session of UNESCO Executive Board,
adopted last April, on UNESCO's role in safeguarding
and preserving Palmyra and other Syria World
Heritage sites.

My delegation would like to make the following
recommendation on the matter. We call on Member
States and other stakeholders to fully implement the
recommendations of global forums, inter alia, the
Donors Conference on Safeguarding Endangered
Cultural Heritage, held this week in Paris; the
International Cultural Conference, held in Milan in
mid-2015; the 4th International Cultural Forum, held in
Saint Petersburg in December 2015.

Join the International Alliance for the Protection
of Heritage in Conflict Areas, spearheaded by France
and the United Arab Emirates. Ratify and implement
the relevant international treaties, conventions and
other instruments, in addition to Security Council
and UNESCO resolutions in that area. Provide
trainings to prevent the illicit trafficking of cultural
property. Support UNESCO's Heritage Emergency
Fund and Unite4Heritage global campaign. Strengthen
UNESCO's Global Coalition for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage, as the Director-General's agenda for
action on the matter and for the promotion of cultural
pluralism. Introduce strict measures to prevent the
legal removal of cultural heritage from archaeological
sites being stolen from museums, trafficked and sold
to private collections by terrorist groups. Such plunder
has become a lucrative source of terrorist financing,
replacing the diminishing income from oil resources.
Ensure greater vigilance of all sources of financing,
including money laundering and diverse markets, such
as auction houses and the Internet - through which
Da'esh runs nearly $100 million annually.

Utilize the INTERPOL database of stolen works of
art and establish special police units for that purpose.
The resolution of stolen cultural property is mandated
under international law, so enhancing the effectiveness
of procedures in domestic courts is critical. All should
work closely with INTERPOL, the World Customs
Organization, UNESCO and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime - which should suggest key
actions to ensure the protection of cultural heritage.

Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to the protection
of cultural heritage as a fundamental tool of preventive
diplomacy to support the development of peaceful
societies, strengthen sustainable development and
suppress terrorist financing.

