Mr. Zarif: Almost six months ago, on 8 June,
legislative elections were held in Kosovo that saw
the politically courageous participation of Serbian
majority municipalities of northern Kosovo, and now
the Kosovo Assembly and Government are finally
expected to be formally constituted in the coming days.
On 18 November, the Democratic Party of Kosovo, led
by Mr. Hashim Thaci, who is with us in the Chamber
today to represent the Kosovo institutions, and the
Democratic League of Kosovo, led by Mr. Isa Mustafa,
reached a power-sharing agreement in principle. That
compromise between Kosovo's two largest political
parties excluded other parties, which had previously
formed a post-election bloc. The two parties are now
in negotiations on the structure and programme of a
new Government with the participation of the Kosovo
Serbs and other communities in order to reconvene
the Kosovo Assembly. President Jahjaga played a key
role in that respect by engaging with the leaders of
the political parties in encouraging a solution. I urge
Kosovo's political leaders to complete the process of
constituting the new Government and institutions, and
to focus their efforts on establishing good governance.
It is also imperative that a spirit of inclusiveness and
collective responsibility prevail at this critical time.

The six months' delay was damaging for Kosovo
and led to increased public dissatisfaction with political
leaders and further delays in bringing about pressing
institutional reforms and the resumption of the political
dialogue with Belgrade facilitated by the European
Union (EU). In the interim, however, technical meetings
have continued under the aegis of the EU, and I note with
appreciation the consistent efforts of the Belgrade and
Pristina technical teams and welcome their agreements,
which enhance the implementation of previously reached
agreements on energy, the integrated management of
crossing points, and the freedom of movement. I also
wish to highlight, as an indication of further progress,
the new arrangements for administering official visits
agreed on between Belgrade and Pristina, which took
effect on 1 December. Nonetheless, I reiterate that new
momentum must be generated and high-level meetings
must resume as soon as possible, so that both sides can
fulfil the promise of that process and avail themselves
of the opportunities presented by the European Union
integration process.

I welcome the cooperation and coordination
demonstrated by the municipal structures functioning
in northern Kosovo during the preparation of the
2015 municipal budgets, despite the complexity of the
current municipal setup in the northern municipalities.
I trust that all sides have now been convinced of the
value of dialogue at the local level for delivering better
governance. It is high time that the issues relating to
construction in the ethnically mixed North Mitrovica
suburb of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani were resolved through
mutually agreeable steps. It is also essential that
momentum be sustained towards the administrative
integration of the four northern Kosovo municipalities.
In that context, advancing the establishment of a
community/association of Serb-majority municipalities,
in line with the 19 April 2013 agreement, remains vital.
I commend the Kosovo police and security bodies
for their contribution to containing transnational
violent extremism. The police operations of this past
summer have been followed by more investigations and
arrests in the months since. I also note the continued
responsible guidance on those sensitive issues provided
by the Islamic community of Kosovo and its leaders, as
well as the public stance of other religious and secular
leaders, unanimously denouncing extremism.

The protection of the religious and cultural heritage
in Kosovo remains an issue and a concern. I welcome
the cooperation between local authorities and the
International Security Force in Kosovo in addressing
illegal construction in the special protective zone
surrounding the UNESCO World Heritage site of Visoki
Decani Monastery. Instances of offensive graffiti in the
vicinity of the Monastery in early October are a clear
indication that reconciliation efforts must be sustained
and strengthened further on the ground. In that
respect, I note with appreciation the prompt and strong
condemnations of those incidents by President J ahjaga
and other Pristina leaders, as well as by representatives
of other religious communities of Kosovo.

Recent developments reflecting improvements in
community and religious interactions have also been
encouraging. Members of the Islamic community of
Kosovo and the Serbian Orthodox clergy at the Visoki
Decani Monastery exchanged visits and publicly
emphasized the importance of dialogue for promoting
religious tolerance in Kosovo. Additionally, on
24 November a delegation from the Islamic community
of Kosovo attended the patron-saint day liturgy at
the Monastery, at which the Patriarch of the Serbian
Orthodox Church conveyed messages of tolerance
and appealed to all Kosovo Serb displaced persons
to return. I have also noted the 12 November visit of
32 Kosovo Albanian primary and high-school students
to the Monastery as part of an awareness project of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
promoting cultural heritage preservation among young
people. Such initiatives are vital to instilling mutual
respect and appreciation for the value of cultural
heritage in all communities in Kosovo.

The pace of the returns and reintegration of
internally displaced persons has remained slow. The
matter is of wide concern for both local and international
stakeholders. In the light of that issue, I note the initiative
of the Serbian Office for Kosovo and Metohija to create
a new consultative body that includes the Kosovo
Minister for Communities and Returns as well as the
United Nations and other international organizations.
However, the continued occurrence of security
incidents affecting returnees and their properties can
only undermine confidence. I welcome the prompt and
clear condemnation of such incidents on the part of
the relevant Pristina institutions. It is imperative that
both local and central authorities demonstrate greater
political will in effectively addressing the issues that
are of most concern to current and potential returnees.

With regard to the progress made in the process
of establishing the fates of persons still missing from
the 1998-1999 conflict and its aftermath, I welcome
the conclusion, on 13 October, of the repatriation of
the bodily remains recovered from the Rudnica stone
quarry in Serbia's Raska municipality. I commend the
commitment and professionalism of both the Belgrade
and Pristina teams of experts, who conducted that
sensitive process without politicization. I urge both
sides to demonstrate greater political will and to be
more proactive in addressing the cases of the remaining
missing persons, allaying the terrible anguish suffered
by their families, contributing to further conciliation
and thereby bringing that painful chapter to a close.

As the Council is aware, the allegations ofcorruption
made recently against current and former members of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) have drawn a considerable amount of public
and media attention. The new EULEX Head of Mission,
Ambassador Gabriele Meucci, has confirmed that
investigations into the allegations have been and remain
ongoing since 2013. On 10 November, the European
Union's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Federica Mogherini, appointed
an independent expert to review the implementation
of the EULEX Kosovo mandate, with a focus on the
handling of the corruption allegations. I would like to
emphasize that, regardless of speculation, there should
be no room for questioning the integrity of EU rule-of-
law principles or indeed their central importance for
future progress in Kosovo. At the same time, the work
of the EU Special Investigative Task Force also remains
critical to the process of justice and reconciliation in
Kosovo. I urge the Kosovo Assembly, once it is fully
constituted, to prioritize the adoption of the required
legislation, so that a specialist court can become
operational early next year and begin tackling the cases
that will be brought before it, in order to swiftly follow
up on the work conducted by the Task Force.

Turning to regional developments, the ethnically
motivated incidents that occurred in various parts of the
Western Balkans in the wake of the interrupted football
match between Albania and Serbia held in Belgrade on
14 October, demonstrated that both the authorities and
the public must act responsibly, so that the momentum
towards enhanced regional cooperation is not reversed.
Despite the incidents, the visit of the Albanian Prime
Minister to Serbia in November, the first of its kind in
68 years, was a welcome step in the right direction.

Likewise, the 23 October informal regional
meeting between the EU and Western Balkan foreign
and economic affairs ministers in Belgrade, with the
participation of Kosovo ministers, was a clear signal of
the improved atmosphere for regional cooperation. The
joint ministerial statement issued by the participants
also holds promise for much needed economic
development in the Western Balkans.

Finally, I wish to express my deepest appreciation to
all Council members for maintaining their engagement
with the parties, particularly in the light of the many
other pressing matters that demand the Council's
attention. UNMIK will continue working closely with
its local and international partners in accordance with
its mandate, helping to ensure that the progress made to
date will be sustained and further advanced.

