Mr. Mantovani (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
welcome the presence among us of His Excellency
Foreign Minister De Gucht and Special Representative
Doss, as well as the presence of the Permanent
Representatives of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda.

We are all well aware that the solution of the
conflict in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will have to be a political one and will
need the support of all regional stakeholders.
Yesterday's Arria Formula meeting showed very
clearly that beyond the calls for a stronger and more
effective role for the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) on the ground, grass-roots and international
civil society organizations are increasingly focusing
their attention and expectations on the new role of the
United Nations on the political track, and they rely on
the leadership of the new Special Envoy, former
President Obasanjo.

It is crucial for the Security Council to place all
its weight behind the action of the Special Envoy. In
that sense, a political message to be delivered through
our resolution on MONUC's renewal will be as
important as, if not more important than, our decisions
on the Mission's mandate. That message should be
constructed in a timely manner, together with the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General.

As highlighted by yesterday's interaction with
civil society, we will have to respond to the
expectations of the people whose lives are affected by
the conflict. The people of the Kivus are well aware of
MONUC's objective constraint. However, as we heard
yesterday, they wonder why, in spite of MONUC's
clear and robust humanitarian mandate and in spite of
its forces, its action has at times given the impression
of missing its goal in terms of resolve and cohesion.

The primary purpose of the Security Council will
be to reverse that perception. The Council should do so
by further clarifying the principle that the Mission's
top priority lies in the protection of civilians. It will be
important to indicate clearly in the text of our new
resolution what that task entails in terms of provisions
of humanitarian corridors as well as of active
protection of human rights.

MONUC should be an instrument in the fight
against impunity, without exception, with a specific
task of reporting on the most serious violations
committed during the latest waves of fighting. As
recalled by the Secretary-General in his report, those

who have committed international crimes should be
aware that international justice will be applied,
including through the International Criminal Court.

However, in order to sustain its humanitarian
objectives, MONUC should also contribute to tackling
the underlying factors of instability. It should be tasked
with a stronger role in supporting the creation of a
credible national army while preserving its neutral role
as a United Nations peacekeeping force.

