Mr. Enkhsaikhan (Mongolia): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. I wish to
express my delegation's appreciation to the Council for
organizing this open debate on this topic prior to the
fourth high-level meeting between the United Nations
and regional organizations, which will also consider
the issue of peace-building.

In more than half a century of United Nations
existence, the world Organization has largely been
successful in mediating or contributing to the cessation
of wars and conflicts in various parts of the world. Yet
with the change of the nature of conflicts today, it is
facing immense difficulties in meeting the challenge of
averting, ending and healing intra-State conflicts, the
viciousness and brutality of which have shocked the
world community time and again. Our commitment
under the Charter "to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war" obliges us to enhance the
Organization's capacity in this particular area,
especially in view of the inseparable link between
conflict prevention and peace-building.

The report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations, chaired by Ambassador Brahimi, identified
sound peace-building strategy as one of the key
conditions for the success of complex peace operations
and presented forthright recommendations for change.
The Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
on its part, emphasized the necessity of incorporating
elements of peace-building into the mandates of
complex operations.

Thus, there is an array of measures that need to
be seriously considered to improve the United Nations
capacity to build peace and make it sustainable. The
working paper presented by you, Mr. President, entitled
"Peace-building: towards a comprehensive approach"
has reflected the major elements without which peace-
building would not be feasible, or even possible. The
Secretary-General, in his address this morning, also
clearly underlined the major areas where attention
should be focused. Thus, tackling the issues of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants is essential for post-conflict peace-
building. In this respect, in our view, the positive
outcome of the Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects is crucial.
It is to be hoped that the final document of the
Conference will reflect the concerns expressed by the
international community and recommendations to be
proposed by the high-level meeting.

We also underline the importance of the
successful reintegration of rival factions in post-war
society for peace to be durable. This requires concerted
efforts to restore and reinvigorate economic and social
institutions. The efforts to relieve the plight of refugees
and displaced persons need to be undertaken in the
context of the efforts to repair the social fabric and to
bring justice, as well as to restore economic activity.
My delegation agrees that broader efforts to strengthen
governance institutions and the rule of law are also
necessary for ensuring lasting peace in post-war
societies.

Although post-war conflicts of the past half
century are framed as conflicts of ideology, identity
and religion, in many cases their root causes lie in
unpalatable poverty, unjust economic and political
arrangements, massive arms trade, inequality, failed
Governments and misuse of power, as well as disputes
over natural resources that in many instances involve
powerful interests of external stakeholders.

The Millennium Declaration underpinned the
concerted will of the international community to
address those issues, and this meeting provides us with
an exceptional opportunity to complement that
willingness with the search for effective tools to do the
work.

Peace-building is not a traditional foreign-policy
or military issue. However, it is obvious that lasting
peace cannot be enjoyed even by the rich in a world
full of discontented poor. Studies conducted by the
World Bank back in 1996 highlighted the direct
correlation between poverty and conflict. The Bank
noted that 15 of the 20 least developed countries in the
world have been involved in major violent conflicts,
and that more than half of all low-income countries
were involved in major civil conflicts between 1980
and 1995. Thus, pursuit of the goal of eradicating
poverty by such organizations as the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the World Trade
Organization can be an important element of, and a
contribution to, lasting peace and stability.

These efforts, however, would be more tangible if
they were supported by confidence-building within
specific regions and subregions. Regional organizations
are vested with powers to deal with matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Thus, the efforts of those organizations should go
beyond confidence-building. Their efforts should seek
to enhance regional capacities for preventive
diplomacy, peacekeeping and peace enforcement. My
delegation would like to underline that, in its View,
there is a need for a clearer vision and division of the
roles of the United Nations and regional organizations
in peacekeeping and peace-building. The regional
organizations, in our View, should engage more broadly
in consultations with the Security Council on matters
pertaining to prevention and regional peace-building.
That message should be underlined at the fourth high-
level meeting between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

Besides the involvement of regional
organizations, that of civil society, as the Secretary-
General underlined earlier today, is important. As
current conflicts involve a multiplicity of formal and
informal actors, the potential contribution of such
significant players as the media, non-governmental
organizations and religious organizations need to be
channeled into peace-building. Thus, in our view, an
added emphasis by the United Nations and the
international community on strengthening and
promoting local capacities for resolving conflict would
contribute to long-term peace-building. This might
include ways to strengthen the positive role of local
media organizations in conflict-prone societies and to
enhance dialogue between various non-governmental
organizations, religious organizations and business
circles in the early stages of conflict prevention.

While other institutions have an important role to
play in peace-building, the United Nations is clearly
expected to play a critical role as the coordinator of
action to prevent and pre-empt violent conflicts, as is
clear from today's debate here in the Council. We
therefore should ensure that the United Nations is
equipped with sufficient resources to effectively plan
and carry out preventive measures. That question has
yet to be specifically addressed; political will be
needed. The prevention of conflicts also depends
directly on the ability to correctly analyse the dynamics
of events in a society and the root causes of tension
within it. Therefore, the United Nations should
develop, together with the relevant regional
organizations, an adequate capacity to analyse the
causes of conflict and should propose early action to
prevent tension from escalating into violence.

In conclusion, allow me to express my
delegation's support for efforts aimed at further
enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations and
its bodies in the area of peace-building. The Security
Council, which possesses primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, can
and should act as a catalyst for international efforts in
this area.

