Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): We would like, at
the outset, to pay tribute to Mr. Sharma, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, to his staff
and to those here at United Nations Headquarters who
do such a fine job in supporting the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET). Their
hard work, and the commitment and leadership shown
by Timor-Leste, will be critical factors in achieving
progress in the final months of UNMISET's mandate.

When we look at What has been achieved in
Timor-Leste at the macro level, there is much to
celebrate. The United Nations should rightly feel proud
of the contribution it has made to the improved
stability and long-term sustainability of its newest
Member State.
But decisions on the withdrawal from a country
that has been host to a substantial United Nations
presence must be made on the basis of careful and
well-informed consideration, and backed by an
appropriate level of detail. New Zealand, for its part,
supports the current downsizing schedule for
UNMISET, on the basis of current information, which
will see that mission conclude in May 2004. But we do
not believe that a total withdrawal from Timor-Leste by
the United Nations at that time would be either
appropriate or sustainable.

New Zealand therefore fully endorses the
Secretary-General's intention to return to these issues
in more detail early next year, at which time the
Council can consider the form and composition of a
United Nations presence after the conclusion of
UNMISET'S mandate. We consider some form of
transitional United Nations presence - less than a
traditional peacekeeping mission like UNMISET but
certainly more than the standard developmental
presence - to be essential and, in this respect, we note
with considerable interest the Australian proposals for
a follow-on United Nations mission, detailed in
Ambassador Dauth's statement a short while ago.

We will rely on the Secretary-General to provide
us with a frank assessment of what is required on the
ground, and how best the United Nations can respond
to these needs. In this respect, we welcome the
indications given by Special Representative Sharma in
his report to the Council earlier this morning.

We are concerned that progress in some sectors
appears slow or fragile. We would welcome a particular
focus on these sectors - especially policing, justice,
prisons and human rights - in the Secretary-General's
report early next year.

Progress in other sectors is clearly more
encouraging, and news of political agreement reached
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste on issues relating
to the common border is very encouraging. We hope
that technical agreement and implementation can
follow these recent expressions of political will.

We would certainly hope to see substantial
progress on border issues, as a critical milestone of
UNMISET's mandate, in time for the Council's next
discussion of Timor-Leste.

New Zealand shares the Secretary-General's
observation that work remains to be done by the
international community in Timor-Leste. We endorse
his intention to provide further careful evaluation and
proposals on a possible United Nations presence after
the conclusion of UNMISET, and look forward to
further discussion of this issue early next year.

Finally, Ijoin others who have reflected on the
memory of the late Sergio Vieira de Mello and the huge
contribution which he made to Timor-Leste; of course,
we fully reflect on those memories.

