Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend our profound thanks to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his
comprehensive briefing.

Jordan again emphasizes the importance of
providing ongoing regional and international support
to Afghanistan to help it advance in the peace and
reform processes, which will play a decisive role in the
development and institutionalization of democracy in
Afghanistan and in the fight against terrorism. These
are the most crucial elements required to achieve
security and stability in Afghanistan.

Jordan welcomes all the positive steps taken by
the Afghan Government to improve the economic
and political situation in the country, including
the legislative reforms and the implementation of
the anti-corruption strategy. We also welcome the
constructive recommendations issued by the Special
Electoral Reform Commission, which could enhance
the confidence of the Afghan people in the Government.
In that regard, we urge the Afghan Government not to
delay the scheduling of the parliamentary elections,
and we hope that favourable security conditions will be
created to conduct the elections in a free, transparent
and comprehensive manner.

The recent attack and temporary seizure of the city
of Kunduz perpetrated by the Taliban is an especially
disquieting development. It underscores the importance
of the Afghan authorities' imposition of its control for
the security situation in the country, especially in the
north, to prevent the repetition of such attacks, which
may increase security challenges, lead to deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and increase the number
of the internally displaced persons in the country. We
also express our grave concern over the growing threat
posed by the terrorist organization the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham in Afghanistan, which demonstrates
the imperative need to confront this threat and not
allow armed elements and terrorist groups to exploit
the withdrawal of foreign forces from Afghanistan. In
that regard, I would like to underline the importance
of improving relations between Afghanistan and
the neighbouring States and enhancing the regional
cooperation to confront the manifestations of violent
extremism and to limit the movement of terrorist
groups.

In addition, international support for the Afghan
authorities to enable them to confront terrorism is an
important element to achieve progress. In that regard,
it will have positive consequences in controlling the
borders and combating terrorism. Therefore, at this
stage, it is necessary to continue support to the Afghan
Government and the Afghan security forces to achieve
security in Afghanistan, to ensure the capacity of the
security forces to control the domestic situation, protect
the Afghan people and contribute to regional security.
We urge all parties to assume their responsibilities
under international humanitarian law, to refrain from
any breaches of the law and to prevent the use of
prohibited weapons, which have been used increasingly
in the recent past.

Jordan underscores the importance of promoting
the rule oflaw, monitoring all violations ofhuman rights
perpetrated in Afghanistan and investigating all crimes
of violence perpetrated against civilians, especially
women and children, to guarantee accountability and
prevent impunity. It is also important to ensure the
security of UNAMA staff members and to protect
them from any acts of aggression, in order to facilitate
their work and allow them to discharge their duties
in improving the security and other situations in
Afghanistan. We also welcome the Afghan President's
adoption of the Afghan National Drug Action Plan
for 2015-2019. The increasing nexus between the
financing of terrorism from the profits earned from
drug trafficking demands that the Afghan Government
intensify its efforts to follow a comprehensive approach
to fight the illicit use, trafficking and production of
drugs.

Finally, Jordan commends the important role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Haysom, in Afghanistan and expresses its
support for his efforts to promote the peace process and
bringing together the points of view of all the parties to
the conflict and improve relations between Afghanistan
and its neighbouring States, in order to support and
achieve peace and reconciliation between the Afghan
Government and the armed groups. In that respect, we
call upon all parties to the conflict to respond positively
to those efforts and those of the international community,
translating their commitments into constructive actions
on the ground, and to forge ahead with direct talks
among themselves in order to arrive at a sustainable
political settlement. For that is the optimum way and
the foundation for progress in Afghanistan in order to
confront the economic and security challenges facing
the country.

