Mr. Hughes (New Zealand): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today. May
we also express our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Gue'henno for his excellent briefing this morning on the
result of the election in East Timor.

It is indeed with great pleasure that we join with
others who have spoken earlier in warmly
congratulating the people of East Timor on the
successful completion of their first democratic
elections. The high voter turnout and the peaceful and
tolerant environment in which votes were cast are
evidence of the commitment of the East Timorese
people to the process towards independence. We look
forward to the announcement of the inaugural meeting
of the East Timorese Constituent Assembly as an
important step towards that goal.

We also extend our congratulations to the United
Nations on the smooth arrangements for the election,
which, in our view, establishes a new benchmark for
future United Nations missions. The New Zealand
observer team's report adds to the international
consensus that the ballot was free, fair and credible.
The international community and the people of East
Timor should have great confidence in the integrity of
the election outcome.

The conduct and successful staging of these
elections also provides an excellent basis for the
planning of the successor mission to the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). New Zealand has previously stated its
strong belief that the United Nations must equip East
Timor to take full responsibility for its own affairs.

We continue to be convinced that the Security
Council must remain focused and committed to
maintaining a United Nations military, police and
civilian presence in East Timor until such time as the
new country has established a truly self-sustaining
administration and the security situation is no longer of
concern. We look forward, therefore, to the Secretary-
General's report due next month, which will
recommend the size, shape and timetable for the
successor mission to UNTAET.

