Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome the
Foreign Minister of the Argentine Republic to the
Council to personally preside over today's important
open debate. We would also like to welcome His
Excellency the President-elect of Haiti, Mr. Preval,
who has travelled here specifically to attend this
meeting and make an important statement.

The situation of Haiti has been a focus of
attention of the international community since the
1990s. Having lived through untold sufferings brought
about by years of turmoil, the Haitian people yearn for
peace and stability. They participated in the elections
with tremendous enthusiasm and used their ballots to
express their strong political aspirations. The
presidential election was successfully concluded after
just one round of balloting, and the date for the second
round of voting in parliamentary elections has been
rescheduled. We can say that Haiti once again finds
itself at a critical threshold of another important new
stage in its history. The dawn of opportunity and hope
is already in sight.

We all know clearly that the successful holding of
the elections and the completion of the political
transition process represent only the first step in Haiti's
endeavours for peace and reconstruction. History has
taught us that sticking to the track of peace and
reconstruction is far more difficult, complicated and
challenging than preparing and holding elections. This
is the historical mission of the new Government of
Haiti, and it also an issue to which the international
community should give serious consideration.

To realize this goal, China believes that, first,
genuine national reconciliation is the precondition for
the restoration of Haiti's stability and development. All
parties concerned in Haiti should carefully sum up
experiences and lessons drawn from the first round of
parliamentary elections and ensure the fairness and
transparency of the second round, as well as of
municipal and local elections, so as to establish trust
and confidence in the population and all participating
parties. Once elections are concluded, all parties and
factions should respect the outcome of the elections,
keep in mind the overall interest of the country, put
aside their previous differences and engage in sincere
political dialogue in an effort to achieve consensus and
create a healthy political atmosphere for peace and
reconstruction of their country.

Secondly, maintaining and improving the security
situation will form the basis of peace and
reconstruction in Haiti. In spite of recent improvements
in the security situation, it seems that, for a
considerable period of time, it will be difficult totally
to eradicate factors affecting the stability and security
of Haiti. The Haitian authorities should, on the one
hand, work closely with the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) forcefully
to combat and deter illegal armed elements and
criminals, and, on the other hand, to reform and
restructure the police and judiciary, with the help of the
international community, and effectively carry out

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

Thirdly, economic and social development is the
key to eradicating the root causes of the turmoil in
Haiti. As a least developed country, Haiti has long
suffered from a paucity of infrastructure and
substandard living conditions. The new Government of
Haiti should mobilize all of its forces and concentrate
its limited resources on quick-impact projects in order
to improve people's daily lives and help generate
employment opportunities. The people will start to
have confidence in the future of their country only
when they begin to enjoy real benefits. In that respect,
the role of the international financial agencies and of
the donor countries is essential. The relevant assistance
commitments should be honoured as soon as possible,
and emphasis should be put on quick-impact projects,
so as to guarantee a good beginning for the
reconstruction of Haiti.

Haiti is a country with extremely limited
resources that is faced with numerous tasks. Whether
Haiti can successfully avoid a relapse and proceed
towards lasting peace and sustainable development will
depend on the hard work of the people and the
Government of Haiti as well as on the sustained
attention and assistance of the international
community. Latin American countries have always
actively participated and played an important role in
international assistance activities in Haiti, and the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) has recently
decided to reinstate Haiti's membership. That kind of
support is extremely important for Haiti's stability and
development and for its reintegration into the
international community.

There is an ancient Chinese proverb that says,
"Give a man a fish, and you feed him for a day. Teach
a man to fish, and you feed him for a lifetime". I think
that the international community, in providing help to
Haiti, should heed its concerns and ideas, and enhance,
on an ongoing basis, Haiti's sense of ownership in the
reconstruction process, thus helping to revitalize the
country. Given that the Peacebuilding Commission has
been established and will start functioning soon, we
should consider listing Haiti as one of the candidates
for consideration by the Commission, in due time.
Although China does not have diplomatic
relations with Haiti at the current time, the Chinese
people have always had friendly ties with, and been
close to, the Haitian people. China believes that the
Security Council should continue to watch closely the
situation in Haiti and looks forward to the early
submission by the Secretary-General, after
consultations with Haitian leaders, of recommendations
regarding the structure and mandate of MINUSTAH in
the next stage. China also hopes that the political
conditions necessary for MINUSTAH to stay on will
continue to prevail.

We trust that, as an experienced statesman,
Mr. Preval will live up to the high expectations of the
Haitian people and the international community;
address, in an appropriate manner, the various
complicated and sensitive issues facing the country;
and lead Haiti towards stability, development and
prosperity.

Finally, the Chinese delegation endorses the
presidential statement to be issued at the end of this
meeting and thanks the Mission of Argentina for its
diligent work in that regard.

