Mr. Dotta (Uruguay) (spoke in French): Uruguay
would like to thank France for organizing today's
debate during its presidency of the Security Council.

(spoke in Spanish)

We would also like to thank France for enabling
the presence at this meeting of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as the Executive Director of UNICEF,
which testified to the importance of today's debate. We
should all take note of how meaningful that is to all of
us.

Likewise, Uruguay wishes Malaysia success in its
work in this very important Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. Although this debate has sought
to place special focus on children who are victims of
non-State armed groups, my delegation believes that all
children affected by conflict are in the same situation
and require equal protection.

Uruguay commends the invaluable work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and we reiterate our support for
her mandate. We wish to highlight the work done in
coordination with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations aimed at incorporating measures to address
the situation of children in countries where there are
peacekeeping operations.

Uruguay welcomes the tenth anniversary of the
creation of a mechanism to systematically monitor
and report on the six grave violations of the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict: the killing and
maiming of children, the recruitment or use of child
soldiers, sexual violence against children, attacks
against schools and hospitals, denial of humanitarian
access to children, and child abduction.

Uruguay also commends the work of UNICEF, in
coordination with Ms. Zerrougui, which is indispensable
to put an end to recruitment by States or security forces
or armed groups. We are concerned at the situation that
is being experienced now and has been for a period
of time by the children in the Syrian Arab Republic,
where 14 million children are affected. Two million live
in areas without humanitarian access, 2.6 million live
in areas without access to education, and 2 million live
in refugees camps in Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan. Of
course, the interrelated crisis with Iraq also means that
8.2 million children live in areas far from their homes,
in areas controlled by armed groups of various origins.

With so many children in danger, the future of
humanity is also in danger. The Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole face a choice
between civilization and barbarism. We have always
been committed to defending the rights of children
in situations of armed conflict, as can be seen in the
annual submission and negotiation of resolutions on the
rights of children, both in the General Assembly and in
Human Rights Council.

Uruguay also shares the Secretary-General's
concern and his commitment to eradicating violence
against children and echoes his call for countries that
have not yet done so to sign or ratify the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols.

Although this debate has sought to focus on children
that are victims of non-State armed groups, which is
very important, we do not wish to overlook the fact that
despite the fact that such groups are aberrant, terrible
and unacceptable, most of the children recruited are
recruited by their own States; this is unacceptable to
the international community and to this Organization.
This issue is on the General Assembly's agenda. My
country plays an active role in that respect, and we hope
to see a similar attitude on the part of other States.

However, it is nonetheless true that thanks to the
work of the Council over the past almost 20 years,
we have seen thousands of children released from
conditions that violate the dignity of the human being.
My country deems it fundamental that we respect the
rights enshrined in various international instruments,
especially article 28 of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, which obliges States to respect children's
right to education.

In the resolution on the rights of the child adopted
last year in the General Assembly, it was decided that
the issue of the right to education would be focused on
in the operative part of the resolution to be adopted this
year. Uruguay hopes that - and we will work towards
this - States that have the capacity to defend this right
will reaffirm it in the resolution that will be adopted
during this seventieth anniversary of the Organization.

It is also important to continue working with the
International Criminal Court and for the Security
Council to refer cases to it, which would give more
value to the work of that body, and extend this logic to
other international tribunals that are responsible for the
protecting of children under their jurisdiction.
Finally, we deem critical the issue of the effective
reintegration of children associated with armed groups
and believe that demobilization and reintegration
programmes are necessary for the truly successful,
effective and sustainable reintegration of children into
their societies.

As long as the rights of children are disregarded
and violated, and as long as children continue to be used
for reprehensible purposes such as war, the scourge of
which this Organization was created to eliminate, it
will not be possible to maintain international peace and
security or for civilization to make progress.

