Mr. Ladsous: At this time last year, the situation
in Liberia was of deep concern. The country was in
the throes of a national tragedy, an unprecedented
health emergency that was devastating families and
communities, threatened to reverse the political and
security gains made since the end of the civil war and
risked tearing apart Liberia's fragile social fabric. The
Security Council recognized that this health emergency
posed a threat to international peace and security.
Fortunately, the country has since turned a corner.

The people of Liberia endured the trauma of Ebola
with resilience, dignity and a profound determination
to overcome. Indeed, their efforts were rewarded: on
3 September, Liberia was again declared Ebola-free by
the World Health Organization. I would therefore like
to begin my remarks by commending the Minister of
Justice and his Government on the leadership provided
during the Ebola crisis, and now as the country works
toward recovery. I would also take this opportunity
to express my profound admiration for the people of
Liberia, who galvanized themselves at every level,
including at the community level. I also express
my appreciation for the Council's mobilization of
international support for the countries most severely
impacted by Ebola, including Liberia.

Liberia is making progress on a number of
fronts, including important momentum on essential
political reforms. The Government has launched a
deconcentration programme, which is a critical first
step in decentralizing the reach of the State - which,
for the time being, is concentrated primarily in
Monrovia - so that local officials are empowered and
citizens throughout the country are able to benefit from
the most basic of services.

The constitutional review process has also made
progress. Last month, President Johnson-Sirleaf
transmitted to the legislature 25 proposed amendments
that emerged from that process, along with her
recommendations. I note that the President categorically
rejected - and suggested that Liberia's elected
representatives should also reject -exclusionary
provisions such as declaring Liberia a Christian
nation and requiring African ancestry for citizenship.
Recommendations also include proposed changes that
the President supported, such as a shorter term for
elected officials, including presidents and legislators.

Meanwhile, litigation related to last December's
senatorial elections is nearly completed, with only one
appeal still pending. I think that the 2014 electoral
process demonstrated many encouraging elements
about the independence and maturity of Liberia's
democracy, including with respect to the capacity of
national institutions to conduct elections throughout the
country in circumstances, we recall, that were difficult
and with limited means. The subsequent appeal process
has demonstrated the continuing commitment of the
political class of the country to seeking the resolution
of disputes through legal channels.

I turn now to the security situation, which remains
generally stable, although public order is still a source
of concern, as demonstrated by periodic incidents,
for instance, between the police and motorcycle taxi
drivers in Monrovia, and some public disturbances at
concessions. But I am pleased to note that since the
Secretary-General's report (8/2015/620) was issued on

13 August, there have been no major security incidents.

In the meantime, Liberia is working hard to
build its institutions, pass legislation and put in place
mechanisms that will enable it to maintain stability
without the presence of a peacekeeping force. All but
one of Liberia's counties have established a county
security council that brings together security actors
to share information, provide early warning of risks,
and advise national decision-makers. This is an
important tool for channelling local-level knowledge
and capacities in order to prevent localized disputes
from spiralling into larger conflicts. Most recently,
the council of Grand Gedeh conducted an assessment
of community complaints about the cross-border
encroachment on farmland by foreign nationals, with
a view to formulating recommendations to mitigate the
spread of that dispute.

The Government remains committed to making
every effort to mobilize the resources needed to
develop its capacity to maintain stability and protect its
population independently of the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL). Last week, the President signed
into law the 2016-2017 national budget of $622 million,
which includes $20 million in resources allocated to the
security transition. However, the Government estimates
that $37 million are still required for the transition
process.

Last week, the joint implementation group - which
brings together the Government and its key partners,
including UNMIL, which oversees the security
transition - agreed to reprioritize tasks and associated
costs in order to ensure the effective achievement of
key milestones in the transition process. It also agreed
to undertake a more robust approach to measuring
progress against planed benchmarks and activities.
UNMIL and the country team are supporting the
establishment of a programme management office for
the security transition, which is focused on project
implementation, with particular emphasis on fiscal
responsibility and timely delivery.

The legislature is also doing its part. It has actually
postponed its recess so as to be able to review essential
pending draft legislation, including proposed acts for
the police and immigration that include important
provisions for civilian oversight. However, some
important legislation remains pending, including a
firearms control bill that the Secretary-General recently
flagged as critical in the context ofthe sanctions regime.

The quadripartite mechanism bringing together
UNMIL with its sister mission, the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, as well as Liberian and
Ivorian officials, resumed in March with a meeting held
in Abidjan. However, the formal joint border security
operations that were suspended in early 2014 due to
concerns about Ebola and concerns that it might spread
into Cote d'Ivoire have, regrettably, not yet resumed.
Planned meetings of chiefs and elders in the border
area, and the voluntary repatriation of Ivorian refugees
living in Liberia, especially in the area of Zwedru, are
still suspended until after the elections in C6te D'Ivoire
in October. In the meantime, UNMIL is working closely
with the Mano River Union to implement its security
strategy.

In April, the Council decided to resume the
progressive drawdown of UNMIL, which had been
suspended during the crisis. Since the adoption of
resolution 2215 (2015), UNMIL has been reduced by
1,221 troops, reaching this month its new military
strength of3,590 personnel. Additionally, the authorized
strength of UNMIL's police component now reflects its
actual deployment of 1,515 personnel, including eight
formed police units, individual police officers and
immigration advisers.

In the report before the Council, the Secretary-
General recommends further reductions to military,
police and civilian components of UNMIL, taking into
account the Council's expectation that the Government
of Liberia will be fully responsible for security as of
30 June 2016. The strategic concept that underpins
these recommendations is the consolidation of the
remaining armed capacity of UNMIL, which would be
able to provide rapid response in support of the Liberian
security institutions in the event of a serious, sudden
deterioration of the security situation.

Specifically, by the conclusion of the security
transition in the precise middle of next year, the
UNMIL force would be reduced to 1,240 personnel,
including one battalion with support and enabling
units, especially aviation. The police component
would likewise be reduced to 606 personnel, including
three formed police units, in addition to police and
immigration advisers, as well as prison advisers. It
will, however, be important for UNMIL to retain the
capacity to provide such support for some months after
the conclusion of the security transition so as to test
the capability of Liberian security personnel to protect
civilians and respond to security incidents in order to
mitigate any risk of reversal.

I should also note that the Secretary-General's
new Special Representative for Liberia, Mr. Farid
Zarif - whom many here know well - deployed
last Monday. He has considerable experience in
peacekeeping, particularly in Liberia, and I am sure
that he will provide critical leadership at this important
period in the Mission's lifecycle.

Liberia is a country that can be characterized by the
remarkable ability of its people to overcome seemingly
impossible adversity. These are a people who have
endured and are still enduring the devastation wrought
by more than a century of systematic exclusion, decades
of dysfunction, and 14 years of successive, brutal civil
wars. For more than a year, the people of Liberia were
confronted with a national tragedy that took shape in the
form of a medical emergency. And yet, once again, the
country has turned a corner and transcended adversity.
Thus, there is yet again an opportunityto create a better
Liberia.

Now, it is with the people and Government of
Liberia that lies the important work of continuing to
build a nation - a unified, reconciled nation with a
Government that has to be accountable and committed
to addressing corruption Within its ranks; a nation in
which all citizens share the benefits of the country's
abundant natural resources; a nation that has to be fully
responsible for its own destiny, with institutions and
a Government able to provide the basic guarantees of
security, protection and services to all its citizens.

The decision taken by the Council to set 30 June
2016 as the date for the full assumption of security
responsibilities by national authorities is, I believe,
a remarkable demonstration of confidence that the
country has overcome both the instability and the
dependency of the past, and that it is moving steadfastly
in the direction of building a viable, united and fully
independent nation. We shall continue to support
the people and the Government of Liberia in that
endeavour, with the hard-won stability enduring for all
of the succeeding generations of the country.

