Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): The debate
over a two-State solution raised during the latest
elections in Israel reminded us all of the grim state of
affairs of the Middle East peace process. My delegation
believes that in order to preserve a two-State solution,
all actors must adhere to their previous commitments
and step up their efforts to restart the peace negotiations
with a view to establishing a more sustainable future
for future generations of Israelis and Palestinians.
We were encouraged by the news over the weekend
regarding the long-standing dispute over the transfer of
tax revenue from Israel to the Palestinian Authority. An
insolvent Palestinian Authority is in no one's interests.
At the same time, the Republic of Korea remains
concerned about the expanded settlement activity and
the detrimental effect it has on the viability of a two-
State solution. Settlements are not only illegal, they
are not in Israel's long-term strategic interests and run
contrary to international peace efforts.

Turning to the situation in Syria, the Republic of
Korea is deeply concerned about the unprecedented
scale of the violence as the conflict enters its fifth year.
The culture of unmitigated impunity and the systematic
violations of human rights and humanitarian laws are
particularly disturbing. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2199 (2015), aimed at cutting
off the major means of funding used by terrorists.
However, the international community must do more to
address this drawn-out conflict. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the outcome of the third international
humanitarian pledging conference for Syria, held in
Kuwait on 31 March. As we did at the time, the Republic
of Korea commends the host Governments of Jordan,
Lebanon, Iraq, Egypt and Turkey for their tremendous
efforts to lessen the suffering of the Syrian people. On
top of the $14 million in humanitarian assistance it
has given Syria over the past three years, the Republic
of Korea, heeding the call of the Council and the
international community, pledged another $10 million
at the March conference.

Regarding Yemen, my delegation is deeply
concerned about the continuously deteriorating
situation on the ground. In recognition of the urgent
need for humanitarian assistance, the Republic of
Korea recently pledged $500,000 in aid through United
Nations agencies. We welcome the Council's adoption
of resolution 2216 (2015), which calls on the Yemeni
parties to resume the political transition process in
accordance with the GulfCooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, the outcomes of
the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We urge all
the parties involved to focus particularly on protecting
civilians and facilitating the evacuation of foreign
residents from Yemen.

In conclusion, the continued instability ofthe region
is no longer a crisis for the Middle East alone. The
refugee situation is reverberating beyond the region,
as was witnessed by the drowning of more than 1,100
migrants in the Mediterranean just this past month.
We simply must do more to put a stop to violence and
re-start efforts to find a sustainable political solution.

