Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Ethiopian presidency for giving
the Security Council this opportunity to reaffirm
its determination to fight terrorism and support the
Iraqi people and authorities on their path to peace,
stability and unity. And I would like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, who is here with
us this morning.

On Tuesday, in his address to the General Assembly
(see A/72/PV.4), President Emmanuel Macron brought
up the subject of the duty we have to speak for those
who go unheard and whose voices are forgotten. For
example, we have all heard the voice of Nadia Murad,
the Yazidi victim who is seeking justice through the
establishment of an investigation mechanism, and I
would like to thank those who made sure that we heard
her voice in the Assembly (see A/7l/PV.3).

Eradicating Da'esh and stabilizing Iraq are major
priorities for France, which will continue to support
the reconstruction of Iraq with the goal of achieving a
lasting peace that can reconcile every element of Iraqi
society, as Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, France's Minister
for Foreign Affairs, committed to in Baghdad. The
Council's unanimous adoption today of resolution 2379
(2017), proposed by the United Kingdom in response
to a request from the Iraqi Prime Minister, will enable
the United Nations to support the Iraqi authorities in
collecting evidence of serious crimes committed by
Da'esh through the deployment of an investigative
team. Such crimes are intolerable and ineradicable, and
the proof of that must not be erased with the passing
of time. Nor must they go unpunished. We owe that
to the far too high number of victims of this terrorist
organization in Iraq.

We welcome today's resolution, which represents
a concrete contribution to justice on the part of the
Security Council. It is a major first step and a sign
that the consolidation of the rule of law in Iraq is
under way, with France's full support. In that regard,
France reiterates its support to the Iraqi Government in
combating impunity for any crime, whoever commits
it, within a framework of independent and impartial
judicial institutions and with all the necessary
procedural safeguards for human rights.

The Council is aware of France's commitment to

respect for human rights and its unconditional rejection
of the death penalty. It will be essential to ensure
that the evidence collected by the United Nations
investigative team is used in procedures that conform to
those requirements, in accordance with United Nations
practices. Those requirements should be reflected in
the investigative team's terms of reference, and we urge
it to work in close coordination with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, the relevant international
criminal justice mechanisms and the competent
national jurisdictions.

Justice and the rule of law are a corollary of lasting
peace and stability in Iraq. This new chapter in Iraq will
be possible only with the resolute commitment of all
to work together on issues of governance and national
reconciliation so as to ensure that everyone has a place
in the Iraq of tomorrow. That is needed if Da'esh is to
be fully defeated, and until that long-awaited moment,
today's vote is a useful and valuable symbol.

