Mr. Barry (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
France, for its accession to the presidency ofthe Security
Council for the month of June and to thank you, Sir, for
the invitation to take part in this open debate.

The theme of this high-level discussion,
namely, the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations, is of great importance for us, as it is for
the entire international community. Indeed, with
nearly 3,000 - 2,901 to be exact - soldiers and police
currently deployed in various theatres of operation,
Burkina Faso ranks sixteenth in the world as a troop-
and police-contributing country and is the fourth
largest contributor from the African continent. We
have a battalion in Darfur and two battalions in Mali
within the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. We also have police units,
one of which is deployed in the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau,
where it is participating in the efforts aimed at political
stabilization in Guinea-Bissau, which is very difficult.

Burkina Faso hosts on its soil 34,000 refugees from
Mali, and every time there is an upheaval in northern
Mali, civilians flee into our country, which shares over
1,000 kilometres of border with that neighbouring
State. As a formerjournalist, I have witnessed in person
the despair of civilian populations dealing with war in
Cote d'Ivoire and Mali, and I have witnessed people
seeking shelter, care and food; people fleeing and
crossing borders in search of peace and tranquillity. I
have also witnessed gestures of hope, soldiers releasing
people from oppression and reassuring them that they
would protect and help them - in short, doing what
peacekeepers do. Therefore, we must welcome the
role of the United Nations and all other organizations,
including the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States.

The responsibilities for better protecting civilians
in peacekeeping operations are shared and spread across
various levels. First, in any conflict, it is important for
the parties to the conflict, whether States or not, to
fulfil their responsibilities vis-a-vis international law
and international humanitarian law. The four Geneva
Conventions and the two Additional Protocols provide
us with a solid basis both for preventing massive human
rights Violations and for holding parties to the conflict
accountable for war crimes and similar crimes. For us,
fulfilling those obligations is the best way to support
peacekeeping operations in theatres where a decision to
deploy them has been made.

On the ground, peacekeeping operations can indeed
be very useful in the protection of civilians, although
it should be remembered that the responsibility for
that lies first with host States. The contribution of
peacekeepers can take the form of support to existing
local and community-based security mechanisms.
It can take the form of military and police action,
such as patrols, or logistical support in the area of
communication or protecting a refugee camp. In a more
long-term perspective, the implementation of capacity-
building programmes, with the aim of providing the
defence and security forces of host countries with the
skills they need to carry out their sovereign functions,
is the most sustainable approach.

Finally, with regard to the role of the United Nations
as a whole and that of the Security Council, I must also
mention the many initiatives that are being taken to
ensure that the protection of civilians is the cornerstone
of United Nations action in its peacekeeping operations.
The Secretary-General's Rights Up Front initiative, the
zero-tolerance policy with regard to sexual violence, the
deployment of advisers on the protection of civilians in
some peacekeeping operations, and the initiatives of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to evaluate
progress in the implementation of the mandates are
welcome initiatives.

However, despite all those efforts, the picture is not
bright and calls on us to do more. The Security Council
must develop clear mandates for the protection of
civilians and ensure that missions are equipped not only
with sufficient resources to execute them, but also with
the provisions they need to put those resources in place.
I say that because our troops in Darfur, for example,
no longer have sufficient food rations. The American
representative mentioned that earlier, but unfortunately,
this is not the first time that has happened. When it
happened, we were obliged to send money to our soldiers
in Darfur to enable them to directly purchase what they
needed to eat. If we need to maintain a sufficient level
of morale for our troops as they protect civilians, they
must have the necessary means, including the means of
subsistence and nourishment.

It is also important to be realistic and flexible and
to change a mission's mandate whenever it is required
by the reality on the ground. We are pleased that those
elements were given due attention in the various reviews
conducted in 2015, which seek to present a different face
ofUnited Nations peacekeeping operations, namely that
of human-centred operations on the ground. In the case
of Mali, which is of concern because it is very close to
my country, Burkina Faso, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendation to increase by 2,500 the
personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We call on the Economic Community of West African
States to strengthen MINUSMA so as to make it
more robust, more aggressive and better suited to
the situation in northern Mali. That request is all the
more immediate and important to us, since Burkina
Faso suffers collaterally from the ongoing crisis in
northern Mali.

In a single year, we have suffered a dozen terrorist
attacks on our borders, targeting civilians, police and
gendarmerie posts. The last one took place at night on
31 May. There were three Victims, all police officers.
The most tragic attack, also related to the situation in
Mali, took place in Ouagadougou, an attack in January
on the Cappuccino Restaurant and Splendid Hotel, in
which 32 people died, all civilians.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
readiness of my country, Burkina Faso, to continue to
support the actions of the international community in
the field of peacekeeping. I welcome the adoption of
the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
to which my country has acceded. I would also like to
acknowledge and thank our partners present here, whose
multifaceted support has always been crucial in the
predeployment training of troops and police deployed
to the peacekeeping theatres of operation. It is my
hope that this exchange will contributes significantly
to our thinking on ways to lessen the untold suffering
inflicted on humans, which cannot be justified under
any pretext.

