Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ijoin others in thanking
Mr. Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for
his briefing.

I also express my gratitude to Her Excellency
Ms. Nela Kuburovie, Minister of Justice of the
Republic of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, for their
respective statements.

Unfortunately, the negative sequence of events
that have caused instability and could generate further
tensions in Kosovo continued during the reporting
period. Ukraine regrets that, despite the concerns
expressed by Security Council members during
their discussion in February (see S/PV.7891), Kosovo
institutions attempted to move ahead on transforming
the Kosovo Security Force into an armed force. We
consider such an approach to establish facts on the
ground as having the potential to lead to heightened
tensions in the region. We are worried that an attempted
conversion of the Kosovo Security Force into a Kosovo
army, coupled with rising ethno-nationalist sentiments,
could be an explosive cocktail. That definitely does
not contribute to confidence-building both among
communities inside Kosovo and between Belgrade and
Pristina. We commend the quick reaction by the NATO
and the United States to that development and welcome
the decision by Kosovo institutions to withdraw
that initiative.

We have also witnessed further disturbing
developments with regard to property issues, hate
speech implying ethnic cleansing, incidents involving
travellers from Kosovo, resistance to the process of
peaceful returns, as well as the resolution of the Kosovo
Assembly calling for the suspension of the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. My delegation is frustrated
by the reported obstruction of returns, particularly in
Istok. During the first visit of the Security Council to
Kosovo in 2000, in which Ukraine participated, Istok
was presented as a prospective area for Serbs' returns.
Seventeen years later, nothing has changed, and those
who oppose returns are using same old arguments.

All those developments do not contribute to the
spirit of restraint and cooperation needed to achieve the
necessary progress on the implementation of the agreed
commitments. Against that backdrop, we welcome
the efforts of the European Union, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and
UNMIK to preserving peace and stability in Kosovo.
Their actions are vital for diffusing tensions and averting
any further deterioration of the situation. We reiterate
our call on political leaders in Belgrade and Pristina
to actively work to avoid provocation, confrontation,
and escalation leading to a conflict. It is important to
continue the implementation of their commitments,
thereby bringing benefits for all people living in the
region and enhancing their European perspective.

Ukraine would like to take this opportunity to
welcome the peaceful holding ofthe Serbian presidential
elections in Kosovo. We are glad that, despite some
difficulties, according to the report of the Secretary-
General,

"no security incidents were reported in connection
with the voting, collection or transportation of
votes" (S/2017/387, para. 12).

We fully agree with the Secretary-General's
observations that

"the European Union-facilitated dialogue is the best
available mechanism for the peaceful resolution
of differences, to the benefit of both sides" (ibid., para. 47).

We support the European Union's enhanced role
in the region, which has proved to be constructive
and has contributed to the stabilization and peaceful
development of countries in the Western Balkans and
Europe in general.

Finally, we support, as we have before, the call of
many other delegations to reconsider the regularity of
the Council's briefings on Kosovo and to begin focused
discussions on UNMIK' reconfiguration.

