Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like
to begin by thanking Mr. Philip Hammond for having
convened this important meeting, which is geared to
shedding light on what is happening in the Federal
Republic of Somalia in all of its aspects. I would also
like to thank the Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omar
Abdirashid Ali Sharmarke, for his presence at today's
meeting. We are fully aware of the situation in Somalia,
and therefore would like to convey to him how much
we appreciate his work in that country. Jordan also
would like to express its gratitude to Mr. Nicholas Kay,
Ms. Susana Malcorra and Mr. Tete Antonio for their
presence here.

Jordan also sponsored today's resolution 2245
(2015), but that was not initially mentioned.

Jordan highly welcomes the considerable efforts
of Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, President of the
Federal Republic of Somalia, the Prime Minister and
parliamentarians to build a State and restore peace
over the past three years. Jordan is very pleased by
the achievements at the political level, which include
the establishment of regional Interim Administrations,
constitutional reform, the creation of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, and the convening
of the National Consultative Forum to explore the
various modalities and formats for the elections.

Jordan affirms the need for the Government of
Somalia to continue to implement the action plan
agreed in the context of Vision 2016 to provide for
overall reconciliation, promote social cohesion and
integration, and emphasize the need to involve all
aspects of society in the democratic process through
free, credible and transparent elections in 2016 in order
to meet the expectations of the Somali people and to
return lasting peace and security to the country. We
encourage all stakeholders and institutions in Somalia
to cooperate to implement Vision 2016.

We also stress the importance of consolidating
the United Nations presence in Somalia and assistance
to Somalis throughout the country with a view to
promoting reconciliation and the protection of human
rights. We call on the international community to
maintain its financial and political support to the
federal Government of Somalia so that it can fulfil its
functions at all levels, including the organization of
elections in 2016.

Jordan strongly condemns the terrorist attacks
perpetrated by the Al-Shabaab movement in Somalia
and neighbouring countries, which have wounded and
killed many people, including innocent civilians, civil
servants and others working in the missions there. We
pay tribute to the important role of the African Union
and its Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in neutralizing
Al-Shabaab and liberating the regions still under its
control. Those military operations must be continued
in order to completely neutralize Al-Shabaab.

In that context, Jordan believes that the international
community should support the implementation of a
comprehensive regional strategy to eliminate terrorism
through an integrated approach that deprives terrorist
organizations of an enabling environment and cuts
off their sources of financing, while helping people to
meet their socioeconomic challenges so that there is no
longer fertile ground for the promotion of terrorism.
However, military operations are not enough to
restore stability and peace. It is important to promote
the rule of law and reform the security sector while
establishing the necessary administrative structures
and strengthening national reconciliation efforts so
that Somali institutions can assume responsibility for
providing security and replace AMISOM. in that area.

Some 3 million people in Somalia still require
humanitarian assistance. Increased coordination
and support from United Nations agencies and the
international community in the sphere of humanitarian
assistance are therefore vital. We stress the need for
AMISOM. and the Somali national armed forces to
continue to provide protection for roads and supply
lines and to provide for the free circulation and delivery
of humanitarian assistance to those who most need it.
Finally, we urge the international community to assist
the Somali economy by supporting economic recovery
and stability in Somalia.

