Mr. Cardi (Italy): Italy had hoped that the unity of
the Council would be preserved in ensuring swift action
following the latest horrors in the Syrian conflict.

As an elected member of the Security Council, we
feel a special responsibility to live up to the expectations
of the United Nations membership, which has entrusted
us with helping to maintain international peace and
security, a responsibility that today we were not able
to uphold.

We voted in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2017/315) in order to reiterate, first, our condemnation
in the strongest terms of any use of chemical weapons
by anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances, and,
secondly, our support for a full-fledged investigation
into the facts in Khan Shaykhoun by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
Fact-finding Mission and, as applicable, by the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Investigative Mechanism. We call
upon the Syrian Government and all parties in Syria
to cooperate fully with the OPCW and the United
Nations so as to allow for the prompt conclusion of its
investigation into this heinous incident.

Thirdly, there is a need to fight impunity. So
long as no one is held accountable and faces tangible
consequences for war crimes and crimes against
humanity, the incentive will remain to continue to
commit them.
We will do our best to ensure that even in the
absence of a specific Security Council resolution, the
mechanisms in place work to clarify the facts and
responsibilities relating to the Khan Shaykhoun attack
as soon as possible.

It is deeply disturbing that international humanitarian
law and the international non-proliferation architecture
continue to be blatantly violated. Upholding respect
for these norms, including resolution 2118 (2013),
and the Chemical Weapons Convention, which is the
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
regime, should have been a shared priority, one that
unifies us instead of dividing us.

The challenges of the Syrian crisis require strong
cohesion and cooperation on the part ofthe international
community. There is therefore no alternative to engaging
and trying to find common solutions. Italy remains
committed to working with the other members of the
Council and the other members of the international
community in doing so.

As I said this morning, the international community
has the duty to stop the horrendous suffering of the
Syrian civilian population through a political solution
and to bring back peace and hope for the future in
that country.

