Mr. Lubbers: I will, of course, not repeat the
many points on which we agree but perhaps will make
a few comments on questions where there may be
misunderstandings.

I will start with Jamaica. First, on a plan to bring
the refugees in the Languette out, 130,000 of them,
because of the continuous fighting, as was stated by the
representative. I may be a little more optimistic about
this. Because of the action to prioritize the safety of
refugees, we have seen a remarkable slow-down of the
hostilities and fighting in that area. That is precisely
one of the reasons that we stress this point and put it as
a priority on the agenda and invite the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) to participate in that. I am not
saying that we can trust the arrangement permanently,
but at least at this moment this is the situation.
Nevertheless, we are glad the road is open and numbers
of people are coming out, and we will assist them. We
will concentrate on the most vulnerable ones. With
other non-governmental organizations, we monitor the
health situation and specific problems very closely. We
will try to assist them as well as possible. But I hesitate
to come forward with a plan to evacuate them all.

The second point is related to Sierra Leone and
the intervention. It is my opinion that we can still have
only limited numbers of internally displaced persons in
Sierra Leone. They are now coming by boat from
Conakry to Freetown. We can handle them, but I am
not in favour of very big numbers. This relates, then, to
my approach that, at some point, we need to have more
territory in Sierra Leone where returnees can really go
home to their own villages and the places they come
from. This is, of course, a process that takes time, but
that is the basic line.

I now turn to the representative of the United
Kingdom. He, too, made the distinction between the
short term and the long term, as, by the way, did the
representative of Jamaica and others. I appreciate that.
Our plans also have to be good for the long term. It
would be stupid to have successes in the short term and
not in the long term, but, having said that, I claim
simply that what we did last month was good for the
long term as well. It was good for the long term; at
least it created a moment of a little bit more stability. I
would say that we should count our blessings there.

The second remark I allow myself to make is that,
indeed, it is not the opinion of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
that we should open the border from Languette to
Kenema, as was said by the representative of the
United Kingdom. There must be a misunderstanding. In
the letter I sent on 11 February, I mentioned that this
was the wish of the President of Sierra Leone, but that
we at UNHCR preferred to be a little more cautious -
not to do that, but to limit ourselves to the possibility
of opening up the border from Forecariah to Kambia.
We think this will require fewer troops from the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), but that
can be sorted out.

I am grateful for the financial support of the
United Kingdom to our actions and I do hope that there
can be some further increase with other countries.

I turn now to the representative of Tunisia, who
had no specific question. He supported our approach.
He asked about the possibilities with the financial
institutions. This was brought up by some other
representatives as well. Yes, we were in Bamako,
together with the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, but frankly speaking, I did not get the
idea that they were very focused on financial support.
Obviously, this was an important conference and
gathering, but it was not productive for refugees. We
will see what is possible from here.

I turn next to the representative of France. He
asked a question as to whether we had any impression
of what the refugees themselves want in terms of
staying or going back. He asked this for Liberia and he
asked this even more for the refugees of Sierra Leone.
At this point, I want to explain that the main policy, the
first priority of UNHCR at this stage is to relocate, find
safer places within Guinea. That is our main action. We
are not in a programme to repatriate as many as
possible, but, having said that, we appreciate that a
number of refugees have an opportunity to make that
choice. This is still a minority, but a substantial
minority. I do think that, at this stage, from the
perspective of the refugees, they want to have more
opportunities. There is a certain problem with
explaining to them that they should stay where they are
and that we cannot allow them to go to Sierra Leone, in
particular. I would add, because that was the question,
that this is the smaller part of the total number at this
stage.

I want to make a remark about the mandate of
UNAMSIL. I have studied that mandate time and
again, of course. I must say that the mandate itself, in
my opinion, does not create a problem. It is not a
problem of the mandate - it is a problem of resources
and the numbers of troops. For example, I suggested
that it might be possible for UNAMSIL troops to take
over the Kambia area, literally, from the Revolutionary
United Front. They are prepared to do so. It is not a
problem with the mandate. It is within the mandate. It
is a problem of troops being available or not available,
and maybe of priorities in using these troops. I wanted
to make that point clear. I am grateful for the support
that will be positively considered by the Government
of France, as referred to by the representative of
France.

I now turn to the representative of the United
States of America. I start with the same point of thanks
for the financial support and for the possibility of even
more. We certainly will come back to that point.

The representative of the United States of
America said that his country cannot support corridors
or passages through territory held by the RUF. That is
not our intention. It seems to me that there is again a
certain misunderstanding. The conversation with RUF
is only about the F orecariah-Kambia route. That is in
the context of the RUF's pulling out and its becoming
UNAMSIL territory. We have other dealings with the
RUF that are relevant to us, but that does not involve
any action on the territory of Guinea. I am not saying
that we should simply trust the words of the RUF. I
would say that we should test its behaviour and that, at
least at this moment, that behaviour does not give us
reason for complaint. Nevertheless, I use the word
"prudence" because we have to approach this step by
step.

At this point, I shall also answer the reaction of
the representative of Ireland and others to comments
about hesitations among at least a number of non-
governmental organizations. I think that this, too, is
related to a certain misunderstanding. There is, of
course, a risk involved, to be frank. One can never
exclude the possibility that the RUF, at some point in
time, will become more aggressive. Therefore, I would
say that the UNAMSIL presence has to be robust, but
one should not exclude the fact that the RUF itself also
has an interest, a political interest. One should not
exclude the fact that the RUF has gradually come to
understand that, given the fact of UNAMSIL and the
somewhat stronger position of the Sierra Leone Army,
with the assistance of the United Kingdom, its ambition
cannot simply be to take the whole of Sierra Leone and
that it must therefore also play the political position. In
the context of improving its political position, it has its
own reasons, its own political interests, to use less
violence and to try to build a minimum of credibility
with the population of Sierra Leone.

That is related also to other questions concerning
the return of the refugees - where do they go, to what
territory and so on. So we talk here, and we make
assessments in terms of the past, but we can never
forget that there is also a scenario for the future. My
advice would be to be cautious, but not to overlook
windows of opportunity.

What would represent a window of opportunity?
A gradual decrease in violence, greater access to
refugees, and passage in Guinea and at some point into
Sierra Leone territory - territory controlled by
UNAMSIL. That is the basic picture. Now this can
only be done gradually, step by step. One cannot force
things.

Here I should like to repeat what I said earlier:
that I have some hesitation with the reasoning
concerning the short term and long term. I would say
that none of the steps, even the short-term ones, should
damage the long-term perspective. If we can take short-
term steps that serve the long-term perspective, why
not do that?

I turn now to what was said by the representative
of Colombia, who strongly emphasized the regional
aspect. He had a few questions that were intriguing to
me, and maybe also to his colleagues - two questions,
in fact. One concerns the timing of a return to normal
life, and how long will it be before donor fatigue sets
in again?

This was one of the reasons for going there.
There was donor fatigue, and it seemed that everyone
thought that there was no solution at all in western
Africa. That was the reason they tried to set a different
political agenda, because we cannot accept this donor
fatigue and this downward spiralling of the whole
situation.

At least at this moment there is some movement
in the right direction, but, to answer the question, I am
reasonably sure that if there is no follow-up action,
within a number of months there will be pessimism
again. Now that things have started to move ahead a
little bit, we have to think hard and go forward with
prudence, but go forward and do certain things.

The representative of Colombia also asked me
about the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). I will be
very frank and open. One should learn from history and
from past experience, so there is reason to be cautious.
But having said that, other representatives, speaking
after him, said that we couldn't afford to exclude the
possibility that they will choose a different course. As
a former politician, I have to say that they will go for a
different course only when they consider it to be in
their own interest. But it could be in their own interest,
if they gradually change their role of partner in crime
to a political entity in Sierra Leone, and that is the
basic question.

It is very difficult to judge this, and maybe RUF
is not as homogeneous as it is sometimes said to be.
But to give some perspective and a chance to the better
parts of RUF might be a good investment. We shall see,
but I do think that the experiences of recent weeks are
reason, at least, to see how far we can go - again, step
by step.

Turning now to the statement made by the
representative of Mali, I take this opportunity to pay
tribute once again to President Konare'. In my opinion,
he did a wonderful job as Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and is
still doing it. I have very good memories of the
conversation I had with him. It was not an easy one. He
had to cope with the realities of countries that saw
things differently, but I am convinced that there will be
another opportunity - and, hopefully, soon - in the
context of ECOWAS.

Maybe at this point I should explain once again
the relationship as I see it between the UNAMSIL
effort and the ECOWAS effort. The UNAMSIL effort,
in accordance with the Mission's mandate, is to
strengthen Sierra Leone and to restore stability in an
acceptable way, and it is working on that. To do that, it
has to strengthen its presence in Sierra Leone. The
ECOWAS initiative has been developed more in
relation to the borders, including the border between
Liberia and Guinea, which is the main interface for
trouble.

I think that if ECOWAS, maybe in a somewhat
renewed form - and I touched on this in my
presentation earlier this afternoon and the discussions I
had with President Konare' - could safeguard, in an
effective way, at least a crucial part of the border, then
that would be a good opportunity, as long as we can
ensure that the behaviour of RUF is non-interventionist
in the area of Guinea and that the military presence is
coordinated.

I think that at some point the basic question will
be that, if the RUF refrains from action, there are still
many other groups in that area - all sorts of groups
that could take action. If the presence of ECOWAS and
the presence of UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone is
sufficiently, let us say, robust, then we can challenge
the RUF better. We can say that if something happens
there, it is the RUF's responsibility, unless we can
prove that there are other groups. I do not exclude the
possibility that at some point it will be in the interest of
the RUF to report to those observers, because
otherwise they will be blamed for everything that
happens in that area. I do not like to go into the
technical aspects of this question, but indeed I see a
long-term connection in the future between ECOWAS
and UNAMSIL.

Turning now to the statement made by the
representative of China, I would like to thank him for
what he said. I understood his points very well, and I
agree with him that we should not be naive and
optimistic and that we need to strike a balance between
prudence and, on the other hand, the realization that we
are at a crucial moment for West Africa and that we
have to look into the possibility of finding a way
forward. I very much appreciate the fact that the
representative of China described ECOWAS and
UNAMSIL as the two legs on which we have to walk
to reach a solution.

I also thank the representative of Singapore, who
spoke just after China and continued in the same vein.
In listening to the various representatives, it became
clear to me that there is indeed a wish on the part of the
Security Council to make an additional political effort
in relation to UNAMSIL, and probably, if it is
redefined, to ECOWAS as well. I assure the
representative of Singapore that we will be very
cautious when it comes to the security of staff and
United Nations people in general. I hope that the
United Nations and the Council will be instrumental in
assisting in security matters, too.

Turning to the comments of the representative of
Norway, I want to thank him for what he said and, in
particular, for the presence of the Norwegian State
Secretary at the conference on internally displaced
persons. This gives me the opportunity to say once
again that internally displaced persons - not only
refugees - in that part of the world are an enormous
burden. I am sometimes asked whether UNHCR cares
for internally displaced persons, since our mandate is
refugees. Let me be very clear: in Guinea, Sierra Leone
and Liberia - the countries where I was - I cannot
make the distinction at all. I consider internally
displaced persons, as well as refugees, to be our
problem. Our people in UNHCR are instructed to look
after them as well as possible, and I will solicit for
support to continue to do that.

Turning to the comments of the representative of
Mauritius, he stressed the importance of relocation in
Guinea. I think he is right. We do that. However, I want
to avoid the misunderstanding that relocation in Guinea
is the complete answer. There has to be some
perspective. There are basically three reasons why
there should be not only relocation but, to a limited
extent, repatriation too. First, there is the fundamental
reason. It is not good to say to refugees, "We will take
care of you and you will stay here; we are not working
from the perspective that at least some of you can make
the choice to go home". The second point is that when
I acquired the support of the authorities of Guinea -
the Guinean army - to work together with us instead
of resisting flows of refugees and internally displaced
persons - as they have been doing now for a number
of weeks, with great success - I promised the
Government of Guinea that I would try to increase the
possibility of repatriation. That was a promise, so I feel
committed. The third reason is that I am convinced that
we should not overburden Sierra Leone with internally
displaced persons but, to the extent that we can achieve
a little - I repeat: a little - more repatriation in
countries controlled by UNAMSIL, it will be very
positive for Sierra Leone. The stability of Sierra Leone
will probably be increased, not decreased, by it. I do
not believe in the reasoning that says that the fewer
people we have, the better it is for stability.

I have already answered the question asked by the
representative of Mauritius about Bamako. Turning to
the representative of Bangladesh, I appreciate very
much what he put on the table. It gives me the
opportunity once again to explain that, to the extent
that we relate, via the Contact Group, to the RUF, it is
not because we are naive about the RUF. Furthermore,
we are not saying, "Today it is safe to go back to RUF
territory". That may be the misunderstanding of a
number of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) -
they may have thought that that was our plan. No; our
plan was to see if there was the possibility of the RUF
refraining from further action in the territory of Guinea
and accepting that in certain places in Sierra Leone
UNAMSIL will come in. We are creating a situation
for limited numbers of refugees in countries controlled
by UNAMSIL.

What does it mean for the RUF? They are trying
to build a future for themselves in the part of Sierra
Leone that they dominate, or will still dominate. By the
way, they also need humanitarian support. My
impression is that one of the reasons for their different
behaviour today is that they see that they are in a
difficult position, as they are isolated by the
international community, by the NGOs and so on. I do
not exclude the possibility that, therefore, they are
trying to take another course. Once again, let us be
cautious. The RUF is not homogeneous. We will follow
it very closely. Now you may have a better
understanding of our analysis on this point.

Turning to the comments of the representative of
Ireland, I thank him for the support of his Government
when it comes to the money we need. In answering
him, I want to stress one element that is in my letter in
relation to President Taylor and Liberia. We now have
the measures taken by the Security Council - they are
in place, they have to become effective. But in relation
to that, I want to repeat what I said to President Taylor
loudly and clearly. He thought that I was coming to
him to ask him to be a sort of intermediary - a porte-
parole or go-between - to the RUF. I said, "President
Taylor, not at all. I know you did that in the past, and
for good reason. But maybe it is better not to do that."
But of course, that is part of the strategy of trying to
decouple. It will be difficult. But I think that that is the
way we have to try this.

The issue of the Me'decins sans Frontieres (MSF)
press release is interesting. At this very moment, three
MSF members are touring around in RUF-controlled
areas to make new assessments. I consider the
members of the MSF to be people on the ground with
very sound opinions. But I have the impression from
reading the press release that even in that case there is
a misunderstanding of what our intentions are. So that
can be clarified after this meeting.

Turning to the representative of Guinea, I want to
thank his Government for its cooperation. We have met
with them, and we hope to follow up. All of his
colleagues listened to him, and at the very end of his
speech he mentioned the repatriation of refugees as one
of the things on Guinea's list. Practically all
representatives paid tribute to the generosity of Guinea,
and I think that it is fair for some consideration to be
given to answering the question of there being a
prospect, at least, of some repatriation.

Turning to you, Mr. President, as the
representative of Ukraine, I would like to thank you,
first of all for your country's participation in
UNAMSIL. I would also like to thank you because, to
paraphrase your words, you said the political priorities
have to be set right and that one cannot expect the
humanitarian workers to do their work if there is not a
political effort as well. Of course, I fully agree, and I
am grateful that you said it. You made a plea to your
colleagues for a frank follow-up; that is the only thing I
want you to do: a frank follow-up. I do this on behalf of
the refugees. We are talking here of very large numbers
of people. But this is not just about big numbers; it is
about individuals as well.

We started this afternoon with International
Women's Day. I said a few words about women
refugees. Maybe I will end with that as well. On behalf
of women refugees, I simply ask the Council to set the
political conditions to make it possible for them to
improve their situation and to see a future for themselves
and their children - for their sons and daughters. They
are just people like us. I think the Security Council could
do nothing better than, as the President said, go for a
frank follow-up.

