Mr. Aho-Glele (spoke in French): As the
President has said, I am speaking on behalf of the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union in my
capacity as its President for this month of March. The
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
expresses its appreciation to the Security Council and
to you, Mr. President, for having made the necessary
adjustments to its agenda to allow the Chairperson to
speak in today's debate on the issue of support for
peacekeeping operations conducted by the African
Union, which gives us the opportunity to express the
views of the Peace and Security Council on the report
under consideration (S/2008/813).

Certain aspects of the Peace and Security
Council's position have already been outlined by the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, as well as by members of this Council and other
States Members of the United Nations. Nevertheless,
on behalf of the Peace and Security Council, I would
like to reaffirm several crucial points, some of which
appear in its communique No. 178 dated 13 March,
which we formally asked the African Union to pass on
to you, Mr. President, so that the Security Council
could take it into account during its discussions.

The Peace and Security Council wishes to recall
and to stress the importance of the role of regional
arrangements as a basis for partnership between the
United Nations Secretariat and the Commission of the
African Union and between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, on the other. The Peace and
Security Council would therefore like to express its
gratitude for the initiative of the Secretary-General to
establish an African Union-United Nations panel on
support for peacekeeping operations in Africa. We also
congratulate the panel, headed by Mr. Romano Prodi,
09-27223
on drafting a report that makes it possible to take
suitable decisions.

The Peace and Security Council seeks not to act
as an advocate to this Council, but rather to encourage
it to assume its full responsibility for taking the useful
decisions required of it in its primary role in
maintaining international peace and security and
thereby support the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in its role as regional actor and leader
on the African continent.

The Peace and Security Council, in its secondary
role as regional leader, welcomes the good relations
between our two bodies in the settlement of numerous
recent crises and attacks on peace and security on the
African continent. However, situations persist in which
the appeals of the Peace and Security Council have
either not been heeded by the Security Council or have
only provoked a timid response or received a tardy
response. That was the case - and it is worth stressing -
with the situation in the Sudan, where the Peace and
Security Council has called upon the Security Council
to defer the indictment brought against the President of
the Sudan. That request was made last year, but the
Security Council has yet to respond. To the
consternation of the bodies of the African Union, an
inappropriate action has just been undertaken by the
International Criminal Court, which endangers the
search for peace and security in that part of Africa that
is the Sudan.

The Peace and Security Council therefore appeals
to the Security Council to listen more carefully to
Africa's concerns and, following the example of what
we are doing today with the consideration of this
report, address the Peace and Security Council's
requests that the issues of peace and security on the
African continent be dealt with.

