Mr. Nesho (Albania): At the outset, on behalf of
my delegation, I would like to express to the people
and the Government of the Russian Federation our
sympathy and our most sincere condolences with
respect to the terrorist acts that took place earlier today
in Moscow. We strongly condemn such brutal terrorist
attacks.

I would like to join other delegations in
expressing our appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report and in thanking Mr. Holkeri, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
comprehensive briefing. We are pleased to welcome
him today and to commend him for his work. We will
continue to support his efforts and those of the
international community in this new and important
phase of their mission in Kosovo. We are certain that
Mr. Holkeri's leadership will help to maintain the
momentum and the positive trend of significant
progress that Kosovo has made in the past four years.

My Government welcomes the transfer of non-
reserved competences to the Provisional Institutions, in
conformity with Chapter 5 of the Constitutional
Framework. That is a good step forward, which should
be followed by further and closer cooperation between
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the local institutions. Better
participation by the institutions in the decision-making
process and better policy coordination will be
beneficial to both parties. In particular, those elements
will improve the institutions' effectiveness and their
capacity to respond to the needs of Kosovo's citizens.

The Albanian Government reaffirms its support
for the "Standards for Kosovo" document, which
bolsters the efforts of the international community to
build a democratic society and a stable Kosovo through
the implementation of the standards. The standards
implementation plan, which clearly defines the time
frame for the progress to be achieved, is also a most
welcome development. We are confident and optimistic
that it will help Kosovo to make progress as soon as
possible towards a final resolution of its status. In that
context, we regret to emphasize the lack of
participation and cooperation by Serb minorities in the
various working groups for the preparation of the
implementation plan. Their presence and participation
are not only desirable and important, but also necessary
in building a democratic, multi-ethnic society.

Albania praises the first steps already taken in the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade on technical
matters. The Albanian Government will continue to
bring its influence to bear on the political and
institutional actors in Kosovo and to encourage them to
continue their cooperation and to participate in
discussions at the level of the technical working
groups. We consider this a productive way of resolving
the problems and practical issues faced by the people
of both countries in their daily lives. On the other hand,
we deem unacceptable and damaging any attempt that
goes beyond the stabilizing framework of the dialogue.

Albania believes that the continuing existence of
parallel structures in Kosovo is a source of very serious
concern. They represent a serious impediment to the
strengthening of legitimate local institutions and to the
exercise of their full jurisdiction, and to the continuity
of the democratic process in Kosovo.

The arrest warrants issued by such institutions, as
parallel courts, against Kosovar leaders are
unacceptable acts which can only cause uncertainty
among the people of Kosovo and do harm to the
process of building a multi-ethnic society there.

We consider well thought out and reasonable
UNMIK's position, following the December elections
in Serbia, of not allowing officials of Kosovo
institutions simultaneously to hold a post in Kosovo
and have a mandate in Serbia.

We are of the opinion that the progress made in
economic and structural reform in Kosovo is of great
importance for fostering stability and development
within that society. In that context, we support the
resumption of the process of privatization as a key
element with a great impact on economic development.

We all agree that 2004 is going to be a
challenging year for Kosovo. It is our conviction that
the trend of change and constant progress will
continue; that democratic institutions and the rule of
law will function more effectively; and that the
important process of returns, representation and
participation, based on the current achievements and
willingness of the Kosovo leadership, will continue and
be successful.

Given the progress achieved and the positive
efforts of the international community, it is our
conviction that Kosovo will increasingly share the
common aspiration for integration into the region and
into the European family, to which, geographically,
historically and culturally, it belongs.

