We are pleased to congratulate Prosecutor Bensouda's Office and the other members of the International Criminal Court (ICC), who, despite the challenges of their duties and the coronavirus disease pandemic, have demonstrated through each report they submit the difficult and unstinting work they are doing. Throughout our membership of the Security Council, we have been able to study the work of the ICC in great detail. In addition, we have had the honour of hearing today, for the fourth and final time for us, Prosecutor Bensouda share her progress, challenges and achievements. With respect to the issue at hand today, the Dominican Republic applauds the ceasefire signed on 23 October and maintains the hope that it will be observed and upheld in favour of peace and stability in Libya. The Libyan people have been courageous and resilient, and they deserve to enjoy a lasting and inclusive peace - one that is not marred by impunity. Indeed, as the international community, we are called upon to make maximum efforts to fight against impunity for the sake of the victims of the thousands of atrocious acts that have been committed in Libya, so that they may have the hope of seeing perpetrators brought to justice in an impartial and effective manner. In this regard, we are compelled to support, strengthen and promote the work of the ICC, in particular Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office, which has the delicate task of investigating, gathering evidence, prosecuting and capturing dangerous individuals in very difficult situations. We are pleased to note the significant progress made in cooperation between the ICC and the Government of National Accord. This will undoubtedly allow the Court to better fulfil its mandate and serve a people who see justice as a light on the dark journey they have travelled as victims of conflict. Unfortunately, crimes against demonstrators and migrants, poor conditions in detention centres, attacks on civilian infrastructure and the increase in the laying of anti-personnel mines do not seem to have stopped. The people of the Dominican Republic extend their sympathy for and lament the lives lost as a result of a conflict that has lasted for far too long. With regard to the cases of Mr. Al-Werfalli, Mr. Al-Tuhamy and Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, we call upon both the relevant parties to the conflict in Libya and the international community to intensify cooperation efforts aimed at ensuring that these individuals are arrested and that their alleged crimes are prosecuted in accordance with international law. Finally, we commend the cooperation that has developed among the ICC, the European Police Office, the European Union and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and we support the Court's call on all parties to the conflict in the country to refrain from conduct that results in serious violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law.
