Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Serry for his statement and
the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions to this debate. Iwill focus my intervention
on the Middle East peace process and Syria.

The future of the Middle East peace process hangs
in the balance. Both the Israeli and the Palestinian
leaderships need to seize the diminishing opportunity
before them and focus on the ultimate goal - a
negotiated two-State solution to the conflict, which is
so desperately needed for their peoples. During his
recent speech to the Knesset, the United Kingdom
Prime Minister David Cameron emphasized the
transformative benefits of peace. These include a
prosperous Palestinian State living side by side with
a safe and secure Israel, normalized relations between
States ofthe region, and a special privileged partnership
between the parties and the European Union. By
contrast, the consequences of letting this opportunity
pass would be very grave both for the parties and for
the region.

With respect to recent announcements on Palestinian
reconciliation, let me reiterate that the United Kingdom
believes that in order to achieve a lasting peace, it is
necessary to end the separation between Gaza and the
West Bank and to reunite them under a Palestinian
authority that is fully committed to peace with Israel.
The United Kingdom has consistently made it clear
that we will engage any Palestinian Government that
demonstrates through actions that it is committed to
the principles set out by President Abbas in Cairo in
May 2011.

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the increase in tension and violence, leading
to many deaths of Palestinians and Israelis alike. We
condemn the further expansion of Israeli settlements
and continued demolition of Palestinian homes, as
well as the continued rocket fire by extremist groups
in Gaza into Israel. Both are contrary to international
humanitarian law. Increasing tensions around the
holy sites of Jerusalem are also worrying. The status
quo must be maintained and respected. We urge the
responsible authorities to maintain calm and avoid
letting those with an extremist agenda dictate the
atmosphere around the holy sites.

Finally, let me welcome President Abbas's remarks
on the Holocaust. The entire international community
must stand united against those who deny the terrible
truth of the Holocaust.

The situation in Syria worsens every day. The
regime continues to act with complete disregard for
civilian life, humanitarian needs and resolution 2139
(2014). The Secretary-General has been very clear that
the Security Council must act in the event of further
non-compliance. Recent credible reports that chemical
weapons have again been used by the regime in Syria
call into question the regime's commitment to comply
with its obligations and to dismantle its programme in
full.
We raised our concerns in the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on 11 April, and welcome today's
OPCW announcement that it would launch an
investigation into these reports. We commend the work
of the United Nations-OPCW joint mission, but the
situation on the ground is concerning - missed Syrian
deadlines, ambiguities in the declaration, alleged recent
use of chemical weapons, and limited progress on the
destruction of chemical weapons production facilities.
As we approach the completion of the extraction
phase, the joint mission will continue to have a vital
role in ensuring that the Council is fully appraised on
compliance with resolution 2118 (2013).

The Syrian people deserve peace and justice.
The international community must ensure that all
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity are held to account. The United Kingdom
continues to call for the situation in Syria to be referred
to the International Criminal Court and will continue
to support the moderate opposition in their efforts to
protect Syrians from the regime and from extremist
groups.

The Al-Assad regime's announcement of elections
to be held on 3 June is a cynical attempt to sustain his
murderous dictatorship. Elections will be conducted
amidst regime attacks on civilians and hundreds of
thousands living under regime siege in horrendous
conditions. These elections can have no value or
credibility when held in a climate of fear, when
non-violent opponents to Al-Assad have been detained
or disappeared, and when millions of Syrians who live
as refugees are prevented from voting.

A clear route to credible elections exists through
the establishment of a transitional governing body, as
set out in the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).
We call on the Al-Assad regime to return to Geneva
and to negotiate on the basis of the format and agenda
proposed by the United Nations-League of Arab States
Joint Special Representative for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi. All Council members bear a responsibility
to work for a negotiated political solution, and in
particular to put pressure on Al-Assad to engage with
the process in good faith.

