Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
President Mbeki and Special Representative Menkerios
for their briefings. As the representatives of the Sudan
and Southern Sudan said, the agreement reached in
Addis Ababa on Abyei is a major step forward towards
bringing to an end the crisis that has prevailed in the
region since Abyei was occupied by the Sudanese
Armed Forces on 21 May. This is good news.

I welcome the commitment of Ethiopia, and in
particular of Prime Minister Zenawi, which offers a
solution to the crisis by allowing for the deployment of
Ethiopian soldiers. It is now up to the parties, in
coordination with the Security Council, to see that the
agreement just reached is implemented. I welcome the
fact that the United States has announced its intention
to submit a draft resolution allowing for the
deployment of Ethiopian soldiers.

As we speak, the Abyei area remains occupied.
Armed militias continue to pillage the meagre
resources of the local people, who have fled the
fighting. The personnel of the United Nations Mission
in the Sudan (UNMIS) are subject to acts of
intimidation, be it from repeated fire from heavy
artillery close to UNMIS positions or other obstacles to
their freedom of movement.

The reports we are receiving from Southern
Kordofan paint a picture of a situation of war. The
fighting that has been ongoing since 5 June between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in the Kadugli area has led to the
displacement of more than 60,000 civilians. The
humanitarian situation is deteriorating, and
humanitarian personnel have no access to the
population owing to the restrictions that have been
imposed.

France calls urgently on the parties to negotiate a
ceasefire, facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid
and return to dialogue to ensure the implementation of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and allow
for the fair representation of all the minorities of
Southern Kordofan.

It is also crucial that the United Nations Mission
currently in place in the region carry out its mandate to
protect civilians, under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Thousands of civilians are
currently seeking refuge with the United Nations,
especially in Kadugli. It is our duty to use the
necessary means to protect them.

If we can draw a lesson from the violence in
Abyei and Southern Kordofan, it is that the peace
achieved under the CPA is both precious and fragile.
UNMIS has supported the parties in maintaining peace
in Sudan since 2005. Today, it seems clear that the
presence of the United Nations remains justified as
long as all of the aspects of the peace agreement have
not been implemented and the tensions in the border
areas have not been resolved. We therefore call on the
parties in the Sudan to recognize the value of the
United Nations presence and to engage in dialogue on
possible mechanisms for the period beyond 9 July to
ensure support for peacekeeping and thus to foster
peace and prosperity in the region.

The special report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/314) on this issue is, in our view, a reference
document which can contribute to efforts to avoid a
return to violence, which would have tragic
consequences for both parties.

