Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and, through him,
may I thank all of those trying to supply the desperately
needed humanitarian response on the ground. They are
indeed valiant.

Sixteen days ago, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018). We did so because
we and the world were sickened by the slaughter of
innocents in Syria, particularly in eastern Ghouta.
Russia used every tactic in its playbook to weaken
the resolution and buy time for its ally, the Al-Assad
regime, to bomb indiscriminately. But when it raises
its hand in support, we hope that Russia and its clients
would keep their word and implement the resolution.

Sadly, as the Secretary-General's briefing has made
clear, our resolution has not been implemented. What
has happened? First, has there been a ceasefire? No.
The violence continues and civilian deaths continue
to rise. In those 16 days, 607 people have reportedly
been killed, including 99 children and 79 women. The
opposition armed groups committed to implementing
resolution 2401 (2018) in full, but the Al-Assad regime's
air strikes continue.

Despite voting for a ceasefire, between 24 and
28 February, Russian military aircraft conducted 20
bombing missions in eastern Ghouta and Damascus
every day. Russia has failed to confirm that it is only
conducting air strikes against groups that are listed as
terrorist groups by the Council. During the so-called
daily humanitarian pause, over 56 air strikes hit eastern
Ghouta between 27 February and 7 March, including
at least six air strikes by Russian aircraft, according to
monitors on the ground.

Let us recall that only last year Russia declared the
whole area to be a de-escalation zone. It has claimed
that its bombardments are about fighting terrorists.
That is manifestly not the case. There is one terrorist
group recognized by the Security Council in eastern
Ghouta, which accounts for less than not even 1 per cent
of the population of the enclave. The other fighters are
members of the opposition armed groups, which Russia
has itself invited to the Astana meetings. Those groups
have written stating their readiness to expel Al-Nusra
Front from the enclave. Instead, Russia bombs them,
undermining the political process that it is a part of. We
are pleased that the members of the High Negotiations
Committee of the Syrian opposition will be able to
discuss the situation in Syria with Council members
later today. I repeat my consistent condemnation of
attacks against Damascus.

What about our resolution's second demand, that is,
safe, unimpeded and sustained access for humanitarian
convoys, including medical and surgical supplies?
Only one convoy has been able to enter besieged
eastern Ghouta in the past 16 days, in two movements
following shelling. They delivered supplies for 27,500
people - a fraction of the 400,000 civilians besieged
in eastern Ghouta.

What is stopping the aid from getting to the people
that so desperately need it? Again, it is the regime. The
ongoing violence that it perpetrates is an important
factor, and its failure to grant access is another. On
5 March, the regime removed nearly 70 per cent of the
medical supplies from a humanitarian convoy destined
for 90,000 people. That happened at a time when the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is
warning that malnutrition and disease are so prevalent
that people will soon die from hunger and sickness even
more than from air strikes. Finally, have there been
any medical evacuations for the approximately 1,000
people who need them? Not a single one. Again, it is
the regime that will not permit its civilians to reach
urgently needed medical care.

Some may point to an aid convoy or an announced
pause in air strikes as a sign of improvement, and claim
that those actions implement the resolution. They do
not. Our resolution was clear: a ceasefire without delay,
humanitarian access and medical evacuations. None
have happened. Instead, the truth is that the regime will
continue to pound eastern Ghouta until it has a complete
military victory there, and Russia will continue to
protect its ally, whatever the cost to the people of Syria
and its own reputation.

As we sit here, watching Al-Assad inscribing
eastern Ghouta, again, on the roll call of atrocities and
war crimes that he has committed over the eight years
of the bloody conflict, let me say clearly that there will
be future accountability for those crimes, and Russia's
role, bombing alongside him and protecting him from
accountability, will never be forgotten. There is still
time. If Russia is able to announce a five-hour ceasefire,
it can announce a full ceasefire. If it can get one aid
convoy through, it can get more through. I urge Russia to
give its unconditional support to resolution 2401 (2018)
and a ceasefire to enable the delivery of humanitarian

assistance, respect international humanitarian law and
protect civilians.

