Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie and his team
for the thorough research contained in the report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine.

This is an extremely challenging time for the people
of Ukraine. No-one should be driven from their home,
and we are committed to doing everything possible
to assist the displaced, regardless of where they have
fled. No-one should be forced to live without access
to essential medicine or with only an hour of access to
water a day.

As we have consistently made clear throughout
this conflict, and as we reiterate today, all sides must
take every precaution to prevent the loss of civilian life.
The humanitarian situation needs addressing, but not
by those who have caused it. That is why we welcome
the fact that the Ukrainian Government has created
humanitarian corridors, which are allowing critical aid
to get into - and civilians to get out of - separatist-
controlled areas. Ukraine is making a concerted effort
to address the complex needs of approximately 117,000
people who have been internally displaced. In doing
so, Ukraine is working effectively with international
humanitarian organizations to provide assistance.

This week, Russia proposed creating humanitarian
corridors to assist the affected populations in Ukraine.
But in Ukraine, urgent humanitarian assistance
should be delivered by the international humanitarian
organizations that have the expertise, experience and
independence to provide it. It should not be delivered
by Russia. Given that Ukraine has allowed international
humanitarian groups to deliver aid within its territory,
there is no logical reason that Russia should seek to
deliver it. Therefore, any further unilateral intervention
by Russia into Ukrainian territory, including one under
the guise of providing humanitarian aid, would be
completely unacceptable and deeply alarming, and it
would be viewed as an invasion of Ukraine.
We welcome today's statement by the International
Committee of the Red Cross that it is exploring the
possibility of providing more support in conflict areas,
which is something they can do once they have worked
out the modalities with the Ukrainian authorities and,
critically, once they have the security guarantees they
need from the armed separatists, something Russia has
not yet helped to secure. If Russia wishes to channel aid
to those populations, I am certain that my colleagues
on the Council can take swift steps to ensure that
an impartial international aid organization like the
International Committee of the Red Cross can deliver
the aid on Russia's behalf.

Last week the Russians again floated the idea of
sending Russian "peacekeepers" to eastern Ukraine.
A Russian peacekeeper in Ukraine is an oxymoron. At
every step in the current crisis, Russians have sabotaged
peace, not built it. It is particularly worrisome given
Russia's purported annexation of Crimea, which
was predicated on calls by an illegitimate puppet
Government for Russia to send troops to restore peace.
Peacekeepers are impartial, yet Russia fully supports
Russian armed separatists in the conflict.

We have seen the peace that Russian occupation
has brought to Crimea since that time. As the most
recent United Nations report makes clear, the freedoms
of speech and assembly have been violently repressed,
ethnic minorities systematically persecuted and
civilians abducted with impunity, 350 of whom are
still unaccounted for. The United Nations also said that
no progress has been made on any of the 17 previous
recommendations it has made to Russia on serious
human rights problems in Crimea.

Russia has repeatedly accused members of the
Council of politicizing a humanitarian situation, but
Russia has it backwards. In fact, it is Russia that is
trying to disguise a political crisis - one manufactured
and exported by Moscow - as a humanitarian one.
The very humanitarian problems that Russia is
decrying in eastern Ukraine and turning a blind eye
to in Crimea are directly traceable to violence it has
facilitated or supported. Why have thousands of people
been displaced? Look no further than the "egregious
human rights abuses" in separatist-controlled areas
documented in the United Nations report. Why do
civilians lack access to basic services? The United
Nations report documents the "deliberate targeting by
the armed groups of critical public utilities like water,
electricity and sewage plants".

In recent weeks, Russian cross-border military
assistance to illegal separatists has actually increased
substantially. Russian tanks, infantry fighting vehicles,
multiple rocket launcher systems and truckloads of
munitions continue to flow to separatists while new
fighters are trained on Russian soil. Russia continues
to take actions that escalate the conflict, amassing
more and more troops and hardware near the border,
launching extensive military exercises this week and
shelling across the border into sovereign Ukrainian
territory.

Perhaps most shocking is that Russia has doubled-
down on its support for rebels and provocative actions
after witnessing the horrific carnage that resulted from
the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17. On
Wednesday, international investigators were once again
forced to suspend their work at the MH-17 crash site
due to risks of being taken hostage by illegal armed
groups and the threat felt by the increased concentration
of Russian troops nearby. That is deplorable. It is yet
another insult to the dignity of the victims and their
loved ones, who have already endured more than any
families should ever have to endure. It flies in the face
of the resolution adopted by the Security Council and
the unified commitment to justice that the resolution
embodies (resolution 2166 (2014)). It obstructs efforts
to punish those responsible for that abhorrent crime.

In conclusion, let me read from a statement given
by a senior Russian official:

"The population is panicking and there are a
growing number of refugees who are attempting
to flee in order to save their lives. A humanitarian
catastrophe is in the making. Over the past week,
the Russian Federation has continued to receive
refugees. However, tens of thousands of innocent
civilians remain in the conflict zone. Those
circumstances dictate the logic of the steps to be
taken by us now."

Those remarks were delivered by a senior Russian
official in the Security Council about a region where
Russian-backed separatists were sowing violence.
Only the remarks were delivered on 8 August 2008, six
years ago to the day, and the country that the Russian
senior official was speaking about was not Ukraine
but Georgia. Playing the role of Luhansk and Donetsk
was the province of South Ossetia. We all know
what followed. South Ossetia, Crimea, now eastern
Ukraine - similar words have presaged military action.
The onus is on the Council and the entire international
community to meet legitimate humanitarian needs and
do so urgently, but in so doing to make sure that history
does not repeat itself.
