Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened today's meeting.
We welcome the report submitted by the Secretary-
General on recent developments in the situation in
Somalia (S/2009/503). We also thank Mr. Pascoe and
Mr. Boyd for their briefings. We welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of
Somalia.
The report of the Secretary-General and the
briefings by the Secretariat indicate that the current
situation in Somalia remains grave, the security
situation is deteriorating, the political process lacks
momentum and the humanitarian crises is worsening.

After 18 years of civil war, peacebuilding in Somalia
remains an arduous and difficult task. This is
unfortunate both for Somalia and for the international
community. We are seriously concerned by the current
situation in Somalia. We believe that halting violent
conflicts and ethnic disputes, achieving national
reconciliation and embarking upon national
reconstruction is a political choice that must be made
by all political forces in Somalia.

We hope that neighbouring countries, regional
organizations and the international community will act
immediately and use their influence and leverage to
avert the further deterioration of the situation in
Somalia. We call on all parties in Somalia to pursue the
national reconciliation dialogue. We support the
consolidation of the Djibouti peace process and call on
all parties concerned to join it. We condemn the recent
attacks on the Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia, civilians and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). We urge the armed factions in
Somalia to lay down their weapons immediately and
seek to settle the issue by political means.

The question of Somalia has already posed
serious challenges to the Horn of Africa, as well as to
international peace and security. We call on all parties
to use their influence fully and to focus on persuasion
and the promotion of dialogue so as to make timely and
substantive progress in the Somali peace process.

We greatly appreciate the positive role played by
AMISOM. in stabilizing the situation in Somalia and
protecting its people in difficult and complex
circumstances. We especially appreciate the contribution
of troop-contributing countries such as Uganda and
Burundi. We condemn all violent activity against
AMISOM. forces.

China has always maintained that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be deployed in
Somalia. We understand that the implementation of this
task still faces some obstacles. However, the
international community should not wait passively for
right conditions to arise. To achieve peace in Somalia,
the United Nations should play a greater role. We are
concerned by the serious difficulties raised for
AMISOM. by the insufficient level of troops and
shortage of resources. We call on the Secretariat to
strengthen consultations with the African Union

Commission and to further explore ways to strengthen
AMISOM.
China has always maintained that the United
Nations and the Security Council in particular should
play a more positive role in the question of Somalia.
We call on the international community to step up the
implementation of commitments of assistance made to
the Government of Somalia and AMISOM.

On numerous occasions the Chinese Government
has made contributions to the African Union to support
peacekeeping operations in Somalia. We have also
provided logistical assistance to major troop-
contributing countries. Recently the Chinese
Government also provided the Government of Somalia
with $500,000 in cash and with malaria medication
valued at 1 million yuan. We have also agreed to cancel
large amounts of the debt owed by the Somali
Government.

The Chinese delegation is ready to join with other
members of the Council to continue to play a
constructive role in resolving the question of Somalia.

