Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Allow me to
make a few brief comments in addition to the statement
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, which was delivered earlier by the representative
of Switzerland.

At a time when the world faces so many
challenges - from the crisis on the Korean peninsula
to the crises of the protection of civilians in Syria,
Yemen and Myanmar, among others - the need for an

effective Security Council is more obvious than ever.
The centrality of the Council in a multilateral response
to such crises cannot be overstated. Yet, time and again
we have witnessed paralysis in the Council and its
inability to carry out its functions effectively on behalf
of the entire membership with a dramatic impact on
international stability and enormous human suffering
as a result.

In this context, the use of the veto has played
a central and unfortunate role. In the recent past in
particular, the veto has repeatedly been used in stark
opposition to the spirit of the Charter of the United
Nations, preventing the Council from fulfilling its
tasks under the Charter. Examples range from a number
of resolutions on Syria to the reaffirmation of relevant
international law with respect to the situation in the
Middle East. Indeed, permanent members should play a
leading role in upholding the Council's decisions as they
are binding on the entire membership in accordance
with Article 25 of the Charter.

We all accepted the veto when joining the United
Nations, and while many of us favour its abolition as
a matter of principle, working on an understanding on
its use is, to our mind, the more promising path. The
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group has
developed a code of conduct regarding Security Council
action against mass atrocity crimes, which includes
a commitment not to vote against Council action to
counter such crimes. To date, 114 States - large and
small - from all regions of the world have subscribed
to it, including two permanent members of the Council.
Those States are also committed to timely and decisive
Security Council action against the worst crimes under
international law if and when they serve on the Council.

This year is the first time since the elaboration of
the code of conduct that nine States that support it serve
on the Council, which constitutes a procedural majority
that could be of crucial importance for placing topics
on the Council's agenda. We look forward to working
with those States, in particular to ensure that the code
of conduct can, over time, bring about a change in the
political culture in the Council - a change that is very
badly needed. We call on all States that have not yet
done so to join the code of conduct as soon as possible.
Liechtenstein, as a matter of policy, only supports
Security Council candidatures from countries that have

joined the code of conduct.

Along similar lines, the Council should act as
an enforcer of accountability for the most serious
crimes under international law. Accountability for
atrocity crimes not only reduces impunity for such
crimes, it also helps to prevent them in the future and
thereby contributes directly to the maintenance of
international peace and security. When possible, States
in question should be offered assistance to ensure such
accountability in their national systems, with the help
of international components, when necessary.

But referrals to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) by the Council are of course also critical when all
other accountability options have failed. The Secretary-
General recently renewed his calls on the Council to
refer the situation in Syria to the ICC. We support
that call. The work of the ICC, in that respect, could
be greatly assisted by the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, created by
the General Assembly in 2016.

In December 2017, States parties to the Rome
Statute added a new tool to the Council's toolbox by
activating the ICC's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression, which will go into effect as of 17 July
2018. That is a landmark development in the history of
international law and complementary to the prohibition
of the illegal use of force enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. The Council should therefore use
its ICC referral powers with respect to the crime of
aggression wisely, as it has the tremendous potential
not only to hold leaders who decide to commit illegal
acts of aggression accountable, but to deter illegal war-
making in the first place.

