The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.

I would like to begin by extending France's
condolences to and solidarity with Turkey after the
terrible attack that took place in Istanbul yesterday,
which we vigorously condemn.

By adopting resolution 2295 (2016) today, the
Security Council has decided to move in two major
directions. First, the Security Council requests the
Malian Government and the signatory armed groups
to accelerate the practical implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
Government and the signatory armed groups are now
engaged in a race against time against the terrorists who
want to derail the peace process. The signatory parties
have a historical responsibility to come to an agreement
to finally provide the people, especially in the north,
with the dividends of peace. Through resolution 2295
(2016), the Security Council has set a strategic priority
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) of
supporting the implementation of the Peace Agreement,
especially the restoration of State authority throughout
the entire territory of Mali.

The Security Council strengthens MINUSMA to
enable it to adapt to its unique security environment.
The Security Council has heard the urgent request made
by the Malian President and the Heads of State of West
African States, whose soldiers are risking their lives
as peacekeepers in Mali. MINUSMA is addressing
the threat of terrorist groups. This is an exceptional
environment for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, and we are aware of that. In that regard, I
reiterate our condolences for all those who have given
their lives in their commitment to MINUSMA.

Through resolution 2295 (2016), we have decided
to provide MINUSMA with all means necessary to
enable it to adapt to this environment. The protection of
civilians and the safety of the peacekeepers in Mali is
our top priority. More specifically, the Security Council
is strengthening MINUSMA on two levels. First of
all, with respect to the means at its disposal, we have
decided to deploy 2,500 additional troops and police
within MINUSMA. This major increase in the force
will make it possible to deploy specialized European
military units. The Security Council also asks for
a reinforcement of MINUSMA's contingent-owned
equipment, including medical evacuation helicopters,
drones and armoured vehicles. It is crucial that countries
with those capabilities respond to that appeal. With
regard to its mandate, through resolution 2295 (2016)
the Security Council has given MINUSMA the most
robust mandate possible in a terrorist environment. It
authorizes MINUSMA to use all necessary means to
prevent and counter asymmetric threats to civilians and
peacekeepers themselves.

By adopting resolution 2295 (2016), the Security
Council is fully exercising its responsibility for
international peace and security. The Security Council
is assuming its responsibility by reminding the people
of Mali that it stands alongside them on the path to
peace. The Security Council has supported Mali, whose
very existence was threatened, since the beginning of
the crisis in 2012. It will continue to do so until the
Malians can permanently live in peace.

The Security Council has assumed its responsibility
by giving the peacekeepers all the means to fulfil their
noble and essential mission under the most difficult
conditions. Thanks to MINUSMA, the Security
Council has helped peacekeeping to evolve on the
ground. France has an ambition and hope for the United
Nations - France wants the United Nations to protect
civilians wherever they are threatened.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Diop.

