Ms. Lee (Singapore): Ijoin the other members of
the Council in welcoming Foreign Minister Miranda of
Angola to today's debate. I also take this opportunity to
thank Ambassador Ryan for his excellent presentation
on the final report of the Monitoring Mechanism
established under resolution 1295 (2000) in relation to
the sanctions against UNITA. We look forward to the
written addendum to the final report from the
Mechanism under its extended mandate, pursuant to
resolution 1336 (2001).

I would like also to thank the previous Chair of
the resolution 864 (1993) sanctions Committee,
Ambassador Paul Heinbecker of Canada, for his
contribution towards the issuance of the report. His
countryman, the Permanent Representative of Canada
before him, was a hard act to follow. However,
Ambassador Heinbecker rose to the occasion
admirably, and carried on the fine tradition set by
Ambassador Robert Fowler in the report of the Panel of
Experts established pursuant to resolution 1237 (1999)
on Angola document S/2000/203, which was the
mother of all name-and-shame reports.

The five members of the Mechanism, ably led by
its Chairman, Ambassador Juan Larrain, also included
Ambassador Lena Sundh, Ms. Christine Gordon,
Mr. James Manzou and Mr. Ismaila Seek; they truly
deserve our thanks for producing an excellent report.
Like those of the recent report (S/2000/1195, annex, enclosure) of the Panel of Experts appointed pursuant
to resolution 1306 (2000) on the situation in Sierra
Leone, chaired by Mr. Martin Chungong Ayafor - the
Ayafor report - the findings in the report of the
Mechanism are sobering. Once again, the illicit trade in
diamonds was shown to be the cornerstone of the
edifice which fuels conflict, this time in Angola. The
well structured network that has been set up for this
illicit trade in diamonds could almost be admired for its
precision and success, were it not for the fact that the
creation of that network has been paid for in the blood
of the peoples of Angola and of the other countries of
the region.

The war in Angola has now entered its fifth
decade. In the Mechanism's report, it was noted that
the network of structures used by the Uniao Nacional
Para a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA)

"in their turn, profit from conflicts, the trade in
illicit arms and diamonds, and, not least, the
transport of such illicit merchandise".
(S/2000/1225, annex, enclosure, para. 23)

It was also noted in the report that
"The people and companies involved in these
kinds of activities are instrumental in facilitating
war and armed conflict". (Ibid.)

Clearly, the arms and diamonds industries have
spawned a very profitable war economy, such that the
diamonds industry, which was the resource for the
arms, has in turn generated an arms industry to protect
the diamonds. It is a stalemate that has a high price:
violence for economic control.

In the case of Angola, however, there is some
good news: the inroads the Government has made into
territory previously held by UNITA - for example
Moxico province - together with the effect of the
sanctions on the illicit diamond trade, which is the
main source for UNITA's guerrilla activities, have
brought about a diminishment of UNITA's war
capacity. Hence the importance of maintaining the
sanctions against UNITA.

We are here today to review the recommendations
of the Mechanism on the effectiveness of the
implementation of the many sanctions against UNITA
and to consider appropriate action against the
sanctions-busters. The Mechanism's report
acknowledges that the sanctions have curtailed
UNITA's ability to wage war. It also emphasizes the
continued need for their imposition, identifies various
instances of violations and makes recommendations for
the strengthening ofthe sanctions regime.

A significant part of the report focuses on the
circumvention of restrictions on UNITA's official
representation abroad and on travel by its officers.
Although a number of Angola's neighbouring States
and West African States have been identified as States
involved, the circumvention has been attributed more
to the use of front organizations and to the
insufficiently updated list of persons subject to
restrictions maintained by the sanctions Committee and
by the Secretariat. Loopholes in the European
Schengen Agreement's regime have also been
identified.

In the case of the diamonds sanctions, modes of
circumvention similar to those being used in the Sierra
Leone sanctions as described in the Ayafor report
appear to have been used to conceal the true origin of
diamonds from UNITA mines. These include the
potential loopholes found in the Swiss tax-free zones.
However, a serious allegation was made in paragraph
181 of the Mechanism's report: that well known clients
of De Beers are knowingly buying rough diamonds
from UNITA. This and other questionable methods
uncovered by the Mechanism require further
investigation as to the validity ofthe findings.

On the issue of sanctions-busting, the report
mentions some familiar names. On the use of aircraft
for sanctions-busting, Victor Bout has been identified
as a key player, as has Air Cess. The countries named
in the report as being the countries of origin for arms
exports to UNITA, and those accused of complicity in
permitting the forging of end-user certificates for arms
imports, should address the issues raised in the report.

What is most disturbing in the Mechanism's
report are the common criminals described in it,
namely Victor Bout, Fred Rindel and the European
network connection - they are "common" because
they appear to be the same individuals named in the
Ayafor report for activities linked to the trade in illicit
diamonds and arms in relation to Sierra Leone.

If sanctions-busters continue to be "rewarded"
and not punished for their acts, the damage will not be
limited to the exploitation of the resources of Angola.
It will undermine the credibility of the United Nations
itself, because the sanctions imposed against UNITA
are one ofthe tools ofthe Security Council for carrying
out its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. As stated in the
conclusions of the Mechanism's report,
"Peace in Angola will also have an
important impact in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in Sierra Leone". (para. 252)

Angola is a country that has a tremendous
potential for overcoming the ravages of the conflict
with UNITA. It is time to work for genuine and
comprehensive peace in Angola.

