The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Let me start by thanking Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra for their briefings, which
have set the right tone for our debate. The interventions
by Council members have also touched upon all
relevant points, so I will confine myself to four basic
questions we face in dealing with the challenges of
peacekeeping.

First, why do we need peacekeeping? Since its
inception, peacekeeping has become one of the key
tools of the United Nations for the maintenance of
global peace and security and has proved its versatility
in a number of cases by helping to deter or reverse
inter-State conflicts, ending civil wars and mitigating
humanitarian crises.

Of course, it is far preferable to prevent conflicts
before they become full-fledged crises requiring
intensive peacekeeping or peacemaking. And for that,
there is no doubt that we need to invest more in the
international community's mediation and conflict
prevention capabilities. However, in the real world we
all know too well that the need for United Nations
peacekeeping operations will never cease to exist. And
thus, in parallel with efforts to improve our practices
on when and how best to mandate peacekeeping
missions, we must also make sure that the necessary
political will and capabilities are in place.

The second question is: What are the problems?
Today, international peacekeeping operations face a
series of problems and challenges including military,
financial and personnel overstretch. As the largest
institutional provider of peacekeepers worldwide, the
United Nations feels these difficulties more than any
other organization.
In addition to the dwindling of financial
resources available to peacekeeping activities, perhaps
more important is the fact that the pool of troops to
which we all resort also shows quantitative and
logistical deficiencies. The troop-contributing countries
are facing increasing difficulties in providing the
necessary troops and capabilities.

The third question is: What are the causes of
these problems? The causes of the current problems in
United Nations peacekeeping are to be found both at
the strategic-political level and at the operational-
implementation level. Incomplete reforms, strains in
management and command systems, disproportionality
between mandates and resources and problems of scale
all hamper the efficiency of peacekeeping operations.

For instance, peacekeeping operations are now
frequently mandated to protect civilians. But often,
they do not have the size or density of forces to do so.
Likewise, benchmarking of progress is a key
determinant in an exit strategy. But in actuality,
identifying the conditions for exit poses a serious
challenge.

The indispensable link between the political
process and the peacekeeping is yet another important
aspect of the problems faced. The disconnect between
those who mandate and those who implement and the
lack of effective and dynamic supervision by the
Council over all peacekeeping operations are other
factors which in varying degrees add to the complexity
of the problems faced. What is more, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of
Field Support are understaffed.

The fourth and final question is: How can we
overcome these problems and what should be the way
ahead? We definitely need a compass setting out the
agreed and achievable goals and a collective
determination for the future direction of United
Nations peacekeeping. Implementing reforms,
generating resources, building up the necessary
capabilities and developing effective partnership
among all stakeholders, as well as improving
interoperability, turn out to be the essential elements in
this regard.

More rapid and more flexible peacekeeping
operations require institutional and operational reforms
to United Nations command and control mechanisms,
procurement and supply systems and the overall
strategy. We believe that the two central tenets of the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809) should be our guide:
deployment of forces should be tied to a viable
political strategy and mandates should be linked to the
reality of available resources.

Enhancing the deterrent power of peacekeeping
forces by providing them with sufficient assets,
establishing close cooperation between the civilian and
military parts of a mission, strengthening early warning
mechanisms in possible crisis regions, integrating the
political and socio-economic dimensions of
peacebuilding into peace support operations and
enhancing cooperation with regional security
organizations such as the African Union, the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe would all add to the efficient
operation of peacekeeping missions in the field.
Capacity-building and the training of peacekeepers
also constitute an indispensable component of
conducting a successful peacekeeping operation.

In short, to meet the challenges before us, we
need a new coalition, a strategic dialogue that will
include all stakeholders, particularly the Security
Council, the Secretariat, the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the Fifth
Committee, the Peacebuilding Commission and in
some cases the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, as well as troop- and police-
contributing countries (TCCs and PCCs). The new
agenda for partnership as described by Under-
Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra is thus
essential. In particular, earlier and more substantive
consultations by the Security Council with troop and
police contributors would be of significant importance,
since enhanced cooperation would enable the design of
mandates based on a clear picture of available troops
and police, and thus could provide realistic options for
what can and cannot be achieved. As a result, mandates
would have earlier and wider acceptance from troop
contributors, and benchmarking would be easier.

Given the operational and political risks that
United Nations peacekeepers face in tough
environments, it is natural that the troop- and police-
contributing countries want an increased say in how
operations are run. There have been a number of
experiments on how to include TCCs and PCCs more
effectively in monitoring and sustaining missions.
Building on these examples and experiences, we
could- and we should - look for a more concrete
and regular process of dialogue with the TCCs and
PCCs. As a dedicated troop- and police-contributing
country, Turkey has a keen interest in strengthening the
viability, sustainability and effectiveness of United
Nations peacekeeping and will continue to maintain its
commitment to that end.

In conclusion, despite the scale and complexity of
the challenges facing United Nations peace operations,
we believe that this is not a moment for despair.
Indeed, times of crisis carry with them opportunities
for reform and progress. And it is encouraging to see
that there is a true willingness and a strong desire for
fresh ideas, both in the Secretariat and among Member
States, for reviewing and reforming how the United
Nations system responds to conflicts. The challenge
now is to translate this will into concrete steps and
reforms.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Canada.

