Mr. Giraldo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. I
also welcome your initiative to organize this event.

I also congratulate Mexico for its handling of the
presidency of the Council last month.

As stated by the President in the document
distributed on the topic, the United Nations Charter
offers the Security Council vast possibilities of action
to prevent disputes from arising between parties, to
preclude disputes from escalating into conflicts and to
contain and resolve conflicts when they occur. These
possibilities, provided for in Chapter VI of the Charter,
are complemented by the competences given to the
General Assembly in Articles 11 and 12 and to the
Secretary-General in Article 99, as well as by the three
resolutions of the General Assembly mentioned by the
President in his document.

Colombia, which has based its international
policy on the full respect and promotion of the
principles and purposes consecrated in the United
Nations Charter, grants particular importance to the
pacific prevention of disputes based on the principles
of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention,
good faith and the spirit of cooperation. In seeking a
prompt and fair settlement of a dispute, we prefer
direct negotiations as an efficient and flexible means,
but we recognize that States have the right to choose
freely from other legitimate ways that they may
consider more appropriate.

The Charter of the United Nations and the 1982
Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes refer only to the pacific
settlement of international disputes - in other words,
between States - and to the prevention of
international conflicts. Nowadays, the world in general
and the United Nations in particular are concerned with
internal conflicts in many States. In this regard, it has
also been acknowledged that it is the affected State's
fundamental responsibility to prevent and eliminate
disputes and conflicts and that any activity undertaken
by United Nations organs must be at that State's
request. Because many of these conflicts evolve in
circumstances of an international and transnational
nature, the principle of international cooperation in the
resolution of such conflicts at the regional and global
levels acquires particular importance.

Colombia would call the attention of this Council
and of the international community to the external
factors that affect many of the internal armed conflicts
that exist throughout the world. Such factors require
the commitment and cooperation of all States and
international institutions, starting with the United
Nations. The role of diamonds in the financing of
armed conflict in Africa has been well recognized.
Many important mechanisms have been created to
monitor the international trade in diamonds and to
prevent its profits from fuelling the conflict.

In the same way, it is necessary to recognize the
role of the illicit drug trade, a criminal transnational
activity, and related crimes in the funding of internal
armed conflicts. A terrible alliance has been forged
between drug traffickers and illegal armed groups that
finance themselves through such activities. The
weapons and explosives by which these groups spread
death are negotiated for and acquired externally. They
are paid for using international banking accounts
fattened by the drug trade. The chemical precursors
indispensable to fabricate illicit drugs continue to reach
countries in conflict without any appreciable control.

All of these external elements not only fuel such
internal armed conflicts, but also increase the violation
of human rights, a crucial topic for the United Nations
and other international organizations, as well as for
many Member States.

In resolution 44/21, the General Assembly

"Encourages Member States to consult and
cooperate within the framework of the United
Nations, the Security Council, the General
Assembly and their appropriate subsidiary bodies
in order to find multifaceted approaches to
implement and strengthen the principles and the
system of international peace, security and
international cooperation laid down in the
Charter." (resolution 44/2], para. 3)

The issue of external factors that fuel internal conflicts
deserves such an approach, which demands the action
of States and of international and regional
organizations.

Now that the need to address the global illicit
drug problem has been recognized, that approach has to
be based on the principle of shared responsibility. In
sound logic, if an internal conflict is financed by the
drug trade, the consumers of illicit drugs should share
the responsibility for that conflict and of the violations
of human rights and of international humanitarian law
that occur in it. I must insist on that point. That is why
the international community is overdue in initiating
effective cooperation on this issue. Such cooperation,
in the framework of the United Nations, would set a
course and guide the international community in its
efforts to support peoples and States that work to
maintain the lofty principles of this Organization and
that struggle daily for the protection of the dignity of
human beings.

