Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2013/67l).

Many challenges undoubtedly remain in Central
Africa, as mentioned by Mr. Abou Moussa, including
ever-increasing acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
and the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which remains fragile despite the victory over
the Mouvement du 23 mars. I will focus my remarks on
two topics: the Central African Republic and the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA).

With regard to the Central African Republic,
I would like my statement to be heard as a warning,
given the exceptional seriousness of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic, and as an
appeal. I believe that no one can underestimate the risk
of the humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which could lead to killings and violence on
a massive scale ifthe international community does not
intervene. I can only advise participants in this meeting
to meet the representatives of the humanitarian agencies
and entities of the Organization or of non-governmental
organizations who are courageously working in the
Central African Republic.

If they were to do so, they would all hear horrific
reports of the situation of the population, who are
terrorized and at risk from gangs of bandits - let us br
frank - and, at the same time, from being immersed
in interreligious violence. The Christians are afraid of
the Muslims. The Muslims are afraid of the Christians.
They are both made up of militia who, of course, blindly
engage in violence, the primary victims of which are
civilians, including women and children. We must act
and respond very swiftly in order to prevent the worst,
which unfortunately happened 20 years ago on that
same continent.

I have said that the humanitarian situation is
extremely dangerous. The entire Central African
population, half of which is made up of children, is
affected. More than 1 million people suffer from food
insecurity and 400,000 have been displaced. There are
almost daily cases of extorsion, violence and killings
in a country where the State no longer exists. There
is no State whatsoever. There are no longer any State
authorities. There are only militia, who are making
their own laws. So we must act. My statement is also an
appeal to the international community.
I am well aware that the Central African Republic
is a country that is not well known. We do not often
think about it and is not often on the front pages.
Nevertheless, today, an extremely serious tragedy is
taking place there. It is not only a moral tragedy, which
would be sufficient to mobilize us, but also a tragedy
that may have repercussions for the stability of the
entire region. We have already seen incidents reported
on the border between the Central African Republic and
Cameroon. So there is the risk of the Central African
Republic becoming a failed State in Central Africa and
a centre ofinstability for all States of the region.

The States of the region have responded. We
must of course commend the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African
Union. Those States decided to deploy the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic. They therefore deserve the support of the
United Nations and, of course, the bilateral support
of all relevant States. At the initiative of France, the
Council will have the opportunity to consider in
detail the resources that could be used to support that
force and to find a lasting solution to the crisis in the
Central African Republic. As I have said, all those
humanitarian, political and security challenges require
all actors to cooperate. In that regard, UNOCA must
work with regional and subregional organizations.

Having talked about the the Central African
Republic and tried to convince participants and my
colleagues of the seriousness of the situation there, I
will now turn to the other major focus of my colleagues'
statements, that is, the Lord's Resistance Army.
Here, I can only reiterate what has already been said,
namely, that I am very pleased with the recent progress
in combating that armed group, whose cruelty and
Violence are extreme. We therefore encourage relevant
States and partners to continue along that path in order
to put an end to the threat.

The offensive launched by the African Union
against the LRA is a reality. We have said that. The
African Union's Regional Task Force to fight the LRA
has proved its effectiveness. Here, we should of course
commend Uganda and other contributing regional
countries for their commitment. We must now ensure
that the LRA does not benefit from a security vacuum
to prosper. Another issue linked to the situation in the
Central African Republic is to ensure that the western
part of the country does not become a safe haven for
LRA terrorists.

At the same time, we must not forget the need for
justice. We must bring to justice the principal Lord's
Resistance Army leaders, in particular Joseph Kony,
and encourage all States concerned to increase their
cooperation and collaboration with the International
Criminal Court in that regard. Measures to protect
civilians must of course be strengthened. That means
further sharing of information and intelligence among
regional United Nations operations and offices and
between the Organization and the African Union
regional force. Access and humanitarian assistance to
those areas affected by the the Lord's Resistance Army,
which are often by defintion very isolated and remote,
must also be made possible as soon as possible.

France supports all efforts through its contribution
to the African Peace Facility of the European Union.
With regard to the Central African Republic, members
know that France is present in Bangui and will strenthen
its presence in order to provide effective support to the
African force. It will also support LRA-affected States
bilaterally.

The LRA-affected States have a leading role to
play, together with the African Union, in the fight
against that group. Let us stand by their side.

