Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): When the
Security Council was last briefed on the situation in
Afghanistan some two months ago, the prevailing
concern was the deteriorating security situation across
large areas of the country.

The past few weeks are a reminder that, as the
final and most important stages of the peace process
move ahead, many of the fundamental and structural
causes of insecurity remain unresolved. This was
recently clearly demonstrated in the north, when on 9
October, after months of relative calm, the arrest of
elements affiliated with J amiat sparked factional
tensions that flared into the worst fighting in the region
since the signing of the Bonn Agreement.

Sporadic tribal and inter-factional conflicts also
contribute to insecurity in the provinces of the south,
southeast and cast, but the primary source of insecurity
remains the risk of terrorist attacks and continued and
sizeable cross-border infiltration by suspected Taliban,
Al Qaeda, and Hizb-I-Islami elements. With the
exception of Badakhshan province, every border
district - from Nimroz province in the southwest to
Nuristan province in the northeast - was classified as
high risk in the latest assessment of the United Nations
Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD) on 15 October.
Indeed, in several border districts - Maruf in
Kandahar and Barmal and Gayan in Paktika - the
Taliban have been able to establish de facto control
over district administration.

Attacks by terrorists against Government,
military and humanitarian personnel are steadily
increasing. Recent attacks against humanitarian
organizations have primarily targeted national, rather
than international, personnel. In the past six weeks,
four national staff of the Danish Committee for Aid to
Afghan Refugees (DACAAR), a non-governmental
organization (NGO), were murdered by Taliban in
Ghazni on 8 September. According to the sole survivor,
before being shot, the victims were informed that they
were to be killed as punishment for working with
NGOs. This incident was followed by the killing on 24
September of two staff members of the Voluntary
Association for Rehabilitation of Afghanistan (VARA),
an Afghan NGO, in Helmand province. And, on 27
September, in the same province, seven security guards
from the Arghandab Valley Authority were killed in
Lashkar Gah city when their vehicle was struck by a
rocket-propelled grenade. These three incidents are
only the most serious; elsewhere, mine-clearance teams
and clearly marked NGO vehicles and offices have
come under attack.

Caution must be exercised in attributing all
significant incidents to Taliban forces, as there other,
non-Taliban forces that also take advantage of
instability, including narcotics traffickers. Yet,
regardless of the identity or the origin of the
perpetrators, attacks against humanitarian workers
seriously jeopardize the safety of personnel and limit
the ability to effectively conduct reconstruction and to
support political activities.
The trend towards targeting civilians who support
the central Government and the peace process supports
the view that the United Nations itself must also be
seen as a target. As a result of increased terrorist
activities, the United Nations and humanitarian
community have taken further security precautions,
particularly in the south. All United Nations missions
are temporarily suspended in Nimroz, Helmand,
Uruzgan and Zabul provinces. In Kandahar, armed
escorts are required in four districts, and the missions
are suspended in the other five. Following the killings
in Helmand province on 24 and 27 September, to which
I have just referred, the majority of humanitarian
organizations working in that part of the country have
imposed a travel ban outside Kandahar city and its
immediate environs. Those security precautions -
particularly the suspension of operations - are
considerably restricting reconstruction and the political
process, including the ability of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to
ensure effective monitoring of the registration of
electors for the Constitutional Loya Jirga in the south
of the country.

(spoke in English)

Despite serious challenges, the Afghan
Government has made some progress in addressing the
causes of insecurity. First among those steps, reform of
the senior level of the Ministry of Defence has been
completed. On 20 September, President Karzai
announced the list of appointees to the twenty-two
senior positions within the new organizational
structure. The appointment of those individuals has
gone some way towards better representation of the full
ethnic and geographic diversity of Afghanistan, and
should bring a level of professionalism and
accountability to a State institution largely seen as
above the law.

Credible reform of the Ministry of Defence has
been regarded as a prerequisite for successfully
disarming factional armies. Of concern are indications
that the majority of Afghans - particularly among the
Pashtun population in the south - believe the reform
has kept real power in the hands of the Panjshiris. The
new Ministry of Defence will have to quickly prove
that it is pursuing a national policy, despite the
continuity provided by Minister Fahim and the new
Panjshiri chief of staff, Bismillah Khan, and that the
newly appointed staff have effective responsibility and
authority.

Although the reform was less sweeping than
expected, it marked a step in the right direction to
permit the pilot disarmament, demobilization, and
reintegration (DDR) programme to proceed, starting
today in Kunduz. The initiation of the DDR programme
ahead of the election of the majority of Constitutional
Loya Jirga delegates should help to alleviate concerns
over the constitutional deliberations. The programme's
success, meanwhile, should provide the best indication
of whether reform of the Ministry of Defence went far
enough to generate the public confidence necessary for
undertaking the full DDR exercise, and it will be a
primary determinant of the extent to which the
population at large believes that the outcome of
national political processes is based not on the rule of
the gun, but on the popular will of the Afghan people.
Further reforms are needed in national security
ministries and all other government ministries -
which remain influenced by factional and ethnic
interests - so that they become the levers of the State
instruments of a national system of government.

Allow me to briefly bring the Council up to date
on the status of the constitutional reform and the
electoral registration. In September, in consultation
with the Secretariat of the Constitutional Commission,
President Karzai postponed the Constitutional Loya
Jirga until the end of Ramadan, between the end of
November and early December. The revised
schedule - which is still within the timetable set by
Bonn - has provided the Commission more time for
finalizing the draft constitution, which is now with the
President.

Five hundred delegates will participate in the
Constitutional Loya Jirga, of whom 344 will be elected
on a provincial basis by the district representatives of
the 2002 Emergency Loya Jirga, who make up the
electorate that will vote for the elected Constitutional
Loya Jirga delegates. The registration of that electorate
began on 28 September in all provinces except
Kunduz, where it began on 22 September, and in the
eastern region, where it began on 1 October. To date,
the registration process has been completed in some 20
provinces. It is estimated that nearly 76 per cent of the
electorate has been registered in those areas. For the
2002 Emergency Loya Jirga, 25 districts did not elect
representatives. Therefore, by-elections have been held
to add those districts to the electorate. The by-
elections, held so far in 24 out of the 25 districts - the
exception was Daulat Yar, in Ghor province - have
added approximately 1,000 voters to the electorate.

There has been some concern regarding
registration in Logar, Samangan, Sari Pul and Ghor
provinces, where higher than expected percentages of
the electorate did not register. In some areas, that was
due to problems with travel or to absence for work
abroad, but elsewhere it was attributable to insecurity
caused by factional fighting and to intimidation by
local authorities and commanders. The Secretariat of
the Constitutional Commission is considering ways to
ensure that district representatives in those areas are
given an opportunity to register at a later stage.

In order to minimize potential acts of intimidation
and violence against candidates, actual election of
delegates is scheduled to take place just ahead of the
Loya Jirga, with the exception of Badakhshan, where
the onset of winter has necessitated early elections. But
that is not expected to jeopardize delegates, as the
north-east region has not experienced any security
incidents during the registration phase. The rules of
procedure for the Constitutional Loya Jirga elections
have been finalized and distributed to all regions along
with the final seat allocation per province. National
advisory committees for special-category elections -
including women, refugees and internally displaced
persons, nomads and Hindus and Sikhs - are being
established to provide guidance and oversight on
nomination and election procedures as well as to assist
in public education regarding the electoral process.

The adoption of a new Afghan constitution by a
Constitutional Loya Jirga will establish the legal
foundation for re-establishing the rule of law and for
ongoing reconstruction efforts. It will also determine
the form of government and thus provide the basis for
national elections.

The legal and institutional structures necessary
for the national election are gradually being put in
place. The registration decree, establishing the
guidelines for who is eligible to vote, was finalized on
9 September and the political parties law, laying out the
legal framework for the formation of political parties,
was ratified on 12 October. The Ministry of Justice has
received requests for registration from more than 100
parties. Although the final political parties law is an
improvement on the original draft, it is less than
perfect. In particular, there may be room for concern
regarding parties' rights to assembly and free
expression as well as the threshold for parties' being
dissolved by the Government.

The timeline for deployment of the registration
teams has been moved back from 15 October 2003, as
originally envisioned, to 1 December. Deployment will
begin in the eight regional centres. As soon as possible
thereafter, registration will begin in 20 to 25 additional
urban sites - preferably where there is a United
Nations presence, and, obviously, subject to security
assessments. That decision was taken because the
current availability of funds was insufficient to
implement the previous strategy of a broader start.

The establishment of the regional offices of the
Interim Afghan Electoral Commission will be
completed in the coming days. The immediate task
facing the Commission is to begin hiring the 800
registrars needed so as to ensure that the full
complement of trained registrars are ready for
December.

The security project to support the registration is
also moving ahead. Under the plan, police contingents
of four officers - two national and two provincial -
will receive special training prior to being assigned to
accompany registration teams. In this regard, the recent
topping up of the Law and Order Trust Fund for
Afghanistan (LOTFA) by the European Union is a
positive development.

The success of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process and the electoral registration
exercise will be dependent upon sufficient
improvement in security conditions to allow
deployment of staff beyond major urban centres.
Indeed, if it were held today, the electoral process
would not succeed. Some 60 per cent of the south and
some 20 per cent of the south-east and east are at any
one time not freely accessible. As this corresponds to
areas that are heavily populated by Pashtuns, the result
would be disenfranchisement, which would be
politically untenable.

The unanimous vote by the Security Council last
week approving expansion of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) beyond Kabul is a welcome
and much-needed development. The new ISAF
mandate clears the way for extending international
security assistance to where it is most needed
throughout the country, and I would therefore
encourage Member States to provide necessary and
appropriate resources to do that. ISAF expansion
should help to provide a secure environment for the
implementation of the Bonn process and to extend the
authority of the central Government into the provinces
by creating space for new national security institutions,
as well as for other nascent State institutions.

The decision by Germany to deploy a Provincial
Reconstruction Team (PRT) to Kunduz is a welcome
first step - one that will hopefully encourage other
countries to consider how they can best contribute.
However, the PRT concept provides only some, not all,
of the possible benefits of a more robust ISAF
expansion. In addition to the PRT concept, a more
robust deployment of ISAF peacekeepers, short-term
rapid reaction deployments and a presence on major
highways - indeed, a mix of approaches for each
region - could make major inroads in helping to
resolve the security situation. Any initiative to improve
the security environment in Afghanistan is welcome,
provided that it supports the national agenda of
furthering the Bonn process and of expanding
Government authority in a coherent, commonly
understood and coordinated manner.

The international community has also taken steps
to improve the overall security situation in Afghanistan
with available assets on the ground. A joint
coordination cell has been established to improve
coordination between the Afghan Government, the
United Nations, NATO and the coalition in support of
the Bonn process. The joint coordination cell should
assist in coordinating security support and developing
operational plans for parallel Bonn activities,
particularly in insecure areas, as well as dealing with
requests for coalition and ISAF assistance.

Afghans expect their Government to provide
security and social services. Without either, confidence
in the peace process and the transitional administration
will fade, opening the door for Taliban and other anti-
Government forces. Insecurity has, without question,
slowed the delivery of reconstruction - if not outright
prevented it in the most insecure areas. Where
construction projects have gone ahead in spite of the
dangers posed by Taliban and other insurgents, delays
and protective measures for staff have inflated the
projected costs of those projects. Too often, this cost
has also been paid in human life.

Yet it is also true that when the international
donors conference was held in Tokyo in 2002, the
extent of Afghanistan's needs was not fully
appreciated. At that time, estimates by the World Bank
ran upwards of $10 billion. It is now clear that
significantly greater resources are required if
Afghanistan is to recover from the near total
devastation of its infrastructure and social capital after
years of war. Whereas in Tokyo donors pledged some
$4.5 billion for reconstruction over five years, the
Ministry of Finance now believes that $6 billion will
be needed each year if its reconstruction needs are to
be met.

The recent International Monetary Fund and
World Bank meeting in Dubai provided an opportunity
for donors to recommit to Afghanistan. The only
pledges actually made, however, were the
announcement by the United States of some $1.2
billion for Afghanistan, including $600 million for
security and $400 million in support of reconstruction,
and a commitment by the European Union of 50
million euros to the LOTFA. Ministers and senior
representatives from 22 Member States further
reaffirmed their commitment to Afghanistan at the
high-level ad hoc meeting held on the margins of the
General Assembly last month.

Over time, the proportion of funding supplied by
domestic revenues and private investment will need to
increase, as will the role of national institutions in
providing services and protection for the Afghan
citizenry. In the meantime, however, Afghanistan is
still dependent on the continued support of the
international community. Forward momentum across
the parallel tracks of security, reconstruction and
development and the Bonn political process must be
maintained if the institutions of State are to take hold.

Over the long term, guaranteeing peace and
stability in Afghanistan will require national unity. The
creation of a multi-ethnic Government, bound by a
new, broadly agreed constitution, is essential to this
process, as only in that way will all Afghans be able to
have confidence that the central Government is
accountable to and serves the interests of its people.

In the short term, however, there are worrying
signs that the political compact that has allowed the
Government to press ahead with Bonn in spite of the
differences among its individual members may be
weakening. Over the past few weeks, the divisions
between those who would turn the corner on
Afghanistan's past and those who would preserve their
entitlement appear to have deepened. This was most
clearly demonstrated by the several meetings held
among the so-called jihadi leadership during President
Karzai's absence for the General Assembly. Those
divisions were later downplayed, but they nonetheless
demonstrate that a balance must be struck between
moving the peace process forward and ensuring that the
major stakeholders remain willing participants.

As the Bonn process enters its final stage, the
Afghan Government and the international community
will embark upon their most challenging and far-
reaching political undertakings. Afghans have many
reasons to be optimistic that those undertakings will
provide a solid foundation for a stable Afghanistan.
However, there are still significant obstacles standing
in the way, not least the lack of security. Maintaining
the forward momentum that has been building in the
months since Bonn will require the determination of
the Afghan people and the will of the international
community. The expansion of security assistance
provides a critical element of this equation; its
expected benefits must now be realized.

