I thank the Secretary-General of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) for her briefing on the work of the Organization, and the other briefers for their informative remarks. The United States is pleased to take this opportunity to celebrate the Organization's fiftieth anniversary. Since its creation, the OIF has used its good offices, its ability to mobilize French-speaking professionals and technical experts, and its coordination capabilities to help maintain peace, strengthen democratic institutions, and reinforce human rights. These efforts have played out not just in French-speaking countries, but all over the world. Collaboration and coordination between the OIF and the United Nations have been particularly noteworthy in challenging situations. Working with at-risk youth populations in Mali is just one example of where the OIF and the United Nations have worked hand-in-hand in complex environments to maintain international peace and security. The OIF's work to increase the number of qualified peacekeepers and to promote women's participation in peacekeeping has been particularly valuable. These efforts closely parallel two of the United States' top priorities in the United Nations. Because we have seen the direct consequences of poor performance in peacekeeping, we are fiercely committed to having highly-qualified peacekeepers, and the OIF's initiatives have a direct and positive impact on that front. And we know that more women peacekeepers mean better peacekeeping performance and effectiveness. On that note, I would also like to congratulate my Indonesian colleagues for the adoption of last month's important resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping. We also know the ability of peacekeepers to communicate with local populations is tremendously important when working to build trust, gather timely information and deliver much-needed security. With over 50 per cent of the peacekeeping budget dedicated to operations in Francophone areas, the OIF serves a vital function in preparing Francophone peacekeepers to face the dynamic and complex environments they are called to work in. We commend the OIF's efforts to build up the reserve of French-speaking peacekeepers working in United Nations peace operations, to promote peacekeeping reforms, and to reinforce African peacekeeping capabilities in Francophone areas.
