Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2356 (2017) today. Through the resolution and
our unity, we have sent a clear message to the regime of
the Democratic People's Republic ofKorea - faced with
a sustained pattern of reckless, belligerent behaviour
from Pyongyang, we, the Security Council, will act.
Repeated missile launches threaten our allies and
partners in the Republic of Korea, Japan and the wider
region. With each and every launch and missile test, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea demonstrates a
total disregard for international security. They put their
destructive ambitions above the welfare of their own
people. This pattern simply cannot continue.

Multiple missiles have been fired this year alone.
The regime's actions and rhetoric shows clear intent
to pursue its illegal weapons programme. We need to
show that there are consequences and that the whole
international community stands in support of the
Council in tackling this threat.

So, for the third time in 18 months, the Council
has had no choice but to take decisive action. Through
this resolution under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, we will restrict the ability of
key individuals and entities from the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to assist or finance illegal
weapons programmes - building on the analysis and
recommendations from the United Nations Panel of
Experts. We will blunt their ability to generate the
revenue needed to prop up the regime's illegal nuclear-
and ballistic-missile programmes.

Our signal is clear: we will not tolerate nor be
distracted by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's wide range of cover activities that prop up
their illegal programmes. The resolutions adopted by
the Council impose wide-ranging sanctions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and they have
bite. Through them, tangible pressure is being brought
to bear on a regime that has acted with impunity for far
too long. Let me be clear, it is the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea that has a clear choice to make on
the way forward: either continue its destabilizing,
dangerous actions or change its behaviour and begin to
build a future for its people.

Together, we, the international community, must be
steadfast when enforcing these new sanctions, as well
as all previous measures adopted by the Council. All
Member States must do their part to fully implement the
sanctions. We have a collective commitment to address
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's behaviour.
We must show our collective resolve to bring an end to
those destabilizing, illegal actions.

