Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2139 (2014) on the Syrian humanitarian
cr1s1s.
The aim ofthe resolution is simple: it seeks to protect
civilians affected by the conflict in Syria. It demands
that rapid, safe and unhindered humanitarian access be
authorized across conflict lines and across borders, so
that humanitarian assistance can be conveyed along the
most direct routes to the people who need it. It recalls
that starvation of civilians as a method of combat is
prohibited under international humanitarian law. It
reaffirms that those who have committed violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights in
Syria must be brought to justice. Finally, it underscores
the importance of finding a political solution to the
Syrian conflict.

In recent weeks, along with our colleagues from
Australia and Jordan, we worked to build a consensus
around a strong resolution that would enable us to
change the situation on the ground.

By adopting resolution 2139 (2014), the Security
Council is sending a clear and unified message to all
parties to the conflict in Syria with a view to ensuring
that humanitarian access to all Syrians in need is
guaranteed, that the siege of cities where civilians are
trapped is lifted, and that an end be put to the senseless
atrocities and indiscriminate bombings and to the use
of barrels bombs, whose only goal is to the civilian
population.

The requests that the Security Council made in
the presidential statement adopted on 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/ 15) unfortunately were not followed
up on. The humanitarian situation has continued
to deteriorate at an unacceptable pace. Today
approximately 10 million Syrians, half of whom are
children, are in need of urgent humanitarian assistance.
More than 3 million of them are living in areas that are
difficult to access. More than 2.4 million Syrians, more
than half of whom are children, have had to take refuge
in neighbouring countries, primarily Lebanon and
Jordan. Given that tragic deterioration of the situation,
the Security Council had to act.

With today's unanimous vote, the Security Council
is shouldering its responsibilities. Henceforth it is up
to the parties to the conflict in Syria, primarily the
Syrian authorities, to fully and swiftly implement the
provisions of the resolution that we have just adopted
and the provisions of the presidential statement of
2 October 2013.

The Syrian authorities must endorse without
further delay the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/522, annex). The parties must work towards a
genuine political transition that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people.

The resolution includes provisions that will enable
the Security Council to verify in a precise manner
whether its demands have been implemented on the
ground. The Council expresses its intent, in the case
of non-compliance with the resolution, to take further
steps to support the vital humanitarian efforts in Syria.

Today, to the Council's credit, international
humanitarian law and the needs of the Syrian people
have prevailed over the interests of those who cling
to power in Syria. Luxembourg is proud to have
contributed actively to this result. We sincerely hope
that this will mark a turning point for the Syrian people.

