Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing.
China has listened carefully to the statements of the
representatives of Palestine and Israel. The question of
Palestine is fundamental to the Middle East issue and
is crucial to the issue of achieving peace in the Middle
East. The current Palestinian-Israeli situation remains
fragile, with heightened tensions. The humanitarian
situation in Gaza remains grim. China calls on the
Security Council and the international community
to remain united and to work with a greater sense of
urgency to promote a political settlement to the question
of Palestine, which is in the fundamental interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis and is what the region
and the world are waiting for.

The right approach to finding a political settlement
of the question of Palestine is through a two-State
solution. The international community must remain
committed to the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, and must step up its efforts to see negotiations
resumed so as to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace through dialogue and negotiation,
without delay.

China has always firmly supported and promoted
the Middle East peace process. We support the just
cause of the Palestinian people in their desire to see
their legitimate national rights restored. We support
the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
State of Palestine, based on the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital. China's position on that
issue will not change. Last July, with the aim of helping
to promote a settlement of the question of Palestine,
President Xi Jinping of China put forward a four-point
proposal calling for the promotion of a political process
based on a two-State solution; adherence to a shared,
comprehensive, united and sustainable security concept;
improved coordination of international efforts to rally
support for peace; and implementation of a holistic
approach promoting peace through development. On
that basis, China will endeavour to play a constructive
role in promoting a solution to the Palestinian question.

The issue of Jerusalem is complex and sensitive,
and is at the very heart of a solution to the question of
Palestine. Over the years, the issue of Jerusalem has
been addressed in many Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
Its status has come under intense scrutiny recently.
China believes that efforts to address the issue should
be based on the following points.

First, Jerusalem's diverse history must be respected.
It involves very complex historical, religious and ethnic
factors. Its status must be dealt with based on respect
for the various religious and ethnic sensitivities. We
must avoid any simplified approaches to the issue.

Secondly, equity and fairness should be ensured.
Only through a fair approach that accommodates the
views of all of the parties concerned will it be possible
to find a solution that they will accept.

Thirdly, the international consensus on the issue
must be implemented. The status of Jerusalem must
be decided by the parties concerned on the basis of
final-status negotiations. That international consensus
has been developed through the various political and
legal instruments, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Fourthly, we need peaceful coexistence. Jerusalem
is the common home of different ethnicities and
religions. Palestine and Israel must respect each other's
right to existence and avoid taking actions that might
further escalate the situation.

At present, the Middle East region is in turmoil.
The occupied Palestinian territories are facing
even greater security and humanitarian challenges,
especially in Gaza, where the humanitarian crisis
has worsened. The international community must
not forget millions of Palestinian refugees, to whom
humanitarian assistance must continue to be provided.
We call upon the parties to scale up their support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and to countries that have
hosted Palestinian refugees - including Lebanon,
Jordan and Syria - so as to ease the pressure that these
refugees have been facing.

