Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Executive
Director Beasley for their briefings. China supports
the work of Special Envoy Griffiths in advancing the
political process in Yemen and commends the United
Nations, including the World Food Programme and
other relevant agencies for their tireless efforts to
improve the humanitarian situation in Yemen.

The Stockholm Agreement is an important step
towards the political settlement of the Yemeni issue.
After the Agreement was reached, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2451 (2018) to endorse it.
The Stockholm Agreement should be implemented
in earnest. Of course, since the Agreement is only a
framework, it is inevitable that we will encounter
difficulties and challenges during its implementation.
We must build confidence and overcome difficulties to
push for its early implementation.

We have seen that, thanks to the efforts of the
parties to the conflict, notable progress has been made
in the implementation of the Agreement, the ceasefire
in Al-Hudaydah is largely holding and redeployment
has also advanced. However, we should also realize that
differences remain between the parties on outstanding
issues, such as the composition of local security forces
and prisoner exchange. We hope that the Special Envoy,
the United Nations Mission to Support the Hudaydah
Agreement (UNMHA) and the Redeployment
Coordination Committee will strengthen coordination
and enhance synergies to resolve those issues.

The Yemeni parties must support and cooperate
with those efforts. The Security Council should remain
united and provide political support, in accordance
with the relevant Council resolutions. China condemns
all attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure.

Recently, the Secretary-General submitted a review
of UNMHA, as requested by the Council in resolution
2452 (2019). Since the deployment of the Mission, the
overall violence in Al-Hudaydah has declined and the
Mission's operations have been effective, on the whole.
The Yemeni parties need to strengthen cooperation with
the United Nations in order to assist with and facilitate
the Mission's deployment.

China supports the Yemeni parties on the basis
of relevant Council resolutions, including resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative
and its Implementation Mechanism, and the outcome
of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference
in returning to the track of dialogue and resolving
the conflict through political means. The sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Yemen must be safeguarded. In the long run, it is
essential to resume political talks for peace and seek a
comprehensive solution.

China is deeply concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Yemen. The people of Yemen
have suffered immensely from conflict, hunger, disease
and displacement. The international community must
increase assistance and honour its commitments in a
timely manner. The relevant parties need to ensure
humanitarian access in Yemen so that humanitarian
assistance can reach all people in need in all regions.

China has been closely following the food prices
in Yemen. Since July 2017, China has sent seven
shipments of rice to Yemen, totalling 7,600 tons. China
will continue providing humanitarian assistance to
Yemen to the best of its ability.

