Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): No one here doubts that the transformative
processes that have engulfed the Middle East are
serious and long-term in nature. Their impact is often
difficult to predict and will continue for a long time to
come. Russia, which has unswervingly supported the
yearning of the peoples of the region for a better life,
consistently champions non-violent and evolutionary
forms of change - which should not be achieved at the
cost of loss of life and destruction.

Any internal political differences must be resolved
peaceably by the peoples concerned themselves,
through national dialogue and without outside
interference, especially interference involving force.
That principled approach was reaffirmed by Russian
President Vladimir V. Putin during his recent visits
and talks with the leaders of Israel, Jordan and the
Palestinian Authority.

At the same time, as we have underscored
repeatedly, the events of the Arab Spring cannot be
used as a pretext to postpone resolving issues related
to an Arab-Israeli settlement. Quite to the contrary,
progress towards a comprehensive, fair and robust
peace between Israelis and Palestinians on the basis
of the well-known international legal platform would
promote the overall normalization of the situation in
the region.

Unfortunately, the situation with regard to
the Israeli-Palestinian track continues to stagnate.
The status quo is, quite obviously, fragile, and it is
periodically interrupted by flare-ups of confrontation,
which further jeopardizes the prospects for achieving
a just settlement on the basis of the two-State solution.
We must also point out the stalemate with regard to
implementing the programme of action for a final
settlement before the end of 2012, pursuant to the now
almost year-old statement of the Quartet issued in New
York (see SG/2178).

In spite of the efforts of the Quartet and other
interested parties, including Jordan, we have thus far
not succeeded in relaunching the negotiating process.
However, that is not a reason to give up. We will
continue to work within the framework of the Quartet
and bilateral channels to restore positive momentum to
the process.

Steps to promote an atmosphere of trust between
Ramallah and Tel Aviv could help to break the
deadlock. For Israel that could include, for example,
releasing Palestinian detainees held in Israelijails since
before the Oslo Agreement and allowing the transfer
to the Palestinian Authority of goods, including
those of Russian manufacture stored in Jordan. In
that connection, we welcome the decision by Israeli
authorities to transfer tax and customs revenues to the
Palestinians. That step, just as the financial assistance
provided by Saudi Arabia, should have a positive impact
on the socio-economic situation in the Palestinian
territories.

The ongoing Israeli settlement activity, including
in East Jerusalem, is impeding the establishment of
a conducive climate and destroying the prospects for
a two-State solution. That policy of creating a fait
accompli blatantly violates the requirements of the
road map and aims to prejudice the outcome of final
status negotiations. Such activity is illegal and must end
immediately.

It is regrettable that the veto by the United States
of America on a draft resolution on settlements (see S/PV.6484) prevented the Council from expressing itself
on such an important political and humanitarian issue.
We are seriously concerned about the deterioration in
the grave humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
which is fuelling radical activity.

Restoring Palestinian national unity on the basis
of the Palestine Liberation Organization platform
and the Arab Peace Initiative is an important element
in the success of a future settlement. Without that, a
full-fledged negotiating process and the practical
implementation of agreements cannot be considered.
The logical conclusion of that process should be the
reunification of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip under
legitimate Palestinian authorities. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of Egypt's new leadership, headed
by President Morsy.

For many months now, the members of the
Security Council have had on the table before them
an application by the Palestinians for admission to the
United Nations as a full-fledged Member State. We
back the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people for
self-determination and see no incompatibility between
the implementation of those rights and the pressing
need to resume negotiations. The vulgar forms of
pressure that the Palestinian people are subjected to in
their desire to fulfil those legitimate aspirations should
be condemned.

The unanimous adoption by the Security Council
on 20 July of resolution 2059 (2012) on extending the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria served
as an important indication of the need for both sides,
including the opposition, to cease violence. The
Council's unanimity demonstrates its ability to achieve
consensus. We are referring, in that regard, to tried,
tested and balanced political decisions. In backing the
work of the Mission, Russia has recently informed the
Secretariat of its readiness to contribute 30 military
observers to it.

The position of the Russian Federation is consistent
in nature and is based on principle. We advocate
the rapid peaceful settlement of the crisis by the
Syrians themselves, without foreign interference,
through national dialogue between the Government
and the opposition, during which they could freely,
democratically and without any preconditions determine
the future order of the country. That position is fully
in keeping with the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), which laid the foundation for the activity of
Kofi Annan's Action Group for Syria. Against the
backdrop of an unfolding spiral of violence, intense
pressure on both Damascus and all of the opposition
groups and strict compliance with Kofi Annan's plan
and the Geneva agreements are needed. The situation is
dangerous because the opposition, a significant part of
which does not wish to even hear of dialogue, is being
told to continue with the armed struggle, which only
exacerbates the confrontations and destabilization.

The United States of America has recently spoken
of its intention to circumvent the Security Council.
In essence, that is nothing new as such a policy has
been followed by Washington and a number of other
capitals since the beginning of the crisis in Syria,
which has significantly exacerbated it. It is therefore
those Member States that should bear the burden of
responsibility for the likely catastrophic consequences
of those actions.

The Russian Federation intends to continue to
work towards a consensus in order to reach an internal
Syrian dialogue. We are ready to afford both the
opposition and the Government a negotiation platform
in Moscow to forge contacts to unify the opposition and
for possible negotiations between representatives of the
Government and the opposition.

In conclusion, a lot of attention has been paid to the
recent statement by the representative of the Ministry
for Foreign Affairs of Syria with regard to the possible
use of chemical weapons in case of foreign aggression.
We assume that the authorities of the country will
continue to abide unswervingly by the international
commitments they subscribed to in 1968 when they
acceded to the 1925 Geneva Protocol for the Prohibition

of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or Other
Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare.

