Mrs. Ogata (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees): I am pleased to have the
opportunity to comment on the Secretary-General's report
on Africa, a comprehensive, timely and insightful
document. With 7 million people of concern to the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Africa continues to be the continent with the
largest total number of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Since the end of the cold war and the settlement
of some long-standing conflicts, however, my Office has
been increasingly involved in repatriation operations.
Today, despite many problems, solutions are foreseeable for
many refugee problems in Africa.

The report recognizes that addressing and resolving
refugee problems is an indispensable contribution to peace
and stability in the continent. Not only are forced
population displacements a grave violation of human rights,
they are also a factor which threatens the stability, and
ultimately the peace and prosperity, of entire regions. The
uprooting of hundreds of thousands of Rwandans between
1994 and 1997 sent dangerous shockwaves through the
entire Great Lakes region and beyond. I should also
mention the current crisis in Sierra Leone, which has
displaced almost half a million people; the continued
displacement of almost 300,000 Burundians; and the
unresolved crises in the Horn of Africa.

Given the exhaustive nature of the Secretary-General' s
report, making any further points on the matters it raises
would be redundant. I would however like to draw the
attention of the Security Council to one issue which I
consider of fundamental importance. The mixed nature of
groups hosted in refugee camps - refugees coexisting
with fighters, criminals and ge'nocidaires - has been the
greatest challenge to the work of my Office throughout
the Great-Lakes-region crisis. I am concerned that this
trend will expand further if no measure to deal with
mixed groups in a rapid and effective manner is designed
and implemented soon. I have already highlighted this
major problem, in the course of the consultations of the
Security Council last Tuesday.

Maintaining the civilian character of refugee camps
is the responsibility of host Governments, as clearly
stipulated by the 1969 Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa. However, different situations
may require a variety of responses. Rather than setting up
a single mechanism, I would like to speak of a "ladder of
options", a ladder of which the deployment of
international police or military forces would be the step
of last resort. Let me elaborate on this issue.

In what I would define as normal situations,
adherence to certain basic principles of the OAU
Convention is sufficient to ensure that camps are not used
for military purposes: for example, locating them away
from borders, or prohibiting the circulation of arms.

In situations in which it may be difficult for host
Governments to implement the required principles,
international assistance is needed in building their
capacity to enforce law, for example through the
provision of equipment and other logistical support for
police forces. My Office has been involved in this type of
support in African countries, for example Kenya, for
some years. At yet another level, capacity-building may
involve training and even financial support for police
forces. This is what my Office is currently doing in
Tanzania, in refugee camps at the Burundian border. Let
me remind the Council that in the former eastern Zaire
this support went further, and included supervision by
international officers and a very close operational
relationship between UNHCR and military forces
responsible for the maintenance of law and order in
camps. While this arrangement did not ensure the
separation of refugees from criminals, it did contribute to
improving security, and should be considered when
examining different options to maintain the civilian
character of camps.

 

There are situations, however, in which building or
supporting local capacity is inadequate to maintain the
civilian character of camps. Separation of refugees from
criminals can then become an important security
requirement, and there may be no other option but to
deploy international police or military forces. For such
cases, I would like to express my strong support for the
Secretary-General's call for the creation of an international
mechanism to assist host Governments in maintaining the
civilian character of camps. I hope that the Security Council
will give concrete follow-up to this recommendation and
will examine the possibility, for example, of creating a
stand-by international force in support of humanitarian
operations. Given the delicate and specific nature of any
separation of refugees from criminals in a camp situation,
my Office stands ready to help develop procedures and
techniques for police and military forces to carry out this
type of activity. It is essential also to define principles and
decide on a division of work for dealing with those who
will be separated and excluded from international
protection.

There are of course other issues of interest to my
Office in the report, to which I would briefly like to draw
attention: the negative effect of sanctions on vulnerable
groups, including returnees and internally displaced persons;
the social and environmental effects of the presence of
refugees and the importance of rehabilitation work in areas
affected by massive human displacement; the need to
address the continued gap between humanitarian assistance
and the long-term reconstruction and development of war-
torn societies; and, last but not least, the essential focus on
civil society in African countries. The challenge more
specifically is to develop grass-roots activities to promote
community reconciliation in post-conflict situations, and
ultimately to contribute to the prevention of further
conflicts.

