Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to say that my delegation associates
itself with the statement made this morning by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio
Group.

In our view, the issue before us today is of the
greatest importance in that it affects international
relations with regard to two essential elements: peace
and justice. Those two elements should not and cannot
appear to be in contradiction or collision. On the
contrary, each of them constitutes an essential
condition for the other.

The Statute of the International Criminal Court
entered into force just a few days ago with surprising
speed, thanks to the firm and continuous support of the
States and of civil society, which in that way have
reaffirmed their willingness to combat impunity
through the investigation of the gravest international
crimes and the prosecution of those responsible.

However, the International Criminal Court was
not created to administer justice in a vacuum, above or
against legitimate national interests or other objectives
of the international community. On the contrary, the
history of the negotiating process and the balance that
the Statute's provisions represent reflect a clear
objective: to reconcile the interests of the international
community as a whole with national objectives of
security and sovereignty. Its provisions also reflect a
determination to establish a system that will make the
Court's functions duly compatible with the needs of the
functioning of the system of collective security. The
Rome Statute is not in conflict with the system created
in San Francisco. To the contrary, the International
Criminal Court will definitely serve to bolster the
system of maintenance of peace. We agree with the
idea that there is no contradiction and no need to
choose between them.

The proposals that are being considered in the
Security Council might be detrimental to the ICC and
to the Security Council itself. More generally, they
might be injurious to the United Nations and to the rule
of law. On one hand, they might lead to a distortion of
the spirit and a departure from the letter of a key
provision of the Rome Statute, thus undeniably and
seriously weakening the powers of the ICC to render
justice in an independent and impartial manner. On the
other hand, the adoption of proposals of this kind might
also adversely affect the legitimacy of the Security
Council, whose activities in this field would appear to
exceed the powers conferred on it by the Charter.

Above and beyond these considerations, we need
to bear in mind that what is at stake in this debate is the
continuity of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and possibly of other
peacekeeping operations, which, together with
sanctions, are the fundamental instruments for the
Security Council's effectiveness in fulfilling its
primary responsibility of maintaining international
peace and security, entrusted to it by the Member
States of the United Nations. For that reason, my
Government hopes that the members of the Council
will find a practical solution that will make it possible
to renew UNMIBH's mandate, securing the future of
peacekeeping operations and safeguarding the future of
the International Criminal Court.
