The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I want to join other Council members in
thanking Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Feltman, for his update on the situation in Ukraine.

The situation in Ukraine remains tense, and the risk
of further escalation remains a matter of grave concern
to the international community. Utmost care needs to be
taken to ensure that the crisis does not degenerate into a
civil war. Ifit does, it might become an internationalized
conflict, with attendant reverberations everywhere. We
followed with keen interest the talks held about two
weeks ago in Geneva between Ukraine, the European
Union, the United States and the Russian Federation.

At the meeting, they agreed on initial concrete
steps to de-escalate tensions and restore security for
all citizens. It was decided that all sides must refrain
from violence, intimidation and provocative actions.
The meeting specifically called for the disarmament of
all illegal armed groups and the return of all illegally
seized buildings to the legitimate owners. Significantly,
it was agreed that protesters who laid down their arms
and vacated the buildings they occupied would be
granted amnesty.

We believe that the agreement reached in Geneva
constitutes the basis for the peaceful resolution of the
crisis in Ukraine. That scenario offered a glimmer of
hope, as Under-Secretary-General Feltman has aptly
characterized it. That glimmer of hope, I am afraid,
is fast fading before our eyes. Armed men continue
to occupy buildings in cities across eastern Ukraine,
and the level of violence is escalating. The capture
and detention of monitors from the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), who
are designated and expected to play a leading role in
implementing the de-escalation measures agreed on
at the Geneva talks is, in our view, an affront to the
international community. We support the position
of the Secretary-General that international missions
working in Ukraine must be allowed to perform their
duties unimpeded. We call for the immediate release
of the OSCE monitors and urge those with influence in
the capitals to use it to that end.

As in every conflict, the way forward to lasting
peace, security and stability in Ukraine lies in dialogue
between all the parties concerned. The alternative of
a military option would only bleed Ukraine's already
open veins. We believe that the Geneva agreement
provides a strong surgical procedure that can mend
those veins. The clock is ticking. Ukraine is the patient.
The Security Council and the international community
constitute the surgical team. Let us stabilize and restore
the patient to health, or many more may bleed. That is
our collective responsibility.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

