Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for
her briefing and to express our gratitude for the
tireless efforts of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs in support of the people of
Syria. I would like to also welcome the presence in the
Chamber today of Mr. Khaled Sulaiman Aljarallah,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.

As we have just heard, civilians in Syria continue to
face significant hardships. We have to acknowledge that
the conflict has caused violence as well as violations
and abuses of international law, including human
rights law, and has brought suffering to the civilian
population of Syria on a scale that is unique in today's
world. It is civilians, including children, who continue
to pay the highest price in the ongoing hostilities in

Syria. It is unacceptable that health-care and education
facilities continue to be attacked. Just two days ago, the
air bombardments in Idlib intensified, killing children
and wounding other people. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties to the conflict to implement all
ceasefire agreements and ensure unhindered and safe
humanitarian access for all humanitarian actors to the
whole of Syrian territory.

Access should first be granted to priority areas,
including for cross-border deliveries of humanitarian
assistance in which the safety of humanitarian personnel
is ensured. We also want to underline the obligation of
all parties to the conflict to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure. The protection of civilians, including
children, in armed conflict should be at the centre of
our debate. We must put practical measures in place to
effectively prevent or minimize civilian casualties and
incidental damage to civilian facilities.

While I am touching on practical issues, I want to
underline how enormous the humanitarian needs are in
Syria. On average, in every month in 2019 the United
Nations has reached around 5.6 million people in need
all over the country, including children. In November,
humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations
agencies included the delivery of food for 4.2 million
people. For a population that is highly vulnerable,
cross-border humanitarian assistance remains vitally
important. In that regard, we would like to reiterate
our strong support for the renewal of the mechanism
that enables humanitarian supplies to be brought into
Syria, provides aid to those in urgent need and supports
the delivery of basic services. Without it, it would be
impossible to ensure life-saving assistance for millions
and to reach those in need.

The scale of the Syrian crisis and humanitarian
needs remain enormous. I want to stress our concern
about the terrible state of health-care facilities in Syria.
Most are not functional and those still operating are too
poorly equipped to provide proper care to patients. In
our opinion, the international community and especially
the Security Council should vigorously advocate for
health care and the protection of civilians, especially
women, children and persons with disabilities, as stated
in resolution 2475 (2019), which we adopted in June.

As we are going to discuss the political track
tomorrow, I want to conclude by underlining that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A
political agreement remains the only path to peace.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (Spoke in 
Russian): We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ursula Mueller for her briefing and also welcome
the participation of Mr. Khaled Sulaiman Aljarallah,
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait.
The most problematic humanitarian and military
situation is still in the territories outside the control
of the Syrian Government on the eastern bank of the
Euphrates, in the Idlib de-escalation zone and the
United States-occupied zone around Al-Tanf. We have
carefully studied the assessments of the situation in
the Idlib de-escalation zone, which continues to be a
breeding ground for international terrorism, especially
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. We regret the fact that
information on the shelling of the surrounding areas
where militants have established themselves takes
up only a single line in the United Nations reports.
We have established that there were some 600 such
attacks and assaults in October, and the intensity of
the radicals' firing on Aleppo has increased in the past
two weeks. While in November the city's residential
areas were shelled 191 times, the corresponding total
for the first half of December is already 139. The use
of multiple launch systems and mortars is increasing.
In the first week of December there were 32 missile
launches in residential areas of Aleppo. In November
and December 11 civilians died and 41 were injured in
Aleppo alone. On 4 December, jihadists shelled a sports
club in Tal Rifaat in Aleppo governorate, killing eight
children. And for some reason not a single person has
wondered where these militants continue to get their
munitions from.

Unfortunately, neither have our colleagues'

statements mentioned the many incidents in which
militants are terrorizing local populations and using
civilianinfrastructure formilitarypurposesandcivilians
as human shields. There are reports of executions,
detentions and the brutal dispersal of ordinary people
protesting the terrorists' control in Idlib. Some of those
incidents are mentioned in the United Nations reports.
These acts of terror should be firmly condemned and
appropriately repudiated. We see in the silence about
such crimes an attempt to whitewash these bandits as
the so-called moderate opposition. But those who want
to solve the problems in Syria peacefully long ago joined
the negotiating process, including in the framework of
the Constitutional Committee, while those who have
continued their armed struggle, including against
Syrians, are militants who have rejected dialogue. As
the guarantor nations of the Astana process, Russia,
Turkey and Iran are ready to continue to assist the Syrian
parties and Special Envoy Pedersen in the quest for a
political solution to the Syrian conflict. The relevance
of the Astana process was confirmed at another useful
meeting of the participants in the format in Nur-Sultan
on 10 and 11 December.
We have once again been hearing accusations that
the Syrian Army and its allies have been targeting
civilian facilities in Idlib with air strikes. And we once
again assert that the Syrian authorities are observing
the ceasefire and that the military activity is in response
to violations of the ceasefire by terrorists.

With regard to north-eastern Syria, Russia is
working with Ankara to implement the memorandum
of 22 October in the interests of preventing armed
clashes and restoring the humanitarian situation. We
are also working to establish contacts between the
Kurds and Damascus and to repair the damage caused
by the illegal occupation of the area and the dangerous
experiment in demographic engineering undertaken
there. We want to draw the Council's attention to
the dire situation in Raqqa, which was subjected to
massive bombardment by the so-called international
coalition and held captive for more than four years by
militants of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
On 7 December a Russian contingent conducted a
humanitarian operation there. Through our direct
presence on the ground, we ascertained that the civilian
infrastructure has been almost entirely destroyed. The
work on rubble removal and demining the area has still
not been completed and there are shortages of drinking
water, medicine and food.

We share the concerns expressed about the
increasing terrorist threats in various parts of Syria,
including in the north-east. We call on those who
managed and built prisons there not to shift onto others
the responsibility for preventing jihadists of every sort
from scattering throughout the region.

Together with the Government of Syria, Russia is
taking steps to create the necessary conditions for the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
More than 2 million Syrians have already returned
to their homes so far, including more than 1.3 million
internally displaced persons (IDPs). More than 1,500
houses, 95 medical facilities and 210 educational
institutions have been repaired and begun functioning
since the beginning of the year, and electricity, water
and industrial facilities are being restored and built.
The numbers are incontestable proof of how effective

the measures taken by the Syrian authorities have been
in creating the necessary conditions for the voluntary,
dignified and safe return of refugees.

We call on international organizations, including
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and other humanitarian entities, to take
action in this arena. Unfortunately, such activities
are often being artificially delayed. We also urge
the members of the international community to get
involved in post-conflict reconstruction projects in
Syria and lift unilateral sanctions in the interests of
normalizing Syrians' lives, without surrounding them
with political conditions. That would be a serious
contribution to improving the humanitarian situation
in Syria. Incidentally, if control of the illegally held
oilfields were returned to Damascus it would go a long
way to helping to provide Syrians with fuel and resolve
humanitarian problems.

With assistance from the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides and the Syrian
Government, together with the United Nations and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, efforts
to resettle the Rukban camp have been continuing.
However, owing to the desire of the armed groups
there to maintain control, they are stalled. We hope
that the problem of the IDPs and refugees there will
soon be resolved. The situation at Al-Hol camp remains
difficult and has been exacerbated by the significant
number of refugees who have moved there from other
camps in the north-east. More than half of the people
in the camp are women and children. It is high time to
think about transferring the illegally occupied territory
to the Syrian authorities in the interests of resolving the
IDP problem.

We heard the assessment of how the cross-border
operation is functioning. We want to make it clear
that we are in favour of removing the Al-Ramtha and
Al-Yarubiyah checkpoints for the following reasons.
The Jordanian border crossing at Al-Ramtha has not
been used since July 2018. We are not convinced by the
argument that it is needed just in case. The situation
in south-western Syria changed long ago, after the
reconciliation achieved with Russia's assistance, and
the Syrian authorities are working to rebuild the region,
which endured years of crisis. There will be no "just in
case" there, especially since normally there are official
checkpoints that could be activated if humanitarian
deliveries have to be made from Jordan.

The situation on the Syrian-Iraqi border has changed
radically. The border crossings controlled by the Syrian
army have been reopened. The transfer of control
over other checkpoints from the Kurds to the Syrian
authorities is under discussion. A dialogue is also under
way with the Kurds about getting access to humanitarian
assistance to the eastern bank of the Euphrates from
within Syria itself rather than across the border. The
Secretary General's latest report (S/2019/949) clearly
indicates the volume of humanitarian aid being
delivered through Al-Yarubiyah, not on a regular basis
but as needed. The data clearly show that humanitarian
convoys can be sent through official channels with the
agreement of the Syrian authorities.

As far as Idlib is concerned, we agree that this
area of Syria is still in dire need of humanitarian
assistance. Aid is being sent there through two Turkish
checkpoints, Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam. We
support their continued functioning because it is based
on the humanitarian needs of Syrians.

