Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): The Republic of Korea
is gravely concerned about the current tense situation in
Angola and its stalled peace process. In view of the serious
implications for peace and security in the region, the peace
process should not be allowed to be reversed. Contrary to
our expectations, the much-awaited participation of UN ITA
in the Angolan Government last April did not usher in the
beginning of full-fledged national reconciliation.
Developments in the neighbouring region have also added
to the tension and fluidity of the situation. The momentum
of the peace process has waned and, as the Secretary-
General points out in his report, it is experiencing some of
the most serious difficulties since the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol.

Despite numerous warnings by the Council, UNITA
has yet to fulfil its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol
and those repeatedly called for in the relevant Council
resolutions. The delay in the peace process in its final stage
is not only inflicting unbearable suffering on the Angolan
people themselves, it is also posing a greater threat to the
region. At this critical juncture, we believe that the
international community has to intervene with resoluteness
and seriousness to complete the peace process. We
therefore support the draft resolution before the Council
today, which provides for additional measures to be
imposed against UNITA in the event that it fails to
implement its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol within
a given timeframe.

We draw to the attention of the UN ITA leadership the
fact that the measures set forth in the draft resolution are
not meant to punish UNITA but to lead it to cooperation.
In the interest of peace, UNITA can and should stop the
clock ticking against it. We indeed hope that it will disarm
and demobilize all its personnel, give up its means of
hostile propaganda and cooperate in the normalization of
State administration before the end of next month.

Today's decision by the Council does not mean any
diminution in the commitment of the international
community to help promote the Angolan peace process.
The United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General will continue to assist the parties in the
implementation of the peace process.

We renew our appreciation and support for the
Secretary-General; his Special Representative, Maitre
Beye; the personnel of MONUA; and the troika of
observer countries for their dedicated efforts. In View of
the changing situation on the ground, we also endorse the
Secretary-General's recommendation for the continued
presence of United Nations military units until the end of
November.

In this connection, we would like to remind the
Angolan parties that the much-needed international
assistance for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of their
country is being hampered by the tension they have
created. The Government of the Republic of Korea is
contributing $250,000 to assist the demobilization of ex-
combatants, in addition to the earlier troop contribution
made to the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III), in the belief that the current difficulties
in the peace process will soon be overcome through the
concerted efforts of the Angolan parties themselves and
the international community. We stress once again in this
regard the importance of a meeting between the President
of Angola and the leader of UNIT A, which is long
overdue despite the repeated calls by the international
community for its convening.

In concluding, we reiterate our sincere hope that
reason will prevail upon the Angolan parties, in particular
UNITA, so that the international community will be able
to see the successful conclusion of the peace process in
the very near future.

