Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We too wish
to thank the United Kingdom for convening today's
meeting. We think it is very timely to have an open
discussion in the Chamber about the situation in Syria,
and in particular the situation in Aleppo.

New Zealand has been deeply concerned about
the violence in Aleppo and elsewhere in Syria. We
continue to be shocked at the apparent indifference of
the parties to the war and all of their backers to the
appalling suffering of the Syrian people. The escalation
of violence in and around Aleppo shows that the parties
have been continuing to pursue their objectives by
military means. And yet, as we have said so many times
in the Chamber and in the adjacent consultation room,
there can be no military solution to the conflict. We
welcome the news that it has been agreed between the
United States and the Russian Federation to extend the
cessation of hostilities to Aleppo, Latakia and eastern
Ghouta. But if peace is to have any chance, there must
be a full re-establishment of the cessation of hostilities
to all of Syria and a genuine recommitment to the
peace process.

All sides must invest fully in the political process.
That means respecting international humanitarian law.
It means respecting the Council's resolutions, and it
means prioritizing the welfare of the Syrian people over
narrow political and military aims. The current political
process, established at the end of 2015 under resolution
2268 (2015), represents the best chance we have had
in five years to end this awful war. We cannot afford
to miss that opportunity. We all have a responsibility
to support the talks, to support the Special Envoy
and to pressure the parties at the negotiating table to
participate in good faith.

In our View, good faith means increasing access for
humanitarian aid, negotiating the release of detainees,
stopping the fighting and engaging on the substance of
a political transition. It also means stopping attacks on
schools and hospitals and allowing medical supplies to
be delivered in humanitarian convoys. Just yesterday,
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2286
(2016), reminding combatants of the rules of armed
conflict, demanding protection for those who provide
health care, and demanding accountability for those
who flout those rules. Most of all, good faith in this
context means adhering to the spirit of the cessation
of hostilities, which means stopping the fighting and
attempts to grab land.

What has happened in Aleppo in the past few days
was all too predictable, as we heard reports over the
past two weeks from United Nations representatives.
While we have understood that there have been efforts
to battle Al-Nusra, it is hard not to conclude that what
has happened has all been part of an elaborate plan to
seize Syria's second-largest city before the peace talks
got seriously under way.

New Zealand is fully committed to international
efforts to combat terrorism. As we have said in the
Council Chamber and in the adjacent room, this should
be an issue that unites us, but it has not been, and
there has been a growing tendency to use the words
"terrorism" and "terrorists" loosely in justification for
any military response. That must stop. Any military
action needs to be carried out with full respect for
international humanitarian law. This of course means
avoiding attacks on civilians and civilian targets.
The requirements of distinction and proportionality
and the prohibition on indiscriminate attacks must
be respected, even when fighting terrorists. If the
cessation ofhostilities and the peace process are to have
any chance of succeeding, greater care is required to
distinguish between those groups that are participants
in the peace process and those that are outside it, and
greater weight given to the overall political need to
advance the peace process.

The talks that have been under way between the
United States and Russia, in coordination with the
Special Envoy and others in the region, are the best
chance we have in the short term to make progress and
to see an end to fighting, particularly in and around
Aleppo. We welcome those talks, we welcome the recent
announcement, and we look forward to further progress
in such areas as further geographical delineation and
other measures to help restore and sustain the cessation
of hostilities.

While the United States and Russian efforts
are critical, the United States and Russia are not the
only actors that can make a difference. New Zealand
supports the International Syria Support Group and
the Security Council putting their weight behind the
political talks. We are open to any course of action
that would be helpful and effective and would welcome
the views of the Special Envoy, the United States and
Russia in particular on how this Council might best
support their efforts.

We all need to remember that the stakes are
high. The breakdown of the peace process would be
catastrophic for the Syrian people and for preserving
what remains of this shattered country. We look forward
to discussing the press statement just circulated by the
United Kingdom and to early agreement upon it.

