Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
also want to thank Deputy President Zuma for his
report, which was very informative and that shows
quite clearly that a lot of progress has been made in
Burundi thanks to the hard work of the Deputy
President, his country and many others, but obviously
there still remains much to do. As Ambassador
Rosenthal pointed out in his excellent overview, there
is a need for all of us - the international community,
the United Nations, individual countries and countries
in the region - to concert our efforts to deal with the
many issues that are still to be resolved in helping the
Burundians find a way out of their difficulty.

We commend the Government and the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie (CNDD) and
the Forces nationales pour la defense de la democratie
(FDD) for progress in implementing the 8 October and
2 November Pretoria Protocols. We welcome the news
of the CNDD-FDD's entry into the Transitional
Government and we urge all the parties to continue to
implement all agreements, including and especially the
2 December 2002 Ceasefire Agreement. Security has to

be a priority if progress is to be made in all the other
areas that need to be addressed.

We welcome continued support for the peace
process from South Africa and others in the region and
South African leadership, including the 16 November
Summit of the Great Lakes Regional Initiative on
Burundi. As others have done, we again urge FNL in
the strongest terms to cease hostilities and join the
peace process. We stress the need for the Government
and FNL to use the recent meetings in Nairobi as a
launching pad for positive negotiations and want to
encourage Deputy President Zuma to pursue his
mandate to bring FNL into the process.

I wanted to make a point of commending the
African Union for its positive role in overseeing the
implementation of the Ceasefire Agreement and to
commend the African mission in Burundi, which, as
the Deputy President said, that could be considered as a
shining example and a model of African engagement. It
demonstrates Africa's commitment to providing
African solutions to African problems. The United
States strongly encourages and will support that
approach. It is something that all of us in the
international community should do - we must help
our African friends when they step up to the challenge
as they are doing here.

We are pleased that recent Ethiopian and
Mozambican deployments to the African mission went
smoothly. We will provide the African mission with
logistical support and have recently dedicated $6.2
million for that purpose. We urge other countries to
contribute to the African mission's efforts as well.

We also welcome the efforts of the United
Nations Office in Burundi which, coupled with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
chairmanship of the Arusha Agreement Implementation
Monitoring Committee, ensures an important United
Nations role in the process.
We hope that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration will begin as soon as possible and that the
Burundian Government will work closely with the
World Bank to quickly establish a strong World Bank
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme in Burundi.

We welcome Belgium's efforts to organize a
donor's conference in Brussels, which I understand will
take place in January, and hope that many countries
will contribute to those efforts. As I said earlier, the
international community needs to buttress and
encourage African efforts to deal with their problems
and to give them the support required when difficult
decisions are needed.

We understand that Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is sending an assessment team to Burundi to
look at the situation on the ground. We welcome that
action, look forward to the results of that mission and
hope that it can lead to productive discussions in the
future on solutions, including to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration components of the
peace process.

