Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
efforts. I also welcome the Permanent Representative
of Israel and the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine, who are present in hre in the Hall, and thank
them for their statements.

I shall make some brief remarks about Syria and
then focus on the Middle East and the question of
Palestine.

With regard to Syria, Argentina deeply regrets
that we have had to adopt a new resolution on the
humanitarian crisis. That was the result of the
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014) and the
increase in the suffering ofthe Syrian people. However,
we value in particular the fact that the Council assumed
its responsibilities with regard to a situation that has
undermined its credibility and cast a doubt over its
authority. We hope and demand that this time the voice
of the Council be heard.

We would like to take this opportunity to underscore
the fact that, despite the profound differences among its
members, the Security Council has been able to speak
with one voice in dealing with the effects of the crisis:
demanding access for assistance, reacting quickly each
time incidents occurred in the area of operations of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and
recognizing and strongly supporting the Government
and the people of Lebanon and the countries that are
receiving refugees. No less important is the fact that
the Security Council has been able to be at the forefront
of the complex process of eliminating Syria's chemical
weapons programme, which is already in its final
stages.
While we recognize that it is not easy, we hope
those elements can lay the foundation for a common
vision so that the Council can contribute not only to
addressing the consequences of the crisis, but also
to understanding its causes and offering solutions,
thereby concretely and effectively assisting the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, to whom we offer our support. His success
will not only make it possible to contribute towards the
building of a better future for Syria, but will be key
for the achievement of peace and security in the entire
region.

This open debate undoubtedly comes at a time of
great upheaval in the Middle East, which is being torn
apart by violence, the exacerbation of sectarian tension,
the indiscriminate abuse of militarism and the increase
in various types of extremism. In that environment of
uncertainty, for the third time in less than six years
Gaza has again been plunged into violence. Once
again, it is civilians who are paying the price for the
disproportionate use of military force by Israel. Once
again, there are unacceptable acts by Hamas. And once
again, there is despair and death. Sooner or later, there
will once again be calm. And once again, there will be
the certainty that violence will return unless the causes
that made it possible are eradicated and the eternal
cycle of a pattern of abuse and intolerance, which is
repeated all too often, is broken.

Despite the calls by the Council and other voices
of the international community, instead of moderation,
all that we have seen has been an intensification in
the fighting and an open defiance of the obligations
incumbent by way of international humanitarian law,
human rights law and the protection civilians.

As it could not be any other way, the immediate
result of Israel's ground offensive in Gaza and the
bombing that accompanied it, was the sharp increase
in the number of fatalities, the vast majority of whom
were civilians, including an intolerable number of
children. What happened in Shujaiya on Sunday cannot
be described as anything other than a massacre - one
more in the long history of Palestine - which we
condemn in the strongest terms. That and all allegations
of excesses, abuses and violations of international law
must be investigated and the perpetrators must be held
accountable. We must ensure that there is justice for all.

The incursion has also increased the number of
displaced people, has had repercussions throughout
the region and has deepened the humanitarian crisis,
which exceeds the international community's ability to
respond. More than 1 million people are affected by a
lack of adequate access to water and sanitation services,
while 80 per cent of the people in Gaza have electricity
only four hours per day. United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
schools have stopped being centres for learning in order
to become improvised refugee camps.

It is therefore clear that our responsibility is to
demand an immediate cessation of hostilities, strict
respect for international humanitarian law and human
rights, and the protection of civilians. That means that
Israel must put an end to its military operations and
the disproportionate use of force in Gaza, and it also
means that both Hamas and the Islamic Jihad must
put an end to the indiscriminate launching of rockets
against Israel.

We therefore reiterate our support for the peace
initiatives currently under way. History and geography
have assigned to Egypt a key role in these efforts, but it
is clear that other regional and international actors with
influence on the parties should be prepared to use that
influence in order to find a way out.

We welcome in this respect the decision of the
Secretary-General to travel to the region, and we hope
that his efforts will yield favourable results and make
it possible to move towards what both the General
Assembly and the Council have presented as not only a
possible but also a desirable and necessary way out in
order to put this long-standing conflict behind us.

Our priority objective here is to restore calm, and
yet we cannot allow ourselves to consent to a return to
things as they were before the crisis. It is neither viable
nor sustainable for Gaza to continue to be an economic
and political shut-in, with 40 per cent of its people
without work or income and subject to food insecurity,
a sanitary and energy crisis, and a lack of conditions
conducive to promoting economic development with
full social inclusion and human rights.

Given that the horizon is receding due to the
frustrating path that has been tread over and over,
the question is not if there will be another outbreak
of violence, but when there will be one. This renewed
crisis should be a strong wake-up call to address,
comprehensively, the root causes that led to the outbreak
of the conflict. The paths to this goal were already
laid out by the Security Council in its resolution 1860
(2009). The time has come to support its implementation
in all its dimensions, that is, allow the unimpeded
access of humanitarian assistance; ensure the sustained
and regular flow of goods and persons through the
borders; and prevent the illicit trafficking of arms and
ammunition.

Learning from recent experience and in order to
guarantee effective compliance, it will also be key to
establish an international mechanism to monitor these
and other measures that may be agreed on as part of the
initiatives under way.

No less important will be achieving a single
Palestinian Authority, so that it can govern effectively
also in Gaza, because while our objective remains a
two-State solution, reunification of the Palestinian
political system is in that context not a problem but part
of the solution. It would be unfortunate, therefore, if one
of the fatalities of the tragedy we are experiencing were
to be the incipient process of Palestinian reconciliation,
which we have so strongly stressed and on which we
have so intensively laboured.

As we clamour for an active role on the part of
countries, leaders and organizations to resolve this
crisis, we expect the same from the Security Council.
We have said it every single time we have met in order
to address this situation, and we reiterate it again today.
We believe that the Security Council, assuming the
responsibilities assigned to it by the Charter, can and
should more firmly support the efforts undertaken to
achieve a ceasefire, ensure compliance with it and,
finally, to help to create the necessary conditions so
that both sides can renew their dialogue with a view to
bringing about a two-State solution based on the 1967
borders, which is the only guarantee for lasting peace
and security.

In this regard, we should ask ourselves the
question: what is the point of the Security Council if
the maintenance of international peace and security
becomes a mere matter of a few ad hoc mechanisms?
We are far from opposing bilateral diplomacy or the
diplomacy of groups of States or other organizations,
but it should not be at the cost of rendering the Security
Council an institution devoid of meaning and incapable
of having on impact on conflict resolution. It is about
finding complementary, convergent and effective
strategies, based on strategic solidarity.

Argentina believes in real multilateralism that is
most truly represented in our Organization. It cannot
be conceived of as an obstacle to achieving a more just
and peaceful world. It is not a case of multilateralism
versus bilateral relations, nor is it multilateralism versus
regional organizations. Each of these dimensions and
strategies must be brought together and coordinated
with a common goal, but as the same time it should be
recognized that it is multilateralism that ensures that all
States and peoples, without exception, can be heard and
recognized as equal in dignity and in rights.

In this context, since the press statement issued on
12 July by the Council had no impact, perhaps we should
speak more loudly and with a single voice in order to
demand, along with the other tools at our disposal, a
ceasefire, that international law be respected, that an
end be put to violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights, and that civilians be protected.

Argentina is prepared to comply with this goal. In
that context, given the tools available to us, Argentina
would here respectfully address the members of the
Security Council to propose that the Council use
all the tools available to it. As it has the lofty task of
maintaining international peace and security, it should
consider the possibility of conducting a mission to
the countries of the region in order to support, and
give a renewed impetus to, the efforts to bring about
a ceasefire, including a visit to Gaza in order to see
first-hand the ravages of the armed conflict. We must
support all who are working towards a lasting peace
in two States living in reciprocal mutual respect, in
security, safety and prosperity.

I would ask that the Security Council consider this
proposal. Argentina wishes to honour the commitments
it undertook when it was elected to this body. We
believe that the ethics of conviction and responsibility
are not two different things; they are two sides of the
same coin, so we must be consistent.

