Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan commends Japan for having convened
this open debate to strengthen peacebuilding in Africa
through the more effective implementation of resolutions
2282 (2016) and General Assembly resolution 70/262,
and the lessons learned as delineated in the 2015 report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) Working
Group. As a member-observer of the African Union and
a strong supporter of Africa's revival, my delegation
shares the region's vision for long-term peacebuilding.

The changing nature of conflict demands a new,
robust and multidimensional strategy combining
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable
development with climate mitigation. A strategic,
integrated and coherent approach to conflict-affected
countries should be a priority from the onset of
the conflict, and international attention must be
sustained not just for years but even decades so as to
prevent relapses.

The PBC now more than ever must serve an advisory
bridging role among the various departments of the
Secretariat, United Nations organs and entities and field
operations, involving also all relevant actors, together
with the various units - political, human rights, rule of
law and gender - as well as peacekeeping operations
and political missions.

Mediation, negotiations and reconciliation between
conflicting sides aimed at resolving long-standing
as well as newly emerging conflicts are the building
blocks for the peacebuilding architecture. This task is
best achieved through coordinating the efforts of the
Secretary-General and the Special Representatives
and Envoys, in conjunction with regional and
subregional organizations.

The vast range of regional organizations in Africa
as well as the World Bank, the African Development
Bank and bilateral donors should be involved so
as to advance the situation on the ground and
ensure stable, predictable funding for capacity- and
institution-building. We note the contribution of the
European Union as a strong supporter of Africa.

In addition, parliamentarians and religious
leaders, together with civil society, the private sector
and the media, constitute an influential stakeholder
arrangement. They promote State-building; the rule
of law; good governance; the protection of civilians,
especially women and children; the disarmament of
combatants; security and justice sector reform; and
inclusive political processes. This calls for broadening
the concept of peace and stability from State-centred
security to a people-oriented security, from purely
military to non-military security, which includes food,
water and energy security. In this reconstruction process
for Africa, the women/youth and peace and security
agenda must be overarching and supported by civil
society and the larger multi-stakeholder arrangement.

Kazakhstan believes that there is the need for a
global development strategy in order to create just
structures and a just world order that can eliminate
conflict for all time, because it is well known that
underdevelopment and financial and digital inequality
are the main causes of conflict. My delegation strongly
believes that the international community must develop
and implement a coherent assistance strategy to rebuild
Africa.

Kazakhstan fully supports the vision of Africa
2063 to make the region conflict-free. Kazakhstan,
along with the United Nations Development
Programme, is implementing the Africa-Kazakhstan
Partnership Project for Sustainable Development. We
also were pioneers in establishing a regional centre
for excellence in civil service to prepare professionals
based on meritocracy, and we have great potential for
a partnership with Africa. Kazakhstan stands ready to
build peace in Africa as a steady and trusted mediator
and partner.

