Mr. Cho Chang-Beom (Republic of Korea): I wish
first of all to express my delegation's gratitude to you,
Sir, for your initiative to organize today's open debate on
the important issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. We applaud Canada's firm commitment, both to
promoting the awareness of the international community
on the new challenges facing human security and to
enhancing the transparency of the work of the Security
Council. My thanks should also go to Mr. Sommaruga,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross; Ms. Bellamy, Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund; and Special Representative
Otunnu for their insightful briefing in this Chamber on 12
February 1999, as well as for their distinguished service
in the cause of humanity.

The end of the cold war did not end the plight of
civilian populations. In many parts of the world, armed
conflict and civilian suffering therein continue with
alarming intensity and growing frequency. In particular,
children, women and other vulnerable groups are
subjected to unlawful attacks and abuses in many
deplorable ways. Moroever, an ever-increasing number of
those who volunteer to help civilians in conflict situations

 

find their lives threatened or sacrificed. Overall, the
changing nature of intra-state conflicts seriously undermines
the respect for international humanitarian law, posing a
grave threat to human security.

My delegation believes that the time has come for the
international community to mobilize the collective will to
cope with these challenges. It was with this belief that my
Government, holding the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May 1997, took the initiative to organize
the first open debate on the related issue of protection of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations. We are happy to note today that our initiative
has since been built upon by like-minded members of the
Council. We are confident that your initiative with a
broader focus, Sir, will further contribute to the discourse
on what the Security Council, and indeed international
community as a whole, can do to stem the large-scale
civilian suffering increasingly prevalent in conflict
situations.

Already, during the open briefing of 12 February,
many constructive suggestions were made by those
providing the briefing, as well as by members of the
Council, on how to promote the protection of civilian
populations affected by armed conflicts. While we believe
these suggestions deserve the broad support of the
international community, we wish to especially highlight
the following points, given the high priority we attach to
them.

My first point relates to the role and responsibility of
the Security Council. As the representative of Canada
mentioned in the previous open briefing, promoting the
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is central to the
Council's mandate. In our view, the Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security should not be limited to its involvement in the
issues related to the traditional concept of States' security.
Ultimately, the security of States cannot be fully ensured
without the security of the people living in those States
being properly protected. Therefore, the Council should be
encouraged to take a proactive approach to enhance its
active engagement in the issues of human security, such as
providing assistance to and protection for civilians in armed
conflicts.

My second comment concerns the strengthening of the
international legal-enforcement framework in order to
combat the culture of impunity. As we are all aware, this
year marks the fiftieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and the centenary of the first Hague Peace
Conference. It is indeed timely for the Council to take
stock of its unprecedented efforts to be directly involved
in punishment for war crimes and other violations of
international humanitarian law in the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Lessons learned from these efforts will be
instrumental in strengthening the future working of the
existing ad hoc tribunals. They will also shed useful light
on the ongoing preparatory work for the early entry into
operation of the new permanent International Criminal
Court. The Republic of Korea remains firmly committed
to the cause of the early establishment of the International
Criminal Court. We are sure that promoting this cause
will strengthen the principle of the rule of law and make
an enormous contribution to the cause of the protection of
civilian populations.

Thirdly, we believe that the Security Council should
pay greater attention to various root causes of civilian
suffering in armed conflicts, in particular to illicit arms-
trafficking and anti-personnel landmines. My delegation
has emphasized its view on various occasions that, with
well-established cross-border arms flows, country-specific
arms embargoes do not suffice to stem the illicit
trafficking of arms. In this regard, we join the recent
appeals of the Secretary-General for a regional approach
to finding practical ways to stem the illicit flow of arms
to and within given regions.

Mine clearance has now become a global agenda
requiring global action. In both conflicts and post-conflict
situations, demining is an urgent precondition for securing
the minimum safety of civilians. In this regard, we hope
that the United Nations Mine Action Service will
strengthen its role as a focal point within the United
Nations system. Since 1996 my country, as a donor to the
Mine Action Support Group, has actively participated in
mine-clearance activities in Cambodia, Tajikistan and
Ethiopia.

Fourthly, we would like to emphasize the obligation
of all States and non-State actors under international law
to ensure humanitarian access to all those in need. The
international community should consider more forceful
measures, such as the imposition of sanctions specifically
targeted against those that do not provide or who wilfully
obstruct access of humanitarian organizations.
In this connection, we would also like to draw the
attention of the Council, once again, to the need for
ensuring the security and safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. We welcome the entry into force
of the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and

 

Associated Personnel in January of this year. We hope that
adequate follow-up measures will be taken to secure
universal adherence and to further expand the scope of this
Convention. As Under-Secretary-General De Mello aptly
pointed out in his open briefing to the Council last month,
ways and means should be explored to cover all situations
in which United Nations and associated personnel,
including national staff, are deployed, and to ensure its
implementation by non-State actors.

We believe that there are many other related areas the
Council can look into in order to improve the security and
safety of United Nations and humanitarian personnel. In
this connection, my delegation welcomes and hopes for the
early translation into action of the specific recommendation
contained in Council resolution 1208 (1998), to include in
the United Nations Stand-by Arrangements military and
police units and personnel trained for humanitarian
operations, together with related mate'riel.

Last but not least, we cannot fail to address the plight
of children in armed conflicts, as eloquently pointed out by
Ms. Bellamy and Mr. Otunnu. My delegation, through its
work as a member of the Security Council for two years,
learned with consternation the truth about the horrible
practice of using child soldiers in many conflict situations.
We deplore that this practice and other atrocities involving
children still continue unabated. It is very clear to all of us
that the international community should do everything in its
capacity to ensure that this awful practice ceases
immediately. In this context, my delegation wishes to see
an early adoption of the optional protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child regarding the involvement of
children in armed conflicts. Among other important issues,
we hope that consensus will soon emerge on the minimum
age of military recruitment.

The international community has to rise to the
daunting challenge of providing adequate security for all
those in need of protection and their protectors. The time
for action has come. We hope that the views expressed
today will be reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General as requested by the presidential statement
of 12 February 1999, as well as in the Council's follow-up
action on this issue. We further hope that such action will
be taken in close collaboration with other United Nations
organs and agencies, as well as with the United Nations
membership as a whole.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that my
Government stands ready to continue to make contributions
in this regard and to work together with interested
members of the Council.

