Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): These are uncertain
times and today we deal with exceptional circumstance.
Acting with our American and French allies, in the early

hours of this morning the United Kingdom conducted
coordinated, targeted and precise strikes to degrade
Al-Assad's chemical weapons capability and deter their
future use. The British Royal Air Force launched Storm
Shadow missiles at a military facility some 15 miles
west of Homs, where the regime is assessed to keep
chemical weapons in breach of Syria's obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention. A full assessment
has not yet been completed, but we believe that the
strikes to have been successful. Furthermore, none of
the British, United States or French aircraft or missiles
involved in this operation were successfully engaged by
Syrian air defences, and there is also no indication that
Russian air defence systems were employed.

Our action was a limited, targeted and effective
strike. There were clear boundaries that expressly
sought to avoid escalation, and we did everything
possible, including rigorous planning, before any
action was undertaken to ensure that we mitigated and
minimized the impact on civilians. Together, our action
will significantly degrade the Syrian regime's ability
to research, develop and deploy chemical weapons and
deter their future use.

The United Kingdom Prime Minister has said that
we are clear about who is responsible for the atrocity
of the use of chemical weapons. A significant body of
information, including intelligence, indicates that the
Syrian regime is responsible for the attack we saw last
Saturday. Some of the evidence that leads us to this
conclusion is as follows.

There are open source accounts alleging that a
barrel bomb was used to deliver the chemicals. Multiple
open source reports claim that a regime helicopter was
observed above the city of Douma on the evening of
7 April. The opposition does not operate helicopters or
use barrel bombs. And reliable intelligence indicates
that Syrian military officials coordinated what appears
to be the use of chlorine in Douma on 7 April. No other
group could have carried out this attack. Indeed, Da'esh,
for example, does not even have a presence in Douma.

The Syrian regime has been killing its own people
for seven years. Its use of chemical weapons, which
has exacerbated the human suffering, is a serious
crime of international concern as a breach of the
customary international law prohibition on the use of
chemical weapons, and that amounts to a war crime
and a crime against humanity. Any State is permitted
under international law, on an exceptional basis, to
take measures in order to alleviate overwhelming
humanitarian suffering. The legal basis for the use
of force for the United Kingdom is humanitarian
intervention, which requires that three conditions to
be met.

First, there must be convincing evidence, generally
accepted by the international community as a whole,
of extreme humanitarian distress on a large scale,
requiring immediate and urgent relief. I think that the
debates in the Council and the briefings we have had
from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and others have proved that. Secondly, it must be
objectively clear that there is no practicable alternative
to the use of force if lives are to be saved. I think that
the vetoes have shown us that. Thirdly, the proposed
use of force must be necessary and proportionate to
the aim of relief of humanitarian suffering. It must be
strictly limited in time and in scope to this aim. I think
we have heard both in my intervention in Ambassador
Haley's how that has also been met.

The history of the Syrian conflict is a litany of
threats to peace and violations of international law.
The Security Council has met 113 times since the
Syrian war started. It was therefore not for want of
international diplomatic effort that we find ourselves in
this position today.

After a pattern of chemical-weapons use since
the outbreak of the conflict, Al-Assad defied the
international community in 2013 by launching a sarin
gas attack on eastern Ghouta, which left more than 800
people dead. Despite the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013) and despite four years of patient engagement,
Syria continues to use chemical weapons against its
people and has failed to answer a long list of serious
questions. The only conclusion we can reach is that
Syria has not declared or destroyed all of its chemical
weapons, despite its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. This is not assertion on our
part but a matter of record, and I draw the Russian
Ambassador's attention to his points about Barazan
and Jimrya. The Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) still has unanswered
questions and discrepancies. He knows this. We all
know this. The Council was briefed by the OPCW
Director-General.

Resolution 2118 (2013) decides in the event of
non-compliance to impose measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter. Yet on 28 February 2017, when
the United Kingdom together with France, proposed
a draft resolution (S/2017/ 172) taking measures under
Chapter VII short of the use of force, Russia vetoed (see S/PV.7893). The very least the Security Council should
have been able to do was to follow up on the findings
of the report of the Joint Investigative Mechanism by
extending its mandate. Yet four times Russia vetoed
different proposals from different Council Members to
do just that.

The Syrian regime and it supporters are responsible
for the gravest violations of international humanitarian
law in modern history. They have used indiscriminate
weapons, notably barrel bombs and cluster munitions,
against civilians, and they have deliberately targeted
medical facilities and schools, as well as humanitarian
personnel and civilian objects. They have used sieges
and starvation as methods of warfare, accompanied by
attacks on opposition-held civilian areas. The regime
has persistently obstructed humanitarian aid and
medical evacuations. Tens of thousands of people have
been illegally detained, tortured and executed by the
regime. This is one of the most serious challenges to
the international non-proliferation regime we have ever
faced. A State party has violated the Chemical Weapons
Convention, it has defied the Security Council, and it
has broken international law.

Repeated attempts over several years to hold them
to account have been met with Russian obstruction and
resistance. In the Security Council, we have repeatedly
attempted to overcome this obstruction without success.
We are faced with a litany of violations, no sense of
guilt, no sense of regret, no sense of responsibility, a
shameful record, wrapped in a mix of denial, deceit
and disinformation.

I would invite those like the Russian Ambassador
who speak about the Charter to consider the following.
It is hard to believe that it is in line with the principles
and purposes ofthe Charter to use or condone the use of
chemical weapons, and in the United Kingdom's view
it cannot be illegal to use force to prevent the killing of
such numbers of innocent people. I will take no lessons
in international law from Russia.

Despite all the foregoing, we would like to look
forward. The United Kingdom, together with France and
the United States, will continue to pursue a diplomatic
resolution to the Syrian crisis. My French colleague
will say more about our work in a few moments. We
believe that it must comprise four elements.

First, Syria's chemical weapons programme
must be ended and the chemical weapons stockpiles
destroyed once and for all. Secondly, there must be an
immediate cessation of hostilities and compliance with
all Security Council resolutions, including those that
mandate humanitarian access. Thirdly, the regime must
return to the Geneva talks and agree to engage on the
substantial agenda put forward by the United Nations

Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Fourthly and finally,
there must be accountability for the use of chemical
weapons and other war crimes in Syria.

The Secretary-General rightly highlighted the
political process. We propose that, as we members of
the Security Council will all be together next weekend
in the retreat with the Secretary-General very kindly
hosted by Sweden, we use that opportunity to reflect
on next steps and the way back to the political process.
And with our allies, we stand ready to work with all
members of the Security Council towards this end.

