The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Lithuania.

I thank Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, for his
briefing and his dedicated efforts on the ground.

We are witnessing positive developments and
changes taking place on the ground in Kosovo and the
region. We are encouraged by the determination of the
Government of Kosovo to continue with crucial reforms,
ensuring lasting stability in Kosovo. We welcome the
resumption of the European Union-facilitated high-
level dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. These
vital talks have already brought results, including an
agreement onjustice and on civil protection integration.

We encourage the Kosovo Government to stay
focused on the outstanding issues. The implementation
of the agreements already reached, the rebuilding of
vital economic links and intercommunal reconciliation
are key. We encourage both parties to further engage
in constructive dialogue, concentrating on the priority
areas set at the most recent high-level meeting, held
in Brussels on 21 April. They include, among other
things, energy, telecommunication, the free movement
of persons and the establishment of an association of
Serbian municipalities.

The European Union (EU) remains committed
to supporting Kosovo as it moves along the path of
reform and pursues its European integration goals. The
stabilization and association agreement with the EU,
which we hope will be signed this summer, will be a
milestone in relations between the EU and Kosovo,
anchoring Kosovo within the EU's Western Balkans
policy and supporting necessary economic and social
reforms in the country.

Establishing respect for the rule of law is
fundamental to achieving a durable peace, and
accountability for past crimes is integral to the rule of
law. We stress the importance ofestablishing a specialist
court to address the allegations raised in the December
2010 Marty report. We welcome the progress made in
preparing the relevant constitutional amendments and
the legislation for establishing specialist chambers to
try cases stemming from the findings of the European
Union Special Investigative Task Force. We note the
positive ruling of the Kosovo Constitutional Court
and the deployment of the new Chief Prosecutor of the
Task Force, David Schwendiman. We look forward to
Kosovo's honouring its commitment and the approval
by the Assembly later this week of the relevant
constitutional amendments that will pave the way for a
specialist court.

We welcome the Kosovo authorities' commitment
to pursuing necessary reforms. The new Government
programme for the period from 2015 to 2018 is a
very promising start. It aims to catalyse economic
development, employment and welfare, improve the
rule of law, implement structural reforms and make
progress on the EU integration agenda, as noted in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/303). We welcome
the adequate focus by the Kosovo Government on
creating social and economic opportunities for the
people of Kosovo that in the long run will encourage
them to stay in the country and contribute to its
prosperity.

While the security situation has remained calm, we
have taken note of the continuing role that the Kosovo
Force plays in ensuring security. We welcome its
continued coordination with the European Union Rule of
Law Mission (EULEX), which also plays an important
role in consolidating the rule of law. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank EULEX for expediting
the investigation into the murder of EULEX customs
officer Audrius Senavicius in 2013. The approval of the
law on prohibiting thejoining ofarmed conflicts outside
the territory of Kosovo - along with Kosovo's support
for the South-East European Cooperation Process
resolution on combating terrorism and strengthening
anti-terrorist cooperation within the region and with
European and international partners - demonstrates
Kosovo's determination to address the issue of
radicalization and violent extremism.

Kosovo's efforts to be a responsible regional
partner and to develop good neighbourly relations are
particularly welcome. We would encourage further
promoting ethnic and religious tolerance and peaceful
coexistence as a direct contribution to the security,
stability and prosperity of the Western Balkans region.

Finally, like many delegations around this table,
we believe that reducing the discussion of the UNMIK
report to twice yearly rather than quarterly meetings
would be a reasonable step forward in acknowledging
the progress being made in normalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina and with stability in
Kosovo. We also have in mind the very full agenda that
the Council has and the many crises we have to tackle.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
