Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Zarif for his briefing. We welcome him in his new
role as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I thank
Foreign Minister Hoxhaj and Foreign Minister J eremic'
for their presence here today and for their statements.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2011/675) highlights the challenges to
long-term peace and security in Kosovo and the Balkan
region. However, it also highlights the successes that
Kosovo and the region have achieved, including the
2 September agreement by Belgrade and Pristina to
recognize each other's customs stamps, as well as
ongoing cooperation on cultural heritage projects.
Despite the recent violence caused by the acts of a few
extremists, the United States remains optimistic that
Kosovo and Serbia can eventually resolve their
differences and that Kosovo will continue to develop
the successful institutions of a democratic nation. I
would like to make four points today.

First, we echo the Secretary-General's call for the
Kosovo Force (KFOR) to continue its efforts to ensure
freedom of movement throughout Kosovo. The Council
has affirmed that Kosovo is a single customs space.
That is fully in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999)
and was a key point in the Secretary-General's
November 2008 report on UNMIK (S/2008/692),
which the Council welcomed in its presidential
statement of 26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44).
Kosovo therefore has the right to control its borders
and to uphold the rule of law, in full cooperation with
the international community. It cannot be considered
unilateral action for Kosovo to enforce its customs
controls. Moreover, Kosovo also coordinated its
activities with the international community, including
KFOR and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX).

Furthermore, Kosovo announced its intention to
establish full border and customs functions at the gates
after Serbia agreed to recognize the Kosovo customs
stamp at the 2 September dialogue. Kosovo established
those functions, in accordance with an operational plan
coordinated with EULEX and KFOR. The obstructions
to freedom of movement are due to the actions of hard-
line Kosovo Serb factions, with the support of illegal
parallel institutions and, in some cases, with the
endorsement of Serbian Government officials. We call
on all actors, including the Serbian Government, to
cooperate fully with KFOR and EULEX in the
immediate removal of the remaining roadblocks, in
ensuring proper controls at the borders and in
supporting the rule of law through cooperation on the
arrests of key criminal suspects. UNMIK can best
facilitate those goals by clearly supporting the presence
of Kosovo customs officials at the border gates and by
emphasizing that Kosovo is a single customs space.
We remain deeply concerned by the violence in
northern Kosovo during recent months, including the
murder of a Kosovo police officer on 26 July; attacks
on nine KFOR soldiers on 27 September; injuries to
21 KFOR soldiers on 23 and 24 November; and, on
25 November, injuries to over 25 KFOR soldiers,
including two wounded by gunfire while attempting to
remove roadblocks that obstructed freedom of
movement.

It is a serious matter that such incidents occurred
while Serbian security structures remained illegally
deployed in those areas. Members of the Council
should be unequivocal in condemning the violence
perpetrated against KFOR and in supporting the
Mission. Just as any attack on United Nations
peacekeepers is unacceptable, so is any attack on
KFOR.

My Government emphasizes that KFOR's actions
have been and continue to be in complete accord with
its mandate under resolution 1244 (1999). We
commend KFOR for using minimal force in self-
defence to de-escalate the situation, and we believe
that Serbia's request to the Secretary-General for a
special investigation into the events of 27 September is
unwarranted.

Secondly, we welcome the progress that has been
made by the European Union (EU) to facilitate a
dialogue to date, but we note that a long list of critical
issues remains unresolved. We commend the
Government of Serbia for returning to the dialogue as
of 21 November for the seventh meeting, in which the
parties agreed on mutual acceptance of university
diplomas, and we commend the Government of Kosovo
for its progress in implementing previously reached
agreements. We call on both sides to demonstrate
flexibility as they return to the table tomorrow,
30 November. The European Union continues to have
our full support in its facilitation of the dialogue. It is
the primary - indeed, the only - high-level dialogue
between the two countries and should be vigorously
supported by all parties.

Thirdly, we would like to comment on some
assertions in the Secretary-General's report. For
example, the Government of Kosovo has substantially
increased human and financial resources in support of
its returnees, even though their number has decreased.
Kosovo's funding for the reintegration of returnees
increased tenfold from 2010 to 2011. In addition, the
central Government has increased its coordination with
municipalities and established new mechanisms for
better addressing the needs of returnees. The low
number of voluntary returns is not surprising, given
difficult economic conditions and still unresolved
property disputes. We also note that many potential
returnees have integrated into their new places of
residence over the past 12 years.

Furthermore, we do not agree with the claim that
an embargo imposed by the Government of Kosovo has
directly caused the supposed hardship in the Kosovo
Serb community. Any denial of access to goods or
services is a direct result of actions by northern
Kosovo Serbs and their parallel institutions, which
severely limited freedom of movement for people and
goods by installing numerous barricades and using of
threats and acts of violence. Neither KFOR nor the
Government of Kosovo can be fairly accused of
blocking the import of any goods.

My final point is that the United States fully
supports Ambassador Clint Williamson in his new role
as lead prosecutor for the international Special
Investigative Task Force. The Task Force will continue
the EULEX investigation into the allegations set forth
in the report of the Council of Europe's Special
Rapporteur, Dick Marty. EULEX's mandate is
enshrined in Kosovo's Constitution and laws, and the
EU Joint Action explicitly provides for EULEX to
investigate and prosecute serious crimes, such as those
alleged in the Marty report, and to do so independently.
Furthermore, neighbouring States, including Serbia,
have offered the Task Force their full cooperation. We
believe there is therefore no need for the Security
Council to interfere with EULEX's ongoing
investigations.

The international community has invested
extraordinary amounts of time and resources in
maintaining peace and security in Kosovo and the
Balkan region. The entire region is now on the
threshold of fulfilling its Euro-Atlantic aspirations.
This opportunity should not be squandered because of
actions by a few extremists. In the long term, the multi-
ethnic communities in Kosovo will bear full
responsibility for their own future. They will decide
whether their future will be characterized by deadlock
and strife or dialogue and cooperation. In the short
term, however, the international community must
ensure that physical and political barriers do not
prevent them for attaining their goals and obtaining
their rights.

