Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin previous speakers
in expressing Malaysia's appreciation to you, Sir, and
the delegation of New Zealand for convening this
important and timely open debate. Iwish to acknowledge
the presence of many leaders and ministers in the
Chamber this morning, which underscores the urgency
of discussing the international peace and security
dimensions of the multifaceted challenges faced by
small island developing States (SIDS) today.

Malaysia welcomes this debate, which, in our
view, provides a valuable platform for discussing and
exchanging views on how we can collectively address
the peace and security challenges faced by SIDS in
their quest for sustainable development and universal
prosperity. My delegation also wishes to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
the Prime Ministers of Samoa and Jamaica, as well as
the Finance Minister of Seychelles, for their respective
briefings, which we followed with much interest.

Malaysia believes that the plight faced by SIDS,
particularly the devastating impact of climate change
on their countries and populations, must be given due
attention by the Council. We subscribe to the view that,
if left unchecked, climate change could, in fact, be the
greatest threat multiplier endangering global security.
What seems clear is that climate change threatens SIDS
at the environmental, social and economic levels. The
adverse impacts of climate change, such as coastal
erosion and rising sea levels, threaten territorial
integrity, food security, water, energy, health, and more
broadly, efforts by SIDS to eradicate poverty. In the
long run, climate change poses an existential challenge
to SIDS.

We share the view that the challenge posed by
climate change to SIDS is exacerbated by certain
factors. For example, their small size limits their
capacity to harness growth opportunities and restricts
their options for economic diversification, leading to
increased dependence on trade and commerce. Those
challenges, which are quite specific to SIDS, deserve
our attention and special consideration. We should
not allow those factors to erode States' capacities or
eventually threaten State stability. Peace and security
cannot exist without development, and development
cannot be achieved without peace.

Another key area of concern is the fact that, to
date, adequate financial resources have not been
made available to SIDS for the implementation of
climate-change adaptation and mitigation projects. In
that regard, Malaysia is pleased to note the decision
of the board of the Green Climate Fund to aim for a
floor of 50 per cent of the adaptation allocation for
particularly vulnerable countries, including SIDS.
Malaysia believes that SIDS must be equipped with
the necessary capacity to gain access to the Fund. At
the same time, more vigorous efforts towards reducing
climate-change impacts on SIDS could be achieved,
if agreement on greenhouse gas emissions reduction
targets at the forthcoming twenty-first session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change could be
found.

With a view to better understanding such challenges
and in an effort to make further progress in addressing
them, Malaysia was pleased to join Spain in hosting
an Arria Formula meeting of the Council on a similar
topic last month. Among the main views shared during

the meeting was the need for the Council to be more
engaged on the security impacts of climate change.

Successive agreements concluded in Barbados
and Mauritius paved the way for the Samoa Pathway
(General Assembly resolution 69/15, annex) adopted
just last year at the third International Conference on
SIDS, which sought, inter alia, to boost capacity of SIDS
to achieve more sustainable development. Among other
things, the Samoa Pathway has called on the United
Nations system to support the SIDS by incorporating
their priorities into the relevant frameworks of the
system.

Malaysia remains committed to assist SIDS in
their pursuit of sustainable development. Malaysia
believes that human resource development and
capacity-building are two key elements for achieving
sustainable development. We have been providing
technical assistance and sharing our experience in those
fields through the Malaysian Technical Cooperation
Programme. Since its inception in 1980, the Programme
has seen the participation of approximately 3,400
participants from 41 SIDS. Apart from short courses in
Malaysia, we also offer the services of experts to SIDS
in areas where Malaysia has the relevant and proven
expertise. Since the SIDS Conference in Samoa last year,
Malaysia has increased its allocation to the Malaysian
Technical Cooperation Programme for courses and
programmes relevant to SIDS. In 2015, to date, a total
of 58 participants from SIDS have attended 19 short
courses. Malaysia remains committed to sharing its
development experience with the SIDS, particularly in
the field of poverty eradication and capacity-building,
at both the regional and the international levels.

The peace and security issues facing SIDS will
have far-reaching impacts over the decades ahead. We
must continue to highlight the unique challenges that
confront those countries in order to mobilize greater
international support for their developmental needs.
We urge the Council to listen to the voices of SIDS and
undertake the action necessary to ensure that their path
to a resilient future is stable and secure.

