I am honoured to be able to address the Security Council this afternoon to present the fifth report (see S/2020/1107) on the activities of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). Today marks three years since the Government of Iraq was able to proclaim that the sacrifices and courage of the Iraqi people had prevailed and that all territories in their country had been liberated from the shadow of Da'esh. I wish to begin today by recognizing the continued strength and resilience of all communities of Iraq, which have been so central both in delivering that victory and in taking the subsequent steps, together with our team, to deliver justice for the victims and survivors of Da'esh crimes. Last month, I was again able to personally bear witness to the strength and courage of those communities, standing side by side with the families of victims at the "grave of the mothers" site at the Solagh Technical Institute in Sinjar, as our Team supported its excavation. The mass grave serves as a reminder of the depths of horrors inflicted by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) on the people of Iraq, containing the remains of teenage children and women executed after having been deemed to be past child-bearing age. In speaking with the sons, daughters and other relatives of those whose remains lay in that grave, I was struck, as I have been so often in my engagement with impacted communities in Iraq, by the painfully present legacy of trauma that ISIL has left in its wake. Our work at those sites and the presence of those who have lost their family members at the hands of ISIL underline both the continued urgency of our task and the need to ensure that our work is conducted in a manner sensitive to the experiences of those whom we seek to serve. The psychosocial support provided on site by UNITAD experts and the holding of a Yazidi religious ceremony upon the commencement of excavations reflect our attempts to ensure that those who have suffered from the crimes of Da'esh receive the compassion and understanding they need, as we work with them to hold the perpetrators to account. It is my personal commitment that, as we continue our excavations in Zaghrutiyah, Anbar and Mosul early next year, our Team will ensure that the work, and indeed all of our investigative activities, are guided by a trauma- informed approach. The recommencement of mass grave excavations one month ago provides one example of the way in which the Team has developed innovative solutions and drawn on its partnership with survivors, Iraqi national counterparts and other actors in order to confront the unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) over the past six months. New approaches have been required across all aspects of our work. The collection of testimonial evidence has continued following the development of new protocols facilitating the conduct of remote interviews. The development of a new online portal allowing for the submission of evidence directly to the Team provides a safe, secure and user-friendly platform through which we have been able to empower members of impacted communities to come forward with their accounts. Through collaboration with Iraqi security services, we have been able to develop enhanced procedures for the movement of investigators in Iraq, ensuring that the most high-priority field activities can continue in compliance with COVID-19 travel restrictions. In parallel, we have partnered with leading technology companies in order to bring cutting-edge analytical tools into our work, significantly reducing the time needed for large-scale data processing. Through a recent initiative with the Microsoft Corporation, the Team has strengthened its ability to utilize facial detection and recognition, machine translation, and automatic detection and labelling of videos with graphic content. Drawing on those innovations, I can confirm to the Council that progress has continued in our key lines of investigation. As reflected in my report, that continued momentum allows us to now envisage the finalization of the first thematic case briefs in the first half of next year, addressing our investigations into crimes committed against the Yazidi community in Sinjar and the massacre of unarmed air cadets and other personnel in Tikrit. In parallel, the Team has continued to expand its lines of investigation, with six dedicated field investigation units now in place, including three new units established in large part thanks to generous financial contributions made by the United States and the United Kingdom. As a result, investigations in relation to crimes committed against the Christian, Kaka'i, Shabak, Sunni and Turkmen Shia communities are also now progressing rapidly. That diversification of our investigative work represents the realization of an undertaking I gave to the Council at the outset of our work - that we will ensure there is no "hierarchy of victim" (S/2020/547, annex I, p. 4) in our approach to the implementation of our mandate. All communities in Iraq suffered at the hands of ISIL and all of them must be engaged in efforts to hold ISIL to account. Faced with the unprecedented challenges posed by COVID-19, UNITAD has further strengthened its cooperation with Iraqi authorities and those of the Kurdistan region. I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to the National Coordinating Committee of the Government of Iraq for the excellent support that it has provided during this extraordinary period. That cooperation is reflected in a significant step we have recently taken with the Government of Iraq and the International Commission on Missing Persons through the establishment of a joint national mass graves excavation strategy. For the first time, the strategy provides a unified, coherent framework guiding action across all mass grave excavation work in Iraq. Excavations are now clearly aligned with the criminal investigative priorities of both Iraqi authorities and UNITAD, with support provided by the Team in the deployment of advanced technological tools and evidence-collection practices to ensure that such sites are addressed in line with international standards. The utmost priority is also being given to ensuring the prompt return of remains to the families of victims, which, it has been confirmed, will commence before the end of this year. A major evidence-digitization project is now under way, aimed at making the vast documentary archives held by Iraqi authorities fully accessible for use in criminal proceedings for the first time. More than 18 Iraqi authorities have now engaged in the project, completing initial evidence-assessment surveys and confirming existing challenges in evidence storage and processing. That initial work has underlined the significant scale of evidentiary material that will ultimately be collected, stored and made available in criminal proceedings through the initiative. Through our recent engagement with one counter-terrorism court in northern Iraq, the Team has identified tens of thousands of pieces of evidentiary material, including a wide range of internal ISIL records of potential relevance to ongoing cases against identified perpetrators. During my recent meeting with His Excellency the Prime Minister of Iraq, we recognized that it is through such a unified approach that we can together ensure that the evidence of ISIL crimes in Iraq is fully harnessed in domestic efforts to hold those responsible to account. That collaborative approach has also been reflected in my recent meetings with the Prime Minister and President of the Kurdistan Regional Government, to whom I am grateful for their ongoing support in the implementation of the mandate of the Team. As reflected in my report, that commitment to delivering meaningful accountability for ISIL crimes has also extended to recent action taken by the Iraqi authorities with respect to the legal basis for the prosecution of ISIL members in Iraq. I have been very encouraged in recent months by the efforts made in the Iraq Council of Representatives to take forward legislation that would allow for the prosecution of ISIL crimes under Iraqi domestic law as war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. That would be a significant step forward in responding to the calls of survivors for prosecutions to reflect the true nature and gravity of the crimes inflicted upon them by ISIL. I am further encouraged that such legislation contemplates a modality through which UNITAD may support such prosecutions in a manner consistent with its terms of reference. The initiative should engender the support of all Member States seeking to promote accountability for ISIL crimes. In the past six months, our cooperation with the Iraqi judiciary has entered a new phase, with agreement reached on a new project through which the Team will provide training and support to Iraqi investigative judges in building case files for the prosecution of ISIL members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. I am pleased to note that progress has already been made in that regard, with initial case files identified for development in relation to the widespread sexual slavery committed by ISIL and a high-level member of ISIL who is currently in detention. I wish to emphasize that the arrangement for the provision of meaningful support by UNITAD to Iraqi investigative judges represents an important moment in the implementation of our mandate. Allied with the potential adoption of legislation in Iraq allowing for the prosecution of international crimes, we can, for the first time, begin to see a clear path towards the fulfilment of the promise made by the Council to survivors and impacted communities three years ago in resolution 2379 (2017). As I have reflected previously to the Council, that commitment is not made good solely through the collection and preservation of evidence. It is not sufficient for us to simply gather evidence of ISIL crimes. Our commitment will be satisfied only when the evidence is presented in court and survivors of ISIL atrocities are able to see their abusers held accountable in accordance with the rule of law. To that end, I can also confirm to the Council that I have continued to engage with the Government of Iraq with a view to establishing modalities for the sharing of evidence with the competent Iraqi authorities in accordance with the terms of reference. In parallel, we have also reinforced our engagement with national authorities in other jurisdictions through the provision of support in ongoing domestic proceedings in line with our mandate. In the past six months, that spirit of partnership in the face of adversity has also extended to our engagement with all parts of Iraqi society. Our cooperation with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in particular has been strengthened through the establishment and initial meetings of the UNITAD-NGO Dialogue Forum. The creation of that platform represents the fulfilment of a priority I had set at the outset of our work to ensure that all parts of Iraqi civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations connected to the communities of Iraq, benefit from a dedicated space in which they can engage openly with our Team. Those entities have already served as crucial partners in the implementation of our mandate through their role in facilitating engagement with impacted communities and empowering survivors to come forward with their accounts. I am delighted that we now have a forum in which we can benefit from their expertise and unique perspective. In addition to our partnership with Iraqi civil society, I have continued to be profoundly grateful to the religious leadership of Iraq for the support of its representatives for our work. In July, building on the adoption of the landmark interfaith statement on the survivors and victims of ISIL earlier this year, I was delighted to host a joint meeting with the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect and with Religions for Peace, at which the leaders of the Shia, Sunni, Yazidi, Christian and Kaka'i faiths in Iraq reiterated their common commitment to support the prosecution of ISIL members in fair trials, in cooperation with UNITAD. As reflected in the interfaith statement itself, the collective support of faith leaders across Iraq for the work of our Team represents a crucial repudiation of any claim by Da'esh to scriptural legitimacy. It is by divorcing their criminal actions from any religious basis or justification that we can inoculate future generations in Iraq - and globally - from attempts to radicalize the most vulnerable members of society. In that spirit, I am delighted that His Holiness Pope Francis will visit Iraq in the coming year. Two years after the arrival of our initial team in Baghdad, the progress that we have made in our investigative work, allied with the crucial partnerships that we have developed with our Iraqi counterparts, has allowed us to begin now to consider what the ultimate fulfilment of our mandate will look like. As reflected in my report, with a view to establishing a comprehensive framework for the next stages of our work, we have enhanced our investigative strategy in order to ensure the effective delivery of its three mutually supportive pillars. Through the production of thematic case briefs outlining the constituent elements of crimes substantiated by our investigations, the finalization of individual case files tying Da'esh members to the crimes they have committed and the provision of targeted support for ongoing proceedings, I believe that in the coming year we will significantly strengthen the basis on which Iraqi authorities and those of other States can take forward domestic proceedings in relation to those members of Da'esh most responsible for its crimes. While the challenges of the past six months have been unprecedented, the Team looks forward to the coming year with renewed hope that the legitimate demands for justice of survivors will be met. The unique partnership underpinning the Team's mandate - between independent investigations based on close collaboration with national authorities and international standards adapted to domestic contexts - is working. That innovative model of criminal accountability, developed by the Council three years ago, now provides an opportunity to instigate a paradigm shift in the investigation and prosecution of Da'esh crimes. In seeking to grasp this moment, the Team will continue to rely on Council members' unanimous support.
