Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): Thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this debate
today. I would also like to thank Mr. Fernandez-
Taranco for his briefing, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements.

It has been more than one year since the start of
the revolution in Tunisia, which sparked the wave of
calls for democratization across the Middle East. The
process of change and reform continues in Tunisia,
Egypt, Yemen and Libya. Although the process will be
long and difficult, we believe that it will result in the
fulfilment of the legitimate aspirations of the peoples
of all four countries. We, our international partners and
the United Nations will continue to support the process
of reform in every way we can. But we are clear that
the primary responsibility for shaping the future in all
those nations lies with the people themselves.

In Syria the struggle for freedom continues to be
crushed with horrific brutality by a regime that has
failed to recognize the unstoppable momentum of its
people's desire to win their legitimate universal rights.
It is simply a fact, borne out by countless examples
over recent history, that autocratic regimes that use
repression to cling to power do not survive indefinitely.
The Syrian regime must now stop its prevarication,
procrastination and deception. In accordance with the
League of Arab States plan of action and its
communique of 22 January, the regime must
immediately and verifiably put an end to the violence,
release all those who have been arrested during the
protests, withdraw all military and security forces from
cities and towns and allow free access to international
media. It is time for the Security Council to take robust
action in support of the Arab League, with the
objective of stopping the violence and, as the
communique makes clear, ushering in a rapid Syrian-
led political transition that leads to free and fair
elections.

In that context, we are concerned about the
supply of weapons into Syria - whether sales to the
Government or illegal smuggling to the regime or the
opposition. When questioned by the BBC on
16 January about the supply of weapons to the Syrian
Government, the representative of one Council member
responded that continued sales of arms to Syria had
"no effect on the situation at all". We fundamentally
disagree. It is glaringly obvious that transferring
weapons into a volatile and violent situation is
irresponsible and will only fuel the bloodshed.

Against the backdrop of changes across the
Middle East, it is as crucial as ever to ensure that the
Palestinians too secure their legitimate rights. The
creation of a sovereign, independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State is long
overdue. The new talks taking place in Jordan have,
thankfully, ended the protracted impasse. But those
must be much more than just talks or an attempt by one
side or the other to shift the blame for failure. Both
sides must now present concrete plans on borders and
security as the basis of substantial negotiations of two
of the core issues.

In order for those talks to be successful, they
need to be conducted in an atmosphere conducive to
making progress. It is difficult to see how such an
environment can be created while settlement-building
and settler violence continue. Israel's continued
settlement announcements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, send a devastating
message. The systematic and deliberate expansion of
settlements not only damages the prospects for a
negotiated settlement, it threatens the very idea of the
future Palestinian State. Along with the other European
members of the Council, as well as a number of other
Council members, we were clear, following last
month's briefing (see S/PV.6692), that all settlement
activity, including in East Jerusalem, must cease
immediately and that Israel should reverse its
announced plans.

We believe that a negotiated solution to the
Israel-Palestine conflict is achievable. The parameters
are well known to all: borders based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps; security arrangements that respect
Palestinian sovereignty and demonstrate that the
occupation is over, while protecting Israeli security; a
fair and agreed solution for refugees; and Jerusalem as
the capital of both States.
If the parties fail to present and negotiate on
concrete proposals on borders and security, it will not
be because of a lack of solutions. There have been
many options aired over decades of negotiations.
Failure will be a direct result of a lack of political will.
Neither party can afford to demonstrate such
complacency in the context of a radically changing
region.

