Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Mr. President, let
me also join in commending you for convening this
open debate. We also congratulate the Secretary-
General on preparing an excellent report on the
challenges faced by civilians caught in conflict.

It is critical for the Security Council to reassert
itself in its mandated role of guaranteeing global peace
and security. This will go a long way in restoring the
credibility of the entire United Nations, particularly on
the African continent. In our continent, we emphasize
the importance of peace and security as prerequisites
for development and prosperity. The Organization of
African Unity long ago adopted a framework of action,
in the form of a Declaration on Security, Stability,
Development and Cooperation in Africa. Other
organizations or agencies, such as the Economic and
Social Council, have critical roles to play as well. I
must pause to say that we look forward to the meeting
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council later on this week. It is therefore
important to have coordination between all relevant
stakeholders in rebuilding peace and security. It is
important for the Security Council to support these
activities wherever they may be carried out.

In your guidelines sent to us, Mr. President, you
raised important issues which my delegation would like
to address. First, the Security Council should establish
and appropriately support credible mechanisms of
international law, such as ad hoc criminal tribunals. In
this regard, the Special Court for Sierra Leone must be
fully supported and adequately funded, like the
Tribunals which were created to address the tragedies
of Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We note the appeal by the
Secretary-General for contributions for the Sierra
Leone Special Court. However, it is disappointing to
note that the Sierra Leone Court is to be funded by
voluntary contributions. My delegation believes that
the Security Council needs to revisit the decision on
the funding of the Sierra Leone Special Court.

Secondly, the Security Council's failure, so far, to
protect the Palestinian civilians caught in conflict in
the occupied territories, including Jerusalem, remains
an indictment against this body. The Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War outlines the collective
responsibility of the High Contracting Parties. It is
incumbent upon the international community, including
the Security Council, to undertake resolute action
against States bearing responsibility for violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law.

The Security Council can reflect its commitment
to the establishment of a secure and peaceful
environment for civilians caught in conflict through its
peacekeeping mandates. In the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, the Security Council must
make adequate provisions for disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation and
resettlement. This is important for achieving a durable
peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
the Great Lakes region as a whole.

In conclusion, the importance of conflict
prevention cannot be over-emphasized. In our View, the
protection of civilians begins with the prevention of
conflict. In this regard, we welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General to promote a culture of prevention in
the work of the United Nations. We agree that the time
has come to replace the culture of impunity with a
culture of accountability in the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. For durable peace in the twenty-
first century, it is not enough for the Security Council
to rely solely on peacekeeping.

