Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2269 (2016). While we did not
block the proposal of the Secretary-General with
regard to the appointments to the post of President and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, our delegation does not support
that proposal and would like to express its very serious
concerns about the chosen candidates.

As we see it, given the positions occupied by the
proposed candidates in recent years in the International
Criminal Tribunal on Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
these appointments could lead to the reproduction
and continuation in the Mechanism of the significant
flaws that were characteristic of the ICTY. As is well
known, we have had many issues with the ICTY in its
over 20 years of existence. One of the most important
reasons for concern is the issue of the administration
of justice, which has become a daily issue for the
ICTY. The length of proceedings in certain trials was
extended on various pretexts, often going beyond What
could be considered reasonable. An example is the case

of Vojislav Seselj, who spent more than 10 years in
detention awaiting his sentence. It is incomprehensible
how such galling excess can go hand in hand with the
presumption of innocence or the basic guarantees of
the rights of respondents, which the ICTY has always
proclaimed.

The attempts of the Security Council to influence
the situation have not been successful. In particular,
the Council has called on the Tribunal more than
once to reduce the length of time for the completion
of cases. The Tribunal, however, has managed to avoid
following the instructions of the Security Council, and
has shown impressive creativity in finding pretexts
to justify the delays. The conclusion strategy for its
work within the framework, established by the Council
at the proposal of the ICTY itself, was constantly
sabotaged. One example is resolution 1966 (2010),
according to which the closing of the ICTY should have
occurred by 31 December 2014. The Tribunal did not
meet that deadline either. Furthermore, the delays in
administering justice were not reduced in spite of the
appeal contained in resolution 2193 (2014); the delays
in fact increased. We hope that the new President of
the ICTY, Judge Carmel Agius, will take the necessary
steps to improve the current situation.

We are very concerned by reports of the death in
February of Zdravko Tolimir in a prison in The Hague.
According to his defence lawyers, in 2015 he applied to
travel to Serbia for medical care; however, his request
was refused. This is not the first such death. For obvious
reasons, such events cause serious concerns about due
process for respondents and those convicted by the ICTY,
and with regard to such fundamental rights as the right
to life and the right to health. Measures to improve this
situation are necessary. It is important that the Office of
Internal Oversight Services investigate the work of the
ICTY medical unit. We expect corresponding proposals
or instructions from the Secretary-General.

It is important to separate the failures of the ICTY
from the work of its leadership. We would certainly
not like to see the Mechanism inherit the problems of
the ICTY, which unfortunately has not proven itself to
be an impartial body of international justice. Based on
everything I have just said, we abstained in the voting
on today's resolution because we would not like to bear
responsibility for the consequences of the proposed
appointments.
