Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank the
Secretary-General and the other speakers this morning.
We offer our special thanks to the French Presidency for
convening today's meeting, as we all need to urgently
address the issue of victims of attacks and abuses on
religious and ethnic minorities in the Middle East.

We are alarmed that extremist and terrorist groups
are creating quasi-State entities to fight against
legitimate Governments, sowing enmity and hatred
and perpetrating extrajudicial killings, torture, rape,
abductions and forcible displacement. My delegation
also condemns sexual slavery, forced conversions,
the conscription of children and other forms of
discrimination and persecution perpetrated against
vulnerable groups, in particular women and children.
We also express our deep concern about the widespread
systematic violation of human rights and the destruction
of unique cultural heritage, including sacred shrines,
and other abuses.

Kazakhstan believes that the determined and
concerted efforts of all Member States and other
relevant stakeholders, together with the United
Nations taking a leading role, are the only way to
combat Violent extremism. What is required is a long-
term, comprehensive approach involving the entire
international community, built on greater regional
and global cooperation in accordance with the United
Nations Charter and international law.

My delegation endorses the proposal of the
Secretary-General for setting up an international panel
of experts and that of the French presidency for convening
a global conference as a follow-up of today's debate. We
join other delegations in calling for greater protection
measures for minorities, especially for women and girls,
bringing perpetrators to justice and ending all impunity
with a greater use of the International Criminal Court.
Every effort has to be made to return expelled groups
to their homelands with the help of military security,
mobilize necessary humanitarian assistance and use
every means to limit the activities of terrorist groups,
such as seizing their assets, inter alia. The existing
resolutions of the Security Council must be followed up
with stronger political will. Likewise, United Nations
peacekeeping operations must now incorporate experts
on religious matters in these specific regions so as to
foster interfaith dialogue on the ground.

We need to widely use wisdom and the experience
of religious and spiritual leaders to promote mutual
respect and harmony in all regions, including in the
Middle East. They support and complement political
efforts to prevent hatred, intolerance and inhuman
crimes. In addition, sound foundations can only be laid
by teaching the values of human dignity and freedom at
all levels of education.

To avail itself of the potential and authority
of spiritual leaders, Kazakhstan every three years
convenes the Congress of the Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions as a dialogue platform to promote
mutual respect, tolerance and non-discrimination. In
June 2015, we will host the fifth Congress devoted to
the dialogue of religious and political leaders for peace
and development. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is
invited to the forum. It will also be attended by political
and religious leaders from all over the world. We believe
that the outcome of the Congress will contribute to the
protection of religious groups, including minorities, in
order keep our societies stable. Its recommendations
could be considered by the international expert group
that was mentioned today.

In conclusion, once again we urgently call on all
parties, especially those having real political power and
influence, to contribute to lasting peace and security in
the Middle East, and freedom and justice for all people.

