The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Liberia in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Osode
(Liberia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/745, which contains the text of a
letter dated 7 December 2005 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1521 (2003) concerning Liberia addressed to
the President of the Security Council transmitting the
report of the Panel of Experts on Liberia.

Members also have before them document
S/2005/792, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Denmark, France, Japan,
Romania, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1647 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

