Ms. French (United States of America): I thank

Special Representative Zerrougui. We are very pleased
to welcome her to the Council and to have her head the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
We also welcome the participation of the Vice-Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional
Integration of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. She Okitundu, in today's meeting.

Before I start, I want to take a moment to remember
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan who were kidnapped
on 12 March 2017, nearly one year ago. We remember
Michael and Zaida and their dedication to improving the
lives of the Congolese. We continue to work to ensure
those responsible for their murders will be brought to
justice.

The Democratic Republic of Congo is a country at
a critical juncture today. For the first time in history,
the people of Democratic Republic of the Congo are
on the verge of a peaceful democratic transition of
power. They have waited too long for this moment, but
their enthusiasm is clear. Despite Violence, threats and
broken promises, the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo have eagerly lined up to register to vote.
They not only have a great desire to determine their
future, but they also have an undeniable right to do so.

For nearly 20 years, the international community
has invested in MONUSCO to protect the Congolese
people from violence and to bring them closer to an
enduring, inclusive peace. That Mission is the most
expensive in United Nations and history and the most
complex. It is fair to ask ourselves what we have gotten
in return for this investment. Although the progress has
been uneven, the greatest achievement of MONUSCO's
precursor mission is clear. The July 2006 voting that
resulted in Joseph Kabila's election as President marked
the first free elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in over 40 years. It is one of the most
complex elections the United Nations has ever helped
organize - a true achievement.

Today, the challenge is related, but different. The
need to protect the security and rights of the people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, however, is
the same. Free, fair, inclusive and credible elections
leading to a peaceful transfer of power are the next
indispensable step in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's development. Like elections elsewhere, the
promised elections in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo will represent much more than the fulfilment
of the minimum right of participation in a democracy.
They will be sign of progress across the board for the
Congolese people. They will be a critical concession
on the part of the Government that it does not exist to
extract wealth and power for an unaccountable elite.

The Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, like all Governments, exists to respond to the
needs of its citizens, but before that can happen there
is much more progress to make. President Kabila has
already stayed in office long past his constitutional
term limit. His commitment to elections in December
that results in his transfer power to a successor
remains unacceptably vague. In addition, political
prisoners who were guaranteed release under the
December 2016 Political Agreement remain unjust
unjustly detained. The Government continues to pursue
questionable charges against political opponents, and
peaceful protesters have been met with violence as the
Government cuts off communication and denies their
right of peaceful assembly.

However, they are also signs of hope amid the
Violence and uncertainty. So far, the Government
is satisfying the technical requirements for holding
elections in December and, most importantly, the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
energized and ready to vote. Building on this energy
and delivering on the promise of democracy in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is now the central
task of the Security Council. As we consider the
renewal of MONUSCO's mandate, we must ensure that
it is doing all it can to ensure that elections are held on
23 December, as the Government has promised.

Our highest priority for the Mission will always
be to protect Congolese civilians from violence. Troop
and staff performance is bedrock. Accountability is
essential. Sexual exploitation and abuse cannot be
tolerated under any circumstances. However, our
focus on the performance of MONUSCO cannot be
allowed to crowd out our focus on its purpose. We are
not the devoting this much time and resources to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to reinforce
a stagnant status quo. Our objective must always be to
move forward to help the people achieve the future they
deserve.

We call on the Council to rise to that challenge as
we renew MONUSCO's mandate. The Mission must
step up to the task of ensuring that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is ready for elections. We must
hold the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo accountable for adhering to clearly defined
benchmarks as we progress towards elections. We must
ensure that Congolese in all areas of the country are
able to vote. We must ensure that the ability of citizens
and candidates to participate safely and securely in
the electoral process is respected. We must ensure the
integrity of their vote by using proven and appropriate
voting mechanisms.

Finally, and perhaps most important, we must know
when those things are not being done. MONUSCO
must report to the Council in a timely and transparent
manner when progress towards elections is not being
made and when peacekeepers fail to do their jobs. It is
for that reason that we support a trip to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to ensure continued Security
Council focus on elections.

When Ambassador Haley met with President Kabila
last year, they talked about the historic opportunity he
has to be the first leader of his country to voluntarily
yield power to a democratically elected successor. That
would be a remarkable and enduring legacy, and there
is no more important work the Council can do but to
share in that legacy. We invested a great deal in the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Now
is the time to ensure that the investment pays off, not
just for the Council but for the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

