Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of today's debate
on the progress of work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and commends
Judge Carmel Agius and Mr. Serge Brammertz, in their
respective capacities as President and Prosecutor of the
Mechanism, for their briefings.

My country takes note of the progress of the work
of the Mechanism related to judicial and administrative
activities, the enforcement of sentences, the protection
of victims and witnesses and the management of
archives. It welcomes the commitment of the President
of the Mechanism to undertake expanded consultations
to ensure greater transparency and better examine the
impact of early releases and urges him to consider
establishing conditions for early releases in appropriate
cases, as recommended by paragraph 10 of resolution
2422 (2018).

My delegation also notes with interest the leading
role of national courts in the investigation and
prosecution of the perpetrators of the war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed in
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In this regard,
it welcomes the multifaceted assistance, including
capacity-building and the sharing of best practices,
provided by the Mechanism to those jurisdictions to
enable the principle of complementarity to be effective
and national authorities to assume responsibility for
post-conflict accountability.

Stepping up cooperation between States Members
of the United Nations and the Mechanism is necessary
for increasing the effectiveness of this entity in carrying
out its mission. Unfortunately, my country notes with
regret the insufficient judicial cooperation of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, which raises the
risk that perpetrators of the aforementioned crimes will
find refuge in neighbouring States. In this context, my
delegation welcomes the constructive dialogue initiated
by the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism with
the prosecutors and national authorities of the region,
with a View to promoting regional judicial cooperation
in the area of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
crimes of genocide.

It also encourages Serbia's initiative to organize
a regional conference of prosecutors for those crimes
and urges all countries to participate. In addition,
the Mechanism needs enhanced cooperation from all
Member States in the prosecution of the remaining
fugitives suspected of committing genocide, the
enforcement of sentences and the rehabilitation and
reintegration of acquitted persons.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
for the Mechanism in its quest for optimal effectiveness
and, to that end, urges it to continue to implement the
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, contained in its evaluation report of 8 March
2018 and its audit report of 5 March 2019.

