The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Prime Minister of Croatia.
Allow me to start by thanking Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice and the delegation of the United
States of America for requesting this meeting on the
situation in Somalia, aimed at considering further
efforts that the Security Council can and should make
in combating the scourge of piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia. I would also like to mention
the contributions of all the representatives who took
the floor in this meeting. I consider their statements to
be additional confirmation of the importance that we
all attach to the grave situation in Somalia and the Gulf
of Aden.

In today's discussion, we have addressed a
serious problem that links various key aspects of the
work of the United Nations, from humanitarian
elements to the impact this problem has on
international trade, and from the overall situation in
one of the most troubled spots in Africa to the
consequences that this instability might have on the
regional and global levels.

Over the past few months, we have heard some
very worrisome statistics from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, which clearly point towards a steep increase
in pirate activities off the coast of Somalia. In 2008,
acts of piracy in that region have doubled in
comparison with the figures from 2007. These statistics
reveal that piracy and armed robbery in the western
Indian Ocean have become an increasing threat. In
examining these figures, we should always take into
consideration that behind these statistics are real
people, who are the actual victims of pirate attacks.

Allow me to mention here that three Croatian
citizens, from the cities of Rijeka and Dubrovnik, have
been kidnapped by pirates off the coast of Somalia
over the past few months. While two have been
released in recent weeks, one of them is still being held
hostage. The terrifying ordeal that he and his family
are enduring reminds us of the suffering of many
others and of the much broader implications of piracy
for the safety of maritime navigation, international
trade and the right of every nation to secure its
development in an international framework of peace
and security.

Furthermore, it reminds us of the devastating
impact that piracy is having on the dire humanitarian
situation in Somalia. The lifeline for an estimated
2.5 million people affected by drought and the food
crisis in general is being cut off by the actions of pirate
militias. For Croatia, this is an absolutely unacceptable
situation. I am confident that I can also speak for the
entire international community when I say that this is
an unacceptable situation.
In this respect, I am convinced that today's
constructive and timely deliberations have been
instrumental in bringing the international efforts to a
new level of commitment and more effective
coordination. We welcome the resolution we adopted
today, which we believe represents added value to an
already solid basis for proceeding in collective
anti-piracy efforts, since it addresses many pertinent
issues at the operational level that need to be improved,
strengthened and further elaborated.

Above all, we attach particular value to the
building up of the legal framework to address the
handling and prosecution of persons suspected of
piracy. It is of the utmost importance that the crime of
piracy, like any crime, not go unpunished. It is also
important to send a deterrent message and reverse this
low-risk, high-rewards trend that we have witnessed
over recent months.

In building these additional efforts, I want to
stress the importance of the measures already taken by
the Security Council, which are reflected in resolutions
1814 (2008), 1816 (2008), 1838 (2008), 1846 (2008)
and now in resolution 1851 (2008).

(spoke in French)

I would also like to underscore the crucial role
played by the European Union in combating piracy and
armed robbery. Croatia, as a future member of the
European Union, welcomes and fully supports the
decision taken this past week by the ministers for
foreign affairs of the European Union to launch the
first European naval operation along the Somali coast.

While we discuss this matter here in New York,
the European Union is today holding a force-
generation conference in Northwood, United Kingdom,
in order to ensure the successful implementation of
Operation Atalanta. Croatia is also participating in that
conference in the aim of identifying the most
appropriate manner to contribute to that new European
Union mission.

(spoke in English)
I would also like to stress Croatia's support and
appreciation for the prompt response of NATO, through
its Operation Allied Provider, in countering piracy off
the coast of Somalia and in escorting vessels that are
part of the World Food Programme. As a member of
the Security Council and a country acceding to NATO,
Croatia welcomes the strong cooperation between the
United Nations and NATO. The particular case of
Somalia demonstrates the significance and importance
of this form of cooperation to achieving our common
goal of advancing peace throughout the world.

The crucial role of regional organizations acting
in accordance with the mandate of the Security Council
is certainly reflected in the efforts undertaken by the
African Union Mission in Somalia. Croatia commends
the key role played by the African Union in facilitating
the delivery of humanitarian assistance through the
port of Mogadishu and contributing to the
establishment of lasting peace and stability in Somalia.

In this sense, we also appreciate the efforts
undertaken this past week at the Nairobi conference
and the constructive engagement of the countries of the
region. Their cooperation is most welcome and should
be further encouraged.

While taking stock of what international and
regional actors have done so far in countering piracy
off the coast of Somalia, we also need to note that
more effective coordination is still required. In this
respect, we value the ideas and initiatives expressed by
some delegations concerning the fact that coordination
among the plethora of actors operating in the western
Indian Ocean needs to be enhanced in order to better
utilize the deployed resources.

As a country with a long maritime tradition,
Croatia has been a strong supporter and advocate for
such actions by the Council, including through our
co-sponsorship of all the relevant resolutions thus far,
which we deem to be a solid basis for proceeding in
our collective anti-piracy efforts. All of our actions
have been guided by the conviction that the Council is
duty-bound to find an effective mechanism for
suppressing the scourge of piracy off the coast of
Somalia.

That being said, I believe that we all share the
view that, at this point in time, anti-piracy measures
alone will not be enough. Although concrete measures
need to be expeditiously agreed to in a coordinated and
consistent manner, to focus only on the question of
piracy without taking into account the wider picture in
Somalia and the complexity of its decades-long civil
conflict would be misleading. We do, however, expect
that the efforts being undertaken by Member States and
the regional organizations, which we fully support and
highly value, in the framework of the Security
Council's relevant resolutions will produce tangible
results in the theatre of operations.

Croatia also supports the active role of the
Secretary-General, including the sustained engagement
of his Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Ould-
Abdallah, in giving visibility to the issue and in
generating more support for ongoing efforts to alleviate
the negative consequences that piracy is having in that
region.

In conclusion, as I have already mentioned, we
are fully aware that the eradication of the scourge of
piracy off the coast of Somalia will require a broader
and more comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community by focusing on the root causes
of the conflict plaguing Somalia over the past two
decades.

My country stands ready to contribute to further
efforts by the Council to find and implement such a
comprehensive approach. In that regard, I would like to
conclude by also stressing the importance of local
ownership and the crucial role of Somali leaders in
cooperating with the international community in the
efforts to secure peace, stability and development.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Ahmed Jama Jengeli, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia.

