Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation is grateful for the holding of this briefing
and congratulates Mr. Huang Xia, the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
for his outstanding briefing on the implementation of
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the implementation of political processes in certain
countries of the Great Lakes region, in particular the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and the
Central African Republic. In the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, my country welcomes also the setting up
of national institutions in the wake of the most recent
elections, specifically the Parliament, as well as the
appointment of the Prime Minister and the formation
of the new Government. It urges the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to continue along
this path through the implementation of the Government
programme that was adopted on 6 September by the
Parliament in order to meet the pressing needs of
the population.

Concerning Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire takes note
of the advanced state of the preparations under way
for the 2020 elections and encourages all Burundian
stakeholders to re-engage in a political dialogue and to
pool their efforts in order to ensure the holding in 2020
of inclusive, credible and peaceful elections.

Regarding the Central African Republic, my
delegation welcomes the formation of an inclusive
Government and of the progressive restoration of State
authority in the interior of the country following the
signing on 6 February of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation. We call upon all signatories
to that agreement to respect their commitments by fully
implementing all the provisions of the agreement in
order to bring about stability and the strengthening of
peace in the country.

These positive signs lead us to hope that the
effective implementation of the Addis Ababa
Framework agreement by all stakeholders will make a
significant contribution to the restoration of peace and
stability as well as to development in the countries of
the region. However, this headway must not cause us to
lose sight of the security, humanitarian and health-care
challenges facing the Great Lakes region, particularly
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On the security front, my delegation remains
concerned by the continued activities of armed groups,
which are destabilizing the provinces of the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and forcing
the civilian population to flee to safer areas, thus
exacerbating the humanitarian crisis in the country.
We call on the countries of the region and international
partners to further support the initiatives of the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
aimed at neutralizing negative forces and stabilizing
that part of the country.

Concerning the health sector, my country remains
alarmed by the spread of the Ebola virus, which,
despite the stepped-up efforts of the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the international
community, remains a threat to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the broader region. In that respect,
we call for ongoing support from all stakeholders to
tackle this disease and strengthen preventive measures
throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
well as on the borders with neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, C6te d'Ivoire would recall that the
Addis Ababa agreement represents the cornerstone of
lasting peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the Great Lakes region. It therefore
urges the countries of the region that are signatories to
the agreement to strengthen their cooperation in various
sectors of common interest in order to collectively
meet the ongoing security, health and humanitarian
challenges facing the region.

