The President (spoke in French): 1 shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. Five years after the signing of the Minsk agreements, the implementation of their key provisions remains a dead letter, which is reflected in a deterioration of the humanitarian and human rights situation on the ground. We therefore call on the parties to implement the Minsk agreements rapidly and fully and to honour their commitments. We support the efforts made both in the Normandy format and in the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group. We welcome the conclusions of the meeting in the Normandy format held in Paris on 9 December 2019 and look forward to a continued and deepened dialogue. In order for those efforts to fully bear fruit, it is essential that a lasting ceasefire be put in place. In that regard, we are particularly concerned about the most recent escalation of violence and call for the utmost restraint. We regret that the parties, in particular Russia, continue to obstruct the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine in its monitoring and reporting tasks. We strongly encourage both sides to respect the mandate of the Mission and to allow it safe and unhindered access to all Ukrainian territory, including the territories bordering Ukraine and Russia, as well as the Crimea. We are deeply concerned about the impact of the conflict on human rights, including the right to life, the right to liberty and non-discrimination, in particular with regard to internally displaced persons. We call for free and confidential access for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and other international observers to all places of detention in the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic. The statistic of the 3.5 million people in need of humanitarian assistance reminds us that the humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine requires our attention. We urge all parties to allow full access in accordance with humanitarian principles. We are deeply concerned about the targeting of critical civilian infrastructure, such as water and sanitation facilities, as well as schools. In that regard, we welcome the endorsement by the Government of Ukraine of the Safe Schools Declaration, which demonstrates its commitment to protecting education in times of armed conflict. We remain deeply concerned about reports of the presence of Russian military equipment and personnel in areas controlled by armed formations. The presence of heavy weapons, which is contrary to the Minsk agreements, continues to be a threat to the civilian population on both sides of the line of contact. We call for a complete withdrawal of those weapons as well as the disengagement of troops from the designated areas. As eastern Ukraine is one of the most mine-contaminated areas in the world, we call for further efforts to demarcate and mark contaminated areas, as well as for mine clearance, especially in the vicinity of schools and entry and exit points. We are concerned about the underfunding of the humanitarian response plan and call on the international community to engage more actively in this area. In conclusion, we call on all parties to work towards a lasting solution to this conflict, based on respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
