Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by conveying my gratitude to the Spanish
presidency for having organized this public debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. I would also like to thank Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General, for his briefing.
I welcome the presence among us of Ministers for
Foreign Affairs who have travelled so far specifically
to participate in this meeting. My statement will focus
only on the Palestinian question.

Today's debate is taking place at a moment when
an upsurge of violence has raged across East Jerusalem
and the West Bank as a result of the incursion by Israeli
extremists on the esplanade of Al-Aqsa Mosque. The
renewed deadly acts of violence serve as a pointed
reminder that the status quo can no longer be sustained,
with its litany of repression, deprivation and frustration
that only further poisons the already explosive situation.

We would like to reiterate our strong condemnation
of all forms of violence, regardless of the perpetrators,
and to call upon all parties to exercise calm and
restraint. In that respect, we welcome the recent visit
to the region by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his commendable efforts to encourage the parties to
ease tensions, thereby avoiding further deterioration of
the situation. We hope that renewed diplomatic efforts,
particularly the upcoming meeting of the Quartet, will
help to douse the flames and lead to a resumption of
dialogue.

It would be wrong of us to overlook the deep-rooted
sense of frustration and the lost hopes of the young
Palestinians who are expressing their anger in the face
of the continuing, unending occupation of their country
and in the absence of any political prospects that reflect
their legitimate aspirations for a Viable, independent
State.

Among the main factors causing the deadlock in
the political process and the farming of the flames of
tension and anger are the expanded settlement policy,
the illegal expropriation of land, the demolition of
housing and the building of housing units, arbitrary
administrative detention and indiscriminate repression,
among other things. Added to that is the impunity
enjoyed by the occupying Power, and the inability of
the international community to accomplish anything.
The indiscriminate repression of innocent civilians and
the daily humiliation inflicted on the Palestinians only
serve to add oil to the fire and further entrench the most
radical positions.

In a region already torn by a number of crises
and threatened by terrorism, it is in the interests of
the entire international community, including Israel,
to find a rapid and lasting solution to the Palestinian
question. To that end, the international community
must spare no effort in diffusing the violence under
way and to give a glimmer of hope to the Palestinian
people for a credible political process, with a deadline,
that will make the two-State solution a tangible reality.
In that respect, international public opinion, and the
Palestinian people especially, hope to see the Security
Council put less store by declarations of intention and
focus more on concrete action aimed at protecting
civilians and putting an end to the occupation.
The Palestinian people have waited for too long.
Their suffering is enormous, as they await the resumption
and hypothetical conclusion of the political process.
Chad therefore wishes to express its full backing for
the idea of placing the holy sites in Jerusalem and the
Palestinian people under international protection.

The grave violations committed against innocent
civilians must be subjected to an independent
international inquiry, aimed at bringing the
perpetrators to justice. To do so, the Security Council
must immediately assume its full responsibility
vis-a-vis all parties, in keeping with the Charter of
the United Nations and its own relevant resolutions on
the Palestinian question, which have remained dead
letters since their adoption. The already undermined
credibility of the international community as a whole
depends on that.

Despite failing to take on its responsibility to
implement the two-State solution, the Security Council
cannot continue to deny the Palestinian State the right
to join the United Nations as a full-fledged Member,
within its pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. There is no alternative to the two-State solution.
I would like to refresh the Council's memory with
the reminder that Israel was created through General
Assembly resolution 181 (II), of 29 November 1947.

By way of conclusion, I would like to pose the same
question as that posed by the Minister of Malaysia:
Why is it that what was possible for Israel back in 1947,
is not possible for Palestine in 2015?

