I begin by thanking the German presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's open debate on this important issue. As stated by Secretary- General Antenio Guterres, human rights are intrinsically linked to peace and security. The Security Council and the whole international community should keep that connection in mind at all times. Malta aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 25) and would like to underline a few points in its national capacity. Human rights are a crucial pillar of the United Nations, and their importance is highlighted in a number of instances in the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We are pleased to note that human rights are being increasingly recognized and incorporated as a key element of peacekeeping, as they provide a solid foundation on which to build healthy, inclusive and resilient societies. While the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians rests with host States, Malta also recognizes the fact that peacekeeping operations can offer a valid and mutually beneficial contribution in this field when mandated to do so. As human rights violations are an indicator of armed conflict and instability, having effective and reliable early-warning mechanisms in place is of fundamental importance. Peacekeeping missions also have a role to play in supporting the efforts of local Governments to address human rights issues in a number of areas, including intercommunal violence, arbitrary detention, forced disappearances and access to justice. Malta is keen to stress the role they have in addressing the violation of rights of vulnerable people, in particular women and children. We take this opportunity to reiterate that we are deeply concerned about reports of increased violence against women and children around the world since the start of the coronavirus disease pandemic, and we echo the Secretary-General's call for the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Malta underscores once again the importance that it attaches to justice and accountability when it comes to human rights violations. Such heinous acts cannot go unpunished, and justice must prevail for parties to reconcile and for peace to succeed. Peace without justice is fragile, and history has shown us that it is only a matter of time until another round of conflict breaks out if there is no closure. In that connection, Malta highlights the need to empower local populations and provide them with the necessary information for them to assert their human rights. Peacekeepers have an increasingly important role to play when it comes to actions in the field of human rights. In view of that, we must also ensure that they are being provided with adequate training and the necessary tools - including new technology - in order for them to be able to fully implement their mandate. We must also ensure that they meet the highest standards when serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions. Malta is pleased to note that the human rights sections of peacekeeping operations continue to build and develop their expertise when it comes to addressing human rights issues with local Governments. In conclusion, Malta would also like to highlight the importance of partnerships with civil society organizations, which are essential and uniquely positioned to offer a local perspective and sensitize peacekeepers on local customs and traditions. They can also serve as a strong link between peacekeeping missions and local populations, and help build trust and strengthen cooperation between the two sides. Their insights and close connections to local communities are invaluable, as ultimately any peace process must be a domestic effort that includes all segments of society.
