Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the delegation of France for initiating this
important discussion. I also thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his insightful briefing. We welcome
the participation of the Minister for International and
Regional Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Raymond Tshibanda.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the progress
that has been made in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and commends the Government on its efforts to
provide security to the population and establish the
infrastructure required for development. However,
more progress is needed in many areas, including
extending and strengthening the rule of law,
reinforcing legitimate State authority and providing
services to the population. Building the capacity of
State institutions, including the security sector, justice,
local administration, education and social services, is a
vital element in restoring peace and stability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, particularly in its
eastern sector. To that end, it is imperative that the
country's Government, with the support of
international stakeholders, intensifies its efforts to
establish and strengthen effective State authorities,
particularly at the local level.

We firmly believe that security sector reform and
the strengthening of security forces require a strong
commitment on the part of all stakeholders, including
the Government, the United Nations and international
partners. Reform of the national army and police is not
only a precondition for consolidating peace, it is also
one of the basic elements of long-term stability and the
effective protection of civilians.

The general elections to be held in November
constitute an opportunity for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to ensure stability and strengthen its
domestic institutions. In that regard, it is essential that
the electoral process be conducted in a secure
environment and a democratic and transparent manner.
It is vital that the United Nations, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and international
partners provide assistance to the national authorities
in holding free, fair and credible elections.

The security situation in the eastern part of the
country is still fragile. Congolese and foreign armed
groups continue to have a serious impact on the
security situation, as well as on the local population
and their human rights. It is important that the
Government, with support from MONUSCO, continue
activities that neutralize armed groups, while the
international community must bring pressure to bear on
armed groups, including the Forces democratiques de
libe'ration du Rwanda, through strict implementation of
the relevant sanctions regime. Concerning the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), we welcome the African
Union's efforts to define steps designed to protect
civilians and diminish the capacity of the LRA. We
also stress the importance of continued coordination
between peacekeeping missions and the Governments
of countries in the region in order to address the
challenges posed by the LRA.

We are concerned that a number of human rights
violations have been committed by elements of the
national security forces. We reiterate our firm belief
that the perpetrators of crimes against civilians must be
brought to justice. We welcome the steps taken by the
Government and the judicial authorities to bring to
justice those responsible for crimes committed against
civilians. Furthermore, every crime committed by
elements of the national security forces must be
properly addressed. Only security forces that enjoy the
trust and respect of the civilian population can fully
exercise their constitutional role and contribute to the
protection of human rights.

Since its establishment, the United Nations
Mission has played a significant role in ensuring peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
as well as in protecting civilians. We fully support
MONUSCO's continued efforts to strengthen the
protection of the civilian population. We welcome its
more robust posture and its efforts to develop and
implement new approaches to the protection of
civilians. By the same token, close cooperation
between the Government and MONUSCO is crucial in
dealing with the root causes of insecurity in the eastern
part of the country.

Regional cooperation and relations among
countries of the Great Lakes region represent a key
factor for lasting stabilization of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are encouraged by regional
cooperation aimed at combating the illegal exploitation
of natural resources, bearing in mind that this issue is
not only related to the economy but also has a security
and stability dimension. Effective cooperation on the
matter at regional and international levels would
significantly contribute to reducing the scope for
activities of illegal armed groups.

Despite its thorny history and many challenges,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
significant progress in recent years. We are convinced
that, with the support of the international community, it
will continue to advance on its path towards stability
and economic development.

