Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. I thank you
and the members of the Council for convening this
meeting to allow us to report on the mission with
which we were entrusted.

At a meeting held in Cairo on 22 January, the
Council of Ministers of the League of Arab States
adopted a resolution requesting that I, in my capacity
as Chairman of the Arab Ministerial Committee on
Syria, and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States brief the Security Council on the plan adopted
under that resolution and that we request the Council to
endorse the plan.

I wish to stress that our first and ultimate goal is
to serve the interests of Syria, which entails protecting
its sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity and ensuring its stability. I further stress the
importance of ensuring the solidarity and unity of the
Syrian people, harmony among its various components,
and the protection of all its ethnic, religious and social
groups. With its unique social fabric and intellectual
and cultural authenticity, Syria is dear to the hearts of
all Arabs. I address the Council today to brief it on the
resolution adopted by an organization representing all
Arabs.

We meet today under the watchful eyes of
bereaved orphans, widows, thousands of wounded,
detainees, displaced children, young people, the elderly
and women who continue to hope for the support of the
Security Council and thus to live a decent, free life
based on right, justice and good governance. It is up to
the Security Council - and its responsibility under
United Nations Charter - to realize the hopes of the
Syrian people. Indeed, we are entrusted with such a
burden by virtue of our humanitarian responsibility.

At the League of Arab States, we have worked
diligently, patiently and responsibly to find solutions
that will help us settle the Syrian crisis peacefully. On
27 August 2011, the League of Arab States adopted an
initiative to end the violence in Syria, launch an
inclusive national dialogue with the opposition to
prevent the situation from deteriorating further, and
introduce reforms in a secure and controlled
environment. The provisions and mechanisms of the
initiative were balanced, transparent and objective. It
was the only way to achieve a peaceful settlement of
the crisis based on the aforementioned goals.
12-21919

On 26 October 2011, at its extraordinary session
in Cairo, the League of Arab States reiterated the Arab
position in a resolution calling for an immediate and
complete end to the violence and killing, the
elimination of armed elements, and the rejection of a
security-based solution in a bid to avoid further
casualties and exacerbating the conflict among the
various factions of the Syrian people, preserve the civil
peace, protect civilians, and maintain the unity of the
Syrian people.

The resolution called on the Council of Ministers
of the League of Arab States to establish, at that
session, an Arab Ministerial Committee - under my
chairmanship and with the Foreign Ministers of
Algeria, Egypt, the Sudan and Oman and the head of
the Arab League as members - mandated to liaise
with the Syrian leadership in an effort to halt all acts of
violence and killing. The Committee requested the
Sudan and Egypt to persuade the Syrian leadership to
withdraw all military presences and launch a dialogue
between the Syrian people and opposition in order to
implement political reforms that would meet the
aspirations of the people. The resolution also called for
the establishment of necessary contacts with the Syrian
Government and opposition in order to prepare for a
conference of inclusive national dialogue at the
headquarters of the League of Arab States and under its
auspices that would realize the legitimate aspirations of
the Syrian people.

On 26 October 2011, the Ministerial Committee
held discussions in Damascus with President Bashar
Al-Assad. In a meeting held with the Syrian side in
Doha on 30 October 2011, the Committee agreed on a
plan of action that was welcomed at the resumed
extraordinary session of the League of Arab States,
held at the ministerial level at the League's
headquarters on 2 November 2011. The agreement was
annexed to the resolution. The plan confirmed the
official Syrian approval of the following: first, to end
all acts of violence committed by all sources in order to
protect the lives of Syrian citizens; secondly, to free
detainees held as a result of the current events; thirdly,
to withdraw all military elements from the cities and
residential neighbourhoods; and fourthly, to provide
the relevant agencies of the League of Arab States and
Arab and international media free access throughout
Syria in order to report on developments there and
monitor the situation. The plan called on the
Ministerial Committee to conduct, in parallel with
12-21919

concrete progress made by the Syrian Government
towards meeting its commitments, necessary contacts
and consultations with the Government and various
factions of the Syrian opposition with a View to
convening a national dialogue conference within two
weeks of the date of the adoption of the resolution.

Unfortunately, the Syrian Government did not
fully or immediately meet its commitments to the
League's initiative of 2 November 2011. Consequently,
the Ministerial Council decided on 12 November 2011
to adopt a host of measures, including the imposition
of economic and political sanctions on the Syrian
Government and calling on all opposition factions to
meet in Cairo for three days to agree at a forthcoming
conference on a transitional phase for Syria.

After the idea of dispatching an Arab observer
mission to Syria took shape - not to give any party an
opportunity to buy time but rather to stop the Violence
and the bloodshed - the Ministerial Council approved,
at a meeting held in Rabat on 16 November 2011, a
draft protocol on the legal status of the mission, whose
mandate was to verify the implementation of the Arab
plan in order to solve the crisis and protect civilians.
Should the Syrian Government fail to sign the protocol
or Violate any of its provisions - including those
calling for an end to the violence and killing and the
release of detainees - the resolution called for
convening the Economic and Social Council of the
League of Arab States to consider imposing economic
sanctions on Syria.

The resolution was communicated to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and requested
him to take necessary action in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations to support the League's
efforts. On 27 November 2011, the Ministerial Council
adopted a package of sanctions, including halting
flights to Syria, that would not directly affect the
Syrian people. At a meeting held in Doha on
3 December 2011, the Ministerial Committee agreed on
the details of the sanctions and relevant action. It is
worth mentioning that the Arab Ministerial Committee
continued its meetings aimed at following up on
developments in the Syrian situation; it met in Doha on
17 December 2011 and in Cairo on 8 January 2012.

Despite all those efforts, including contacts with
the Syrian Government, the Syrian side resorted to
introducing one amendment after the other to the draft
protocol, and asking all kinds of questions, to which
3
the League of Arab States provided answers and
clarifications, for more than a month. It was clear that
the Syrian objective was to stall and prevaricate in order
to avoid taking the responsibility of implementing its
commitments, which reflected the Syrian Government's
lack of political will to sign the protocol and commit to
implementing the provisions of the Arab plan.

Once the fear barrier came down and the people
started defending themselves in the face of military and
security oppression, the Syrian Government signed the
protocol on 19 December 2011. Immediately thereafter,
the Arab observer mission - the first of its kind in the
history of the League of Arab States - was deployed.
It is not unlikely that the purpose behind the Syrian
Government's signing the protocol is to enforce the
military solution under cover of its commitment to the
protocol. In fact, the Syrian Government has failed to
implement major provisions of the protocol, notably
those related to the immediate implementation of the
Arab plan of action that it had agreed to.

In briefing the Council on the Arab efforts, I wish
to take fully into account the Council's continuing
follow-up of developments in the Syrian crisis, so that
the Council will understand the reasons that prompted
the Arab States to adopt their resolution, which we
have been entrusted to convey to the Council.

At the last meeting of the Arab Ministerial
Committee in Cairo on 22 January, a comprehensive
review was conducted of the tasks accomplished by the
observer mission based on its findings. That meeting
adopted unanimously a resolution that included a
unanimously endorsed initiative on an integrated plan
for a peaceful settlement of the Syrian crisis that would
be acceptable to and implemented by all parties in
good faith and without stalling or reluctance. That
resolution has been circulated among the members of
the Security Council.

The plan constitutes a road map that is consistent
with the Charter of the United Nations and is aimed at
a rational, democratic, political solution to the crisis
and a peaceful transition of power. It provides for the
formation of a national unity Government within two
months, to be chaired by a mutually agreed figure and
to include members of the opposition. One of its tasks
would be to prepare for free and pluralistic
parliamentary and presidential elections, under a law
stipulating the conduct of such elections under Arab
and international supervision. The resolution extended
the Arab observer mission mandate by one month
despite the fact that the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States announced on 28 January the
suspension of the activities of the observer mission,
pending review of the matter by the League's Council
of Ministers, given the serious deterioration of the
security situation as a result of the escalation of the
security-based option.

The League of Arab States began to discuss the
Syrian crisis six months after it started. We have come
before the Council today after five additional months
of effort to push the Syrian Government to find a
solution to the crisis with its own people, based on the
resolutions of the League. Throughout our efforts, we
have been eager to preserve the unity and stability of
Syria as an important member of the Arab family.

Our efforts and initiatives, however, have been
completely in vain, for the Syrian Government has
regrettably failed to make any sincere effort to
cooperate with us. It is unfortunate that its only effort
towards a solution have been to kill its own people.
The reality on the ground bears witness to the fact that
the bloodshed has not stopped, that the killing machine
is still at work and that violence has continued to spread
everywhere. That approach was clearly articulated in
the declarations made by the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs at the press conference of 24 January.
After mocking the League of Arab States' plan as an
invitation to internationalization, be confirmed the
Syrian Government's rejection of the Arab solution and
declared that the security-based solution was a
necessity imposed by the situation on the ground.

The important question at this stage is: What is
the solution for a people that is being slaughtered? The
Syrian Government invokes the violence committed by
armed groups as justification. Could it not be that the
people are defending themselves after months of
killing, detention and torture? Could any leadership
continue its rule against the desire of its own people
who are calling for reform? We must not forget that the
crisis we are discussing was launched through
spontaneous, peaceful demonstrations by unarmed
citizens calling for rights that are enshrined in
international covenants and instruments. Those
demonstrators have faced live ammunition, heavy
weaponry, widespread detention and flagrant violations
of their human rights.
1241919

The Syrian regime is promoting the idea of a
hidden agenda harboured by certain States against it.
That idea is untrue and belies the position of the
international community concerning the events in Syria
resulting from the Government's policy. Many
thousands of people have died and many detainees
languish in prisons. The Government killing machine
continues effectively unabated. Sadly, funeral
processions have become scenes of massacres; schools
have been transformed into military headquarters and
even houses of worship have not been spared from the
shelling. Clearly such oppression has reached
unimaginable proportions when the throats of slogan
chanters have been slashed, as the killers of Ibrahim
Qaqoush did in Hama. Fingers of pro-freedom
cartoonists have been broken; the fate of Ali Farzat in
Damascus is a case in point.

The Council may well be aware of the adoption
by the Human Rights Council of three resolutions at its
sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth sessions, strongly
condemning Syria for the flagrant and systematic
violations committed by Syrian forces that may be
considered crimes against humanity.

In its resolution 66/176 of 19 December 2011, the
General Assembly condemned strongly and by a vast
majority the continuation by the Syrian authorities of
their serious and systematic violations of human rights.
The Secretary-General requested the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibilities and to adopt a unified
position with regard to the crisis. As for the rate of
killing taking place in Syria, the United Nations
declared that it was no longer able to keep count of the
thousands of victims and would consequently stop
doing so. A few days ago, UNICEF confirmed that the
death toll of children killed in Syria exceeded 384.

I do not believe that anyone would accept such a
number even if it were described as collateral damage.
I do not believe that any one of those children was a
member of an armed terrorist group. The Council may
well recall that human rights organizations, such as
Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, have
condemned the acts of oppression committed by the
Syrian regime against civilians and called for the
International Criminal Court to investigate the
perpetrated crimes. The International Commission of
Inquiry cited in its report issued in Geneva on
28 November 2011 that the Syrian security forces had
committed crimes against humanity. It reported
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions, enforced

disappearances and acts of torture, some of which had
been carried out in conjunction with acts of sexual
violence.

The Security Council has taken landmark
positions in supporting us, both at the national level in
our attempt to find solutions to the problems of Darfur,
Lebanon and the conflict between Eritrea and Djibouti,
or at the level of the League of Arab States with
relation to the war of Lebanon and the war in the Gaza
Strip. We look forward, in the same spirit, to the
Council's taking a positive stance by supporting the
Arab position on the Syrian crisis.

Allow me to recall that in the past, I came before
the Council with a solution to the Lebanese crisis that
did justice to the occupied Lebanese territories.
Subsequently, in Doha we embarked on the Lebanese
reconciliation that with which all here are quite
familiar. Today, the League of Arab States comes
before the Council to request that it assume its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
to address the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in Syria
by adopting a clear resolution that supports the latest
Arab initiative endorsed in the resolution of the League
of Arab States Ministerial Council in Cairo on
22 January, to which I referred earlier. We also call on
the Council to undertake all measures based on the
resolutions of the League of Arab States, specifically
economic resolutions and bans on travel to Syria. We
are not calling for military intervention; we are
advocating the adoption of concrete economic pressure
to bring the Syrian regime to understand that it cannot
avoid meeting the demands of its people. We are not
after a regime change, because this is a matter that we
believe the Syrian people should decide.

The continuation of the current situation is a
threat to the entire region and might lead to grave
repercussions if we do not remedy it in a serious and
effective manner. We at the League of Arab States have
made sincere efforts to find a solution to the crisis and
hoped that the Syrian regime would be wise enough to
realize that its approach to governance has become
obsolete.

Consequently, and since the Syrian regime has
continued to use an approach that flies in the face of
today's logic and that of the international community,
we cannot but resort to the rational solution to the
crisis that is set out in the plan that we have presented
to the Council. We hope that it will gain the Council's
support. Only through this can we hope to do justice to
the aspirations of the Syrian people, their aspirations for
freedom and for the establishment of good governance.

We call on the Council to adopt the draft
resolution sponsored by the brotherly Kingdom of
Morocco. Otherwise, we will be sending a wrong
message to the Syrian regime, one that encourages it to
continue oppressing its people. That might have serious
consequences for peace, stability and security in Syria
and the entire region.

