Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for responding to the request
by the Arab Group to convene this meeting.

For the twentieth consecutive day, the intensive
Israeli military aggression continues against the
Palestinian people and the Palestinian Authority -
despite Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002) and despite the appeals from all corners of
the Earth calling for an end to the Israeli aggression
and for the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli
occupation forces from the Palestinian cities, villages
and refugee camps which they have occupied since the
beginning of this latest military aggression.

As time passes, the horrific consequences of the
Israeli aggression are coming to light, specifically the
shocking humanitarian situation on the ground. The
Israeli forces have committed gross violations of the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, including the
premeditated killing of civilians and wide-ranging,
intensive destruction.

The war crimes committed by Israel are merely a
part of a premeditated plan to destroy not only the
Palestinian Authority but also Palestinian infrastructure
as a means of destroying the very present and future of
the Palestinian people. In the Jenin refugee camp, the
horrific Israeli acts went even further, with revelations
of a wide-ranging massacre perpetrated against the
camp's inhabitants, including women and children.
Helicopters launched missiles into the camp, where
15,000 people live in an area of only 1 square
kilometre. Bulldozers demolished homes, in many
cases with the inhabitants still inside. An even uglier
crime occurred when the occupation forces for more
than ten days prevented the International Red Cross,
the Palestinian Red Crescent, the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency and other humanitarian
organizations from entering the camp or providing any
form of emergency assistance.

Thus, the wounded suffered under the rubble, the
dead lay where they fell and the corpses could not be
recovered by their relatives.

Even now, the occupation forces are imposing
tight restrictions on the entry of humanitarian, food and
medical supplies as well as on the media and on the
entry of necessary equipment and specialized teams.
That alone is a war crime whose perpetrators must be
brought to justice.

In the past, we have called the States of the world
to indict General Shaul Mufaz, Commander of the
Israel Defence Force, for acts of murder against
civilians. We repeat that call and specifically mention
the commanders of the military units that participated
in the Jenin camp massacre. Over the past years, many
massacres have been carried out against the Palestinian
people, from the massacres at Deir Yassin and Kafr
Kassem to that at Khan Yunis. All of those massacres
were directly related, and they were linked to one
person named Ariel Sharon - Colonel Sharon in
Qibia, Defence Minister Sharon in Sabra and Shatilla.
Such massacres must not be repeated. The international
community must ensure that they do not happen again,
and that begins with taking a genuine, serious stand on
the Jenin massacre.

Let me be clear. First, there was a massacre in
Jenin, regardless of the number of casualties. Secondly,
war crimes were perpetrated everywhere else - not
only in Jenin. Civilian areas, including heavily
populated areas, were fired on with heavy weapons,
resulting in extensive, astonishing destruction. Even
the ancient towns of Nablus, Jenin and Bethlehem were
razed. Water and electricity networks, roads, buildings
and various ministries with all their records and
archives were destroyed. Males were grouped together,
abducted and detained, with approximately 5,000
detainees currently in mass detention camps. More than
1 million Palestinians have been subjected to collective
punishment that is continuing now, including a curfew
and deprivation of essential needs. Then there is the
military siege of the Ramallah headquarters of
President Arafat, the leader of our people and our
national symbol, and the siege of the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, where Jesus Christ was born.

Aside from the fact that all this is politically
unacceptable, that the situation under siege is
unbearable from a humanitarian point of view, and that
it constitutes a grave and gross violation of
international norms, even religious norms, it is truly
shameful that some parties apparently accept the Israeli
conditions for ending the sieges - conditions that in
themselves are grave violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention, including the deportation of Palestinians
inside the Church of the Nativity, and of whatever is
left of the agreements between the parties such as
handing over some individuals from the President's
office. We condemn that strongly. We condemn any
condoning of the Israeli position, which is an
escalation of its rejection of Security Council
resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). The
Palestinian side will not accept any negotiation or
conditions with respect to the implementation of those
resolutions. We insist on their immediate
implementation.

One week ago in Madrid, in the presence of the
Secretary-General, the "quartet" adopted an important
statement in that regard. That same day, the Security
Council adopted a statement supporting the "quartet"
statement and insisting on the immediate
implementation of resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002). That statement gave us hope. Along with our
Arab brethren, we agreed to delay required Council
action until results were visible on the horizon.

It is also known that the United States Secretary
of State, Mr. Colin Powell, visited the region in an
attempt to stem the deterioration, to control the
situation and to revive the political track. For our part,
we expressed our readiness to cooperate fully with Mr.
Powell in the immediate implementation of resolutions
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) and on the political front.
For their part, Mr. Sharon and the Israeli
Government took all the necessary stands to ensure the
failure of the Secretary's mission, including refusing to
withdraw from Palestinian cities and ignoring for 14
days Mr. Bush's call for an end to military activity and
a beginning of withdrawal. Still worse, they refused to
withdraw, even after the Secretary's arrival. They
persisted in creating new facts on the ground, including
besieging cities from which they had previously
withdrawn and continuing to carry out military
activities, to occupy other cities and to lay siege to
President Arafat's headquarters and to the Church of
the Nativity. The Israeli side has openly rejected the
Council's resolutions and the appeals of the world's
leaders. It persists in its aggression, all the while
flouting the will of the Council, international law and
international humanitarian law.

The question must now be asked: what does the
Security Council intend to do? We believe that it must
invoke Chapter VII of the Charter to enforce the
implementation of its resolutions. The least we can
expect is that the Council will show seriousness in the
level of respect for its resolutions and in condemning
the crimes perpetrated by the Israeli side. At the
moment, our expectations are very low. We call upon
the Council to consider and then adopt the draft
resolution now before it, contained in document
S/2002/363.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly expressed
clear positions on the current tragedy, including calling
on the Security Council to take the necessary measures.
His doing so undoubtedly proceeds from his great
moral and political responsibilities. We salute the
Secretary-General, and we call upon the Council to
respond to him, as it has always done. Today, the
Secretary-General presented a detailed briefing on his
clear position that the Security Council must create a
credible and effective multinational force, composed of
States ready to participate, that should be dispatched to
the Palestinian territories, all under the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter.

We have always called for an international
presence in the Palestinian occupied territory, including
Jerusalem. On many occasions we attempted to
cooperate with a number of Security Council members,
including the members of the Non-Aligned Movement
caucus and France, in order to work towards forming
an observer force, or even a force of civilian observers.
Unfortunately, we have not succeeded thus far.

Now we agree with the Secretary-General that
observers will not be able to undertake the required
mission. We call on the Security Council to quickly
respond to the Secretary-General and adopt his specific
proposal in this regard. The Palestinian Authority must
be given an opportunity to rebuild its infrastructures,
including its security apparatus. Some protection must
be provided to our people, and some confidence in
peace must be revitalized among them. The two parties
must agree to implement what has been agreed upon so
far in order to find a political climate and a means that
can be achieved through the Secretary-General's
proposal.

We should like to express our satisfaction at the
widespread understanding on the need to take up all
issues, including security and political issues. We
welcome the statements on the need to revitalize the
political track in order to achieve the vision of two
States, Palestinian and Israeli.

We have lately been apprised of the idea of an
international conference. At this point, I shall not take
up the ludicrous statements being made by the Israeli
side regarding the participation of the Palestinian side.
Frankly, such statements cannot be dealt with seriously.
I do, however, want to take up the idea itself. It is an
idea that the Palestinian and Arab side had set forth in
the past.

However, let me be clear at this point. Such a
conference must, in the first place, be international,
meaning full participation of the members of the
"quartet" - the United Nations, the United States, the
Russian Federation and the European Union - as well
as others. Secondly, the conference must take up all
aspects of the problem in the Middle East, including
the Syrian-Israeli track. Thirdly, and what is most
important, the conference must be based on a
comprehensive and detailed political vision, to be
agreed upon before the convening of the conference.
The conference should not be a mere mechanism, but
should rather set forth a comprehensive and substantial
plan. Substance, I would like to stress, should be first
and foremost. Then, a successful conference leading to
negotiation among the parties on the details, and
working rapidly towards a final settlement, may be
convened.

We agree with those who speak of the need to
find a means to reconcile the traditional resolutions of
the Security Council, 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), and
the new initiatives, including Mr. Powell's statement in
Louisville, resolution 1397 (2002) and Prince
Abdullah's initiative, which then became a resolution
of the Arab Summit. We must find this road. It is the
road towards a solution and peace. It is a road that
allows for the implementation of the Secretary-
General's proposal made today.

I must repeat at this point that the first, indeed the
only, step now needed is the immediate implementation
of resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002),
particularly with regard to immediate Israeli
withdrawal from Palestinian cities, which would pave
the way to the situation on the ground of before
September 2000. In the absence of that, there can be no
talk of any other step. In the absence of such a step, I
fear that Mr. Sharon and his Government will take us
all in the region, and perhaps even outside the region,
to the brink.

Let us all make sure that that does not happen.

