Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Special Representative Zerrougui for
her briefing.

The very fact that a coalition Government has
been formed in the Democratic Republic of Congo
shows that the country has achieved a smooth transfer
of power since the December 2018 elections. The
new Government has outlined a programme of work,
already approved by Parliament, that focuses on
political defence, security, economic and financial
reconstruction and the social and cultural sectors.
President Tshisekedi is pursuing an active and packed
diplomatic agenda. He has met with the Presidents of
Angola, Rwanda and Uganda. He also attended the
Southern African Development Community summit in
an effort to resolve the issue of armed groups in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by strengthening regional cooperation.

Those positive trends show that the Congolese
Government has both the ability and the will to
safeguard national security and stability and achieve
sustainable economic and social development. The
international community can further assist the
Democratic Republic of Congo in various areas of
domestic and foreign affairs, in accordance with the
priorities of the new Government programme. China
welcomed the Secretary-General's successful visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 30 August
and 1 September. In defiance of fears of the Ebola
epidemic and security threats, the Secretary-General
ventured deep into the Ebola area in the eastern
part of the country, where he met with medical staff
working to combat the epidemic and with recuperating
patients, and to inspect camps of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), in a strong demonstration of
United Nations support in the fight against the Ebola
epidemic and the security problems in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

Today I would like to focus on three issues, the
first being MONUSCO, which has long played an
important part in promoting peace and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The report
of the Secretary-General (S/209/776) indicates that
MONUSCO still has a key role to play in responding
to the security and humanitarian challenges facing the
country and that it should cooperate more effectively
with the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in tackling armed groups. In accordance
with resolution 2463 (2019), the Secretary-General
must submit to the Council a strategic review report on
the recent reform and drawdown of MONUSCO. It is
hoped that the Secretariat will continue to strengthen
its communication and consultation with the Congolese
Government and troop-contributing countries so as
to make recommendations on the future direction
of MONUSCO on a basis of full respect for the
wishes of the country concerned and in keeping with
developments on the ground.

Secondly, China believes that regional cooperation
is key to responding to foreign armed groups and
stopping the illegal flow of weapons. MONUSCO
can strengthen information-sharing and strategic
coordination with the Office of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
support the signatories to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region in fulfilling their respective
commitments, and strengthen regional cooperation and
tackle the root causes of conflict in a bid to promote
lasting peace and sustainable development in the region.

Thirdly, owing to intercommunal conflicts, violence
by armed groups and epidemics, the humanitarian
situation in parts of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has deteriorated, with approximately 11 million
people facing food crises and 4.5 million children
malnourished. China has also continued to follow
the development of the Ebola epidemic closely. Since
its outbreak in 2018, we have provided $1 million in
cash assistance to the Congolese Government and
$2 million in funding to the World Health Organization
(WHO) through the United Nations Fund for South-
South Cooperation. China will also provide emergency
humanitarian assistance to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and other countries in the near future
and cooperate with the WHO and the African Union
to control the epidemic and prevent it from spreading
further. We call on the international community to step
up humanitarian assistance, fulfil its aid commitments
and mitigate funding shortfalls.

