Mr. Zielinski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, and the delegation of Germany for
taking the important initiative to organize this timely
debate. I also thank you for the comprehensive concept
note that you have prepared (S/2011/408). My
delegation also welcomes the presidential statement
that you delivered earlier (S/PRST/201 1/15).

Poland fully aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union on behalf of its
27 member States; however, let me just add a few
remarks.

We are already experiencing effects from climate
change. Extreme weather events are becoming more
frequent and intense than ever before. While climate
change alone does not cause conflict, it is an existential
threat that can fuel conflict over food and scarce
natural resources, especially where access to those
resources is politicized. The impacts of climate change
might weaken fragile Governments and generate new
conflict.

Fortunately, there is increasing awareness among
the international community of the urgent need to take
action and place climate change within a broader
global policy context. The impact of climate change on
global security is a cross-cutting issue and requires
comprehensive policy responses. In that context, we

 

find it vital to focus our deliberations on water and
energy issues.

Water should be at the centre of climate
adaptation efforts. Water shortage has the potential to
cause civil unrest leading to significant economic loss
and thus to generate conflict around the world.
Investments and changes to water-management policies
should thus be prioritized. In addition, where water
supplies cross borders, it is crucial to negotiate water-
sharing agreements. Water is also central to almost all
economic activities. Therefore, deficiencies in water
resources will become one of the most visible impacts
of climate change on human society.

Let me now turn to the energy issue. Competition
over access to, and control over, energy resources is
one of the most significant potential sources of
conflict. Since much of the world's strategic energy
reserves are in regions that are vulnerable to the
impacts of climate change, instability is likely to
increase. However, the main threat to energy security
comes from import reliance and the lack of necessary
infrastructure. In that context, the crucial role of
indigenous resources is of the utmost importance.
Moreover, energy supply chains should be set up based
on a competitive market and adequate infrastructure.
Furthermore, reducing emissions by improving energy
efficiency is indispensable to achieving mitigation
measures.

Urgent international action at the global level is
needed to deal with the security challenges of climate
change. Addressing its security implications requires
new foreign policy thinking outside the environmental
box. It is necessary to improve countries' capacity for
early warning, analysis and response to climate-
induced security implications.

We are aware that these actions entail significant
costs. Nonetheless, the cost of action on climate
change is far outweighed by the consequences of
inaction. Sound environmental policies should become
an essential part of conflict prevention on a global
scale. Moreover, prevention, mitigation and response
capacity-building should be coupled with promoting
the development of regional security scenarios for
different levels of climate change and their
implications. We also need a global framework of risk
management to address the challenges of climate
change.

 

Last but not least, Poland understands the
concerns of the most vulnerable countries, particularly
small island developing States. Climate change is one
of the major challenges that these States face. It
threatens their very existence, posing additional
development challenges with significant security
implications. In that context, we would like to reaffirm
our commitment to the implementation of the
Mauritius Strategy, with a view to addressing
effectively the specific vulnerabilities and development
needs of small island developing States. It is of the
utmost importance that we continue and intensify our
assistance to developing countries in their efforts to
address climate change.

Finally, let me also underline the key role of
international climate change negotiations. An
ambitious post-2012 global climate agreement will
play a crucial role in addressing climate security. In
this regard, Poland actively supports the work carried
out in the context of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. The complexity of
today's topic and the institutional aspects of how to
address the various effects of climate change should
not deter us from discussing this important challenge in
the future.

