Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for your swift response to our request to hold this
emergency meeting. I would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for the important briefing
he delivered today on the tragic events that recently took
place in the occupied Palestinian territories, especially
in the Gaza Strip.

We condemn in the strongest terms the massacre
perpetrated by the Israeli occupation authorities
yesterday, which led to 52 people killed and thousands
injured during the peaceful demonstrations that
started on 30 March in commemoration of the right of
return, joining the fallen martyrs since the Palestinian
tragedy began.

Such repeated Israeli violations are simply a
continuation of Israel's violations of international
humanitarian law, international law and Security
Council resolutions, which would not have persisted if
the Security Council had taken a firm stance against
them and called on Israel to stop such practices. We
therefore express our regret that the Security Council
was unable to adopt the draft resolution that Kuwait put
forth yesterday, calling for an end to Israel's practices
and for a transparent and independent investigation to
be conducted into the massacres perpetrated against
unarmed Palestinians and to hold those responsible
to account.

Given the Council's inability to take any measures
to establish an investigative mechanism, we will act in
the General Assembly or the Human Rights Council
in order to guarantee that those perpetrating such
acts are held accountable and do not enjoy impunity.
We would also like to submit suggestions to prevent
the excessive use of force and ongoing violence by the
Israeli occupation authorities. We call for measures
that would ensure the provision of international
protection to the Palestinian people. In that regard, we
highlight the provisions of resolutions 605 (1987) and
904 (1994) - to apply the Fourth Geneva Convention,
end what is happening in the occupied Palestinian
territories and provide international protection to the
unarmed Palestinian people.

The unilateral policies, measures and actions taken
by Israel, the occupying Power, are a source of concern
as it seeks to alter the facts on the ground in the occupied
territory, notably the ongoing settlement activities and
the expansion of the existing settlements, which is
totally illegal and illegitimate and represents a gross
Violation of international law and Security Council
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).

The same is true of the relocation of certain
diplomatic missions to Jerusalem, which is a blatant
violation of the relevant Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), which considered
such unilateral actions null and void, with no legal
effect. We emphasize that such steps, which constitute
violations of international law, will undermine efforts
towards peace, exacerbate tensions, flair the rage and
threaten to push the region into more violence, chaos
and instability.

The State of Kuwait supports the Palestinian call to
give impetus to existing international mechanisms, such
as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to include
other regional parties, provided that it remains under
the aegis of the United Nations peace process. We also
support all legal and peaceful steps taken by the sisterly
State of Palestine at the national and international levels
to consolidate its sovereignty with respect to Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Palestinian territories.

We underscore that, in order to achieve the long-
desired peace, we must start by putting an end to the
Israeli occupation, whose fifty-first anniversary is
coming up in a few days. That should be based on the
resolutions of international legitimacy, the principle
of land for peace, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative, adopted by all Arab States at the 2002 Beirut
summit. It should also be based on the withdrawal
of Israel from all Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territories to the June 1967 borders. It should address
all final-status issues and thereby eventually lead to the
Palestinian people realizing all their political legitimate
rights, including their right to self-determination, and
the creation of an independent State with East Jerusalem
as its capital.

The Palestinian people appeal to the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, to fulfil
all of the pledges made towards the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
reaffirm our unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian
people in the defence of their just cause and legitimate
rights, including their historical and principled rights
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, guaranteed by the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We call on
States to recognize the State ofPalestine, with occupied
East Jerusalem as its capital.

