Ms. Young (Belize): On behalf of the delegation
of Belize, please permit me to congratulate Argentina
on assuming the presidency and to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting.

The problem of Palestine has been on the agenda
of the Security Council since the end of the British
Mandate in 1948. It was included in the Council's
agenda because, on 29 November 1947, in its resolution
181 (II), the General Assembly recommended to the
United Kingdom, as the Mandatory Power for Palestine,
and to all other Members of the United Nations, the
adoption and implementation of a Plan of Partition
with Economic Union for the future Government of
Palestine.

That Plan, set out in resolution 181 (II) B, called
for, inter alia, "Independent Arab and Jewish States
and the Special International Regime for the City of
Jerusalem", to come into existence "in any case not
later than 1 October 1948". The boundaries of the Arab
State, the Jewish State and the city of Jerusalem were
settled, and the Security Council was requested to take
the necessary measures to implement the Plan. Bolivia,
Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Panama and the Philippines
were elected to a United Nations Commission on
Palestine to act under the guidance of the Council.

Sixty-six years later, the conflict between the Jews
and Arabs that should have been neutralized with the
implementation of the Plan has become increasingly
contentious. The bombing of Gaza by the Israeli
Defense Forces between June and August of this year,
in a disproportionate use of force that killed more than
2,000 Palestinians and destroyed businesses and key
infrastructure, could be described as the last straw. In
addition to the killing and destruction over the summer,
there was the annexation of approximately another 950
acres of Palestinian territory on the West Bank.

When the response to that bombing is an assertion
that Israel has the right to defend itself, it should also
be remembered that in the same way as the historical
displacement and oppression of Jews by others produced
relentless resistance on the part of the Jewish people,
Israeli oppression and displacement of Palestinians
will produce relentless resistance on the part of the
Palestinian people.

However, the political tide is surely turning. The
new Swedish Government, which came to power
in September, announced its intention to recognize
Palestine as a State. In the week of 13 October, the
House of Commons in Britain passed a non-binding
resolution that endorsed the diplomatic recognition of
the Palestinian State by a vote of 274 to 12.

It is time for those in the Security Council who
habitually block decisive action aimed at redressing
the wrongs perpetrated on the people of Palestine to
seriously consider that the continuation of the death and
destruction of an oppressed people will likely open the
door for extremist philosophies to enter and flourish.
The recent urging of Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas for the Security Council to set a specific
deadline for Israel to end the occupation is reasonable
and should be taken onboard by the Council. Measures
should be adopted to achieve the immediate, sustained
and unconditional opening of the crossings for the flow
of humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from the Gaza Strip in line with resolution 1860
(2009). Through the negative trade measures that the
European Union brought against us in March, Belize
has experienced only too well the ways and means by
which super-Powers can achieve their goals once there
is the will.

In negotiations with Israel, Palestine needs the
support of the Security Council and of individual
powerful countries to help level the negotiating field.
There is no doubt that the United States plays a critical
role in any negotiations on the issue. Members of the
Security Council ought therefore to work with the
United States to relaunch the peace negotiations that
collapsed in April.

We owe it to the people of Palestine and of Israel to
help them return to that time of optimism in 1993 when
the Oslo Peace Accords were signed. At that time, to
quote the words of Amy Marcus, a reporter for The Wall
Street Journal based in Israel from 1991 to 1998, in her
book Jerusalem 1914:

"Everyone, Israelis and Palestinians alike, seemed
to be signing a deal - to sell tomatoes to the
Persian Gulf, to look for oil in the Dead Sea, to
open a casino in Jericho. There was talk of a new
Middle East, the falling of borders, and an era of
open trade."

My delegation thinks that it is not too much for the
Palestinian and the Jewish people to ask for. We owe
that to them.

