Mr. Kulyk (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
comprehensive and informative briefing, which gives
us a clear update of the developments on the ground.
My delegation acknowledges the progress in the
implementation of the Constitutional Framework and in
the preparation of the Kosovo-wide elections.

Moreover, we note the reduction of the level of
tension in the province. In our View, this has been
achieved by the result-oriented efforts of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), the return of the forces of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to the ground safety zone and
the activities of the Kosovo Force. However, additional
progress in this field is challenged by further critical
problems that remain unresolved. Let me highlight
some ofthese questions.

First is the issue of ensuring a safe and secure
environment for the sustainable return of Kosovo Serbs
to the region. My delegation welcomes and supports
the recent statement of Special Representative
Haekkerup on three key elements - a safe and secure
environment, enhanced inter-ethnic dialogue and a
substantial commitment of international resources -
that should be in place to ensure successful returns. At
the same time, we believe that the latest worried
comments of the Serb authorities would clearly be best
answered by practical results. In this context, we would
be grateful for comprehensive information from
UNMIK on the dynamics of returns, the time
perspectives and major difficulties involved towards
that objective.

Secondly, my delegation attaches particular
importance to pillar I and UNMIK's efforts aimed at
promoting an effective law enforcement and judicial
system. We applaud UNMIK activities to reduce
ethnically targeted crime and political violence and its
progress in developing the Kosovo Police Service. We
consider the implementation of legislation to deal with
illegal border and boundary crossings, illegal weapons
possession and weapons trafficking to be a step of the
highest importance. That is why we would appreciate
any comments on UNMIK's evaluation of the
implementation process and of possible additional
steps to enhance cooperation with the Yugoslav
authorities in this practical field.

Thirdly, I should like to touch on the
humanitarian issue. The continuing flow of refugees
from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
poses a serious threat to the general security situation
in Kosovo. We believe that the measures taken by the
international community to face this challenge should
be redoubled. In particular, we count on UNMIK's
vision of the practical ways that can help to improve
the situation.

Speaking of the regional dimension of the
Kosovo issue, we attach particular importance to the
current situation in Macedonia. We strongly condemn
the military activities of the Albanian extremist armed
groups, their terrorist attacks against Macedonian
soldiers and their acts of Violence against civilians,
which have claimed the lives of dozens of innocent
people. My country reconfirms its full support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Macedonia and
supports measures taken by the Macedonian
Government in this regard. At the same time, in our
View, there can be no military solution to the present
crisis and we urge the parties concerned to seek the
settlement of the crisis through political means.

