Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, Tanzania would like to join others in
welcoming you and the members of the Council back
from the important mission you undertook in the Great
Lakes region, which included a visit to Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania. I hope you had the time to enjoy the bright
sunshine in Dar es Salaam, which contrasts with the
wet weather in New York.

We also want to thank His Excellency Mr. Jean-
Marc de La Sabliere, head of the Security Council
mission team, for his leadership role and the oral
briefing on the team's findings.

As they say, "seeing is believing". There is no
doubt that the visit offered you an opportunity to assess
the situation on the ground and to contemplate decisive
measures to help the fledgling and still fragile peace
process, both in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in Burundi. We welcome the fact that the mission
had an opportunity to meet all the key players,
including the heads of State and the parties to the
raging conflict in the region. We see a ray of hope on
the horizon, given the commitment shown by the
Council and, of course, the regional leaders, to see that
impunity is not tolerated and that peace prevails in that
war-torn region.

We find comfort in the fact that the Council,
when determined to act, can act swiftly. We hope the
momentum created in deploying an interim
multinational force in Bunia will be followed by the
deployment of a robust peacekeeping force. The
position of the Government of the United Republic of
Tanzania was stated clearly by my President, His
Excellency Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, when he met the
mission. Needless to say, for the record, while the
countries in the region recognize their responsibility
and that of the Congolese and Burundi people in
bringing lasting peace to the region, their efforts alone,
however determined, will not be sufficient to stay the
course of peace. This is why our leaders expect their
efforts to be complemented by decisive actions and the
support of the international community in the true
spirit of partnership for peace.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2003/566)
offers a comprehensive roadmap, so to speak, towards
peace-building in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, particularly by reinforcing the presence of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and its
mandate. There is not a single doubt, at least from all
the statements made before the Council, that there
cannot be a military solution to ending the violence and
lawlessness in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and elsewhere.

It is apparent from the Secretary-General's report
that the disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR) programme is
crucial for the peace process to remain on course. The
challenge to the Council, therefore, is not to let the
momentum ebb, but to move expeditiously to empower
the MONUC force to ensure viable and sustained peace
and security in the volatile areas, as recommended by
the Secretary-General.

The prospects for lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will largely depend on the
degree to which this Council can stand up to the
process. Any delay can only be detrimental to the
peace process to which all parties have committed
themselves. It is our hope that the political groundwork
that has been laid will be sustained, both in Burundi
and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We urge
the Council to walk an extra mile along the path to
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.

In conclusion, let me reiterate what President
Mkapa asked of the Council as the way forward. His
first suggestion was to look into the possibility of a
non-aggression pact or similar mechanism that could
promote mutual trust and dispel suspicion. Secondly,
the spirit of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) should be advocated to
encourage and support good governance and
accountability in order to prevent some of the problems
we face in the Great Lakes region from recurring.
Thirdly, there is a need to promote, support and
increase contacts among nations. Such contacts may
include professional organizations and civil society,
both of which could foster greater tolerance among
Governments. Fourthly, better endowed countries could
explore the possibility of helping to avoid wars by
halting the proliferation of arms into potentially
explosive parts of the world.

By addressing these four suggestions, we believe
that the Council would be taking decisive action in
addressing the root causes of the problems facing the
region.
