Mr. Mayr-Harting: Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving the floor to the European Union.
1241419

The acceding country Croatia, the candidate
country Montenegro, the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate
Albania, as well as the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this declaration.

Over the past few years, in these tri-monthly open
debates of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, we have very often heard that the peace
process was at a critical juncture and that decisive
progress was needed now in order to finally turn the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the region for
peace, security and statehood into a reality. At the start
of this new year, such calls from the international
community are needed once again, now more than
ever, to help both sides to this conflict to settle their
differences and agree on the terms of a comprehensive
solution.

The European Union welcomes and supports the
efforts by Jordan to facilitate direct talks between the
Israelis and the Palestinians as part of the Quartet
process. The European Union calls on both parties to
come forward with comprehensive proposals on
borders and security, as envisaged in the Quartet
statement of 23 September 2011 (see SG/2178). A bold
and decisive demonstration of political leadership is
needed from both sides to maintain the momentum of
the talks. As have others during this meeting, the
European Union wishes to stress once again the central
role of the Quartet in that context and express its full
support for the ongoing Quartet process aimed at
achieving an agreement between the parties by the end
of 2012.

The Quartet statement issued on 23 September
2011 called on both parties to make substantial
progress within six months and to reach an agreement
by the end of 2012. In that vein, the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine
Ashton, hosted a meeting of Quartet envoys in Brussels
on 9 October 2011 to launch the process. The Quartet
envoys subsequently met the parties separately on
26 October, 14 November and 14 December 2011 in
Jerusalem. Jordan then took the initiative to invite the
Quartet and the parties to a joint meeting on 3 January.
That meeting was a positive step, since it was the first
one in the current context during which the parties met
face to face. At that meeting, the parties agreed to
further bilateral preparatory meetings under Jordanian
auspices.

The European Union reaffirms its commitment to
a two-State solution. The legitimacy of the State of
Israel and the right of Palestinians to achieve statehood
must never be called into question. The European
Union reaffirms its clear positions on negotiations,
with regard to parameters, principles and issues,
including the conclusions of the European Union
Foreign Affairs Council in December 2009, December
2010 and May, July and October 2011, as well as the
conclusions adopted yesterday and the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union at the
Security Council on 21 April 2011 (see S/PV.6520).
The European Union also reiterates its support for the
Arab Peace Initiative. On its tenth anniversary, the
Initiative deserves renewed attention.

The European Union underlines the urgency of
finding a negotiated solution and urges the parties to
refrain from actions that undermine the prospects for
peace. The European Union calls on the parties to
demonstrate their commitment to a peaceful solution
and to the Quartet process by taking actions that can
build confidence and create the environment of trust
necessary to ensure meaningful negotiations leading to
a comprehensive and lasting peace.

Developments on the ground play a crucial part in
creating the context for successful negotiations. The
European Union reiterates that settlements, the
separation barrier, where built on occupied land, the
demolition of homes and evictions are illegal under
international law, constitute an obstacle to peace and
threaten to make a two-State solution impossible. The
European Union urges the Government of Israel to
immediately end all settlement activity in East
Jerusalem and the rest of the West Bank, including
natural growth, and to dismantle all outposts erected
since March 2001.

The European Union remains one of the major
supporters of, and contributors to, the Palestinian
institution- and State-building efforts led by President
Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad. The European
Union remains dedicated to continuing its support to
the Palestinian Authority's successful State-building
efforts, which have been acknowledged as a
remarkable success.

The continuing financial difficulties of the
Palestinian Authority risk jeopardizing the
achievements made so far in institution-building. The
European Union therefore underlines the necessity of
providing predictable and further support to the
Palestinian Authority and calls for equitable burden-
sharing by the international donor community. The
European Union has consistently called for intra-
Palestinian reconciliation behind President Mahmoud
Abbas as an important element for the unity of a future
Palestinian State and for reaching a two-State solution.

As regards Gaza in particular, the European
Union calls for the full implementation of resolution
1860 (2009), for the full respect of international
humanitarian law and for an immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, including goods from the West Bank.
In this context, the European Union expresses its
concerns about the dismantling of the Karni crossing
and repeats its calls for the full implementation of the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access.

The European Union welcomed as a step forward
the measures announced by the Israeli Government.
However, more is needed. The European Union calls
for full implementation and complementary measures
in order to achieve a fundamental change of policy that
allows for the reconstruction and economic recovery of
Gaza, including through exports. The European Union
has offered its assistance in achieving that objective.
The European Union calls for a solution addressing
Israel's legitimate security concerns. The EU
wholeheartedly condemns any actions in which
civilians are hurt or killed.

In conclusion, regarding Syria, the European
Union remains deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in the country and the
widespread and systematic violations of human rights
perpetrated by the Syrian authorities against their
people, which may amount to crimes against humanity.
The European Union calls for an immediate end to the
violence, is particularly concerned by the recent
escalation of violence, and reiterates its condemnation
in the strongest terms of the brutal crackdown by the
Syrian Government, which risks exacerbating still
further the spiral of violence, sectarian clashes and
militarization. President Al-Assad must step aside
immediately to allow for a peaceful and democratic
transition.

The European Union recalls its support to the
League of Arab States' efforts to end the cycle of
violence in Syria and to the deployment of its

monitoring mission. The EU welcomes the decision of
the United Nations to provide assistance to the League
of Arab States observer missions. It condemns the
attacks on the League of Arab States missions
monitors. The Syrian authorities have a responsibility
to protect the observers in their country. The European
Union is deeply concerned by the Syrian authorities'
lack of cooperation and urges them to fully comply
with their commitments under the League of Arab
States action plan to completely stop acts of violence
against civilians, free political detainees, remove
troops, tanks and weapons from cities, and allow
independent observers and the media to travel in and
report on Syria.

The European Union urges all members of the
Security Council to uphold their responsibilities to end
the violence against the Syrian population and support
the Syrian people in their legitimate desire for freedom
and political rights. In this regard, the European Union
will continue to engage with representative members of
the Syrian opposition, such as the Syrian National
Council, which adhere to non-violence, inclusiveness
and democratic values.

