Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, let me
thank Egypt for having organized this timely meeting on
sanctions, which are an important tool under the United
Nations Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The Security Council has a long-standing history
and practice of applying sanctions. However, several
key issues need to be considered to make sanctions
relevant, such as the best means of increasing their
effectiveness by making them more carefully targeted;
ensuring their worldwide implementation in the
most efficient and balanced way; averting negative
socioeconomic and humanitarian consequences for
innocent populations and third States; and preventing
double standards in their application.

Kazakhstan supports the need for Security Council
sanctions mechanisms and the implementation of
Council sanctions that are important preventive
measures and help sustain or restore international
peace and security. In accordance with Chapter VII of
the United Nations Charter, the use of sanctions, and
the subsequent use of force, should be undertaken with
caution. They must not be seen as an early response but
rather as a last resort, after all preventive and diplomatic
means have been exhausted.

Sanctions should be designed to modify
behaviour. Wherever possible, they must be subject
to a pre-assessment on the probable impact of the
proposed sanctions from a humanitarian point of
View, as well as enforcement and efficacy. Equally
crucial is the need for monitoring and regular review,
taking full account of collateral effects. Bodies
imposing or supervising sanctions must ensure the
maximum possible transparency and accountability,
accompanied by improved working methods and
processes. Correspondingly, Secretariat budgeting and
staffing on sanctions needs to be strengthened so as
to bring about substantial improvement in means of
sanctions enforcement.

We join others in their recommendation that the
ad hoc Informal Working Group on General Issues
of Sanctions should be strengthened. My delegation
welcomes the restructuring of the Security Council
Affairs Division team so as to meet the needs of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011). We hope that this process will be concluded
soon in order to reinforce technical and administrative
support for the Monitoring Team and thus fulfil
that high-profile mandate in a challenging security
and political environment. Every sanction regime
is unique and carefully tailored to address specific,
clear objectives. However, there is always room for
improvement, such as disseminating the best practices
of various committees so as to enhance the overall
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions regimes.
These also can be enhanced by greater cooperation and
information-sharing.

Throughout the sanctions phase, every effort
should be made to continue with diplomacy and
mediation so as to ensure that Member States comply
with Security Council resolutions. Sanctions should
have clear, precisely defined objectives and termination
criteria, and, when these have been met, they should be
lifted. It is important for the Security Council sanctions
committees to closely cooperate and engage in dialogue
with the Member States affected and raise their
awareness regarding the reasons for and the objectives
and nature of the sanctions measures undertaken.

Lack of awareness and absence of a relationship
with the affected Member States could potentially
erode the credibility of United Nations sanctions and
result in a reluctance to implement them. We also call
for close interaction among all interested Member
States so as to influence those States and bring about
regional global compliance.

Just as Vital is timely information management
and sharing among the Council, Member States,
regional or subregional bodies and technical bodies,
including INTERPOL, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Air Transport
Association, the World Customs Organization and the
Financial Action Task Force, with the aim of monitoring
covert illegal operations. The role of the private sector
is critical to uphold norms so that some entities do not
become illegal trading or export or import partners
with countries under sanctions regimes. We also call for
greater vigilance by chambers of commerce working as
key partners with all actors involved in this complex
and wide-ranging stakeholder arrangement.

Capacity-building for Member States that are at
various stages of the economic continuum is necessary.
States must be helped to understand and upgrade their
legal procedures and enact new domestic legislation
in keeping with United Nations standards. Similarly,
assistance in technical guidance and the provision of
equipment and scientific tools are necessary to detect
the inflow and outflow of money and goods that
constitute sanctions violations.

To conclude, Kazakhstan, as the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al Qa'ida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) and the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea will strive, as
part of the larger multilateral effort, to enhance United
Nations sanctions regimes as tools for promoting
regional and global peace and security.

