Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank the
briefers for their presentations today and the tireless
effort of their teams. I also thank the Ambassador of
Peru, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014), for his work and for leading a very successful
Committee trip to the region.

The Security Council acknowledges the tragedy of
the man-made crisis in Yemen every time we meet. For
the fifth year in a row, that tragedy is being compounded
as the crisis continues into the holy month of Ramadan.
Like other members of the Council, we worry that the
world has grown numb to that suffering. If it has, let
us hope that today's alarming briefings by Executive
Director Fore and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock
rekindle broad attention to the humanitarian crisis in
Yemen. They certainly have done so for the members
of the Council.

We appreciate the first signs of progress on
the Stockholm Agreement since December 2018,
and we commend the parties and thank the United
Nations for doing everything possible to press for the
redeployments. Houthi withdrawals from the ports of
Saleef, Ras Isa and Al-Hudaydah are a significant first
step. Today's good news must not break our focus on
how much remains to be done. The parties must keep
working in good faith to reach an agreement on local
security forces in order to fully redeploy. They must
exercise restraint so that fighting does not threaten
the ceasefire, and they must enable the United Nations
efforts on the ground. Whatever other actions it takes,
any party failing to allow United Nations monitors
entry into Yemen is failing the Yemeni people.

Obstruction of the United Nations process cannot
be tolerated. For months, apparent breakthroughs have
happened just in time for Security Council briefings;
then progress stalls once we leave this Chamber. We
have seen enough of that pattern, and we should insist
that it end today. Council members must consider how
to hold parties responsible if they do not implement the
Stockholm Agreement. Fighting around the country,
not just in Al-Hudaydah, needs to stop. The Houthis
must cease unmanned aircraft (UAV) attacks against
their fellow citizens and neighbours. Iran needs to
stop supplying the Houthis with weapons to do so.
Attacks this week against Saudi infrastructure are just
the latest example of how destabilizing that is. Such
attacks threaten to expand the conflict and undermine
the United Nations-led process and the work of Special
Envoy Griffiths.

During its trip last month, the 2140 Committee
reiterated the need for all Member States to adhere to
the arms embargo contained in resolution 2216 (2015).
We cannot ignore the fact that, since the war began and
the Council imposed its arms embargo, the Houthis have
used more sophisticated weapons to threaten Yemen's
neighbours. The Houthis did not develop long-range
ballistic missiles and UAVs on their own. They did not
develop them, and the Council's own Panel of Experts
for Yemen has repeatedly said that those weapons have
Iranian design characteristics. When asked about how
its weapons keep ending up in Yemen, Iran has never
presented a credible explanation. Iran's violations of
the Yemen arms embargo not only flout the Council's
resolutions, but they are also prolonging the war.

As we heard from Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Fore,
limited progress on a political and military settlement
has meant even less progress in addressing the dire
humanitarian crisis. Huge amounts of critical grain
supplies at the Red Sea Mills have been lost. As the toll
of hunger and cholera rises, we once again call on all
parties to safeguard humanitarian infrastructure and
allow for unfettered humanitarian access. That includes
access to food and medical care for migrants and
displaced people throughout the country. Our support
for Special Envoy Griffiths and Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard remains steadfast. They, their staffs and
the international humanitarian community are working
to help the parties reach a resolution to the conflict and
save Yemeni lives. The Council must use all means
to help.

