Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): The Security Council is once again considering
the situation in the occupied Arab territories at the request
of the League of Arab States and more particularly of
Palestine, this time as the result of a decision taken by the
Israeli authorities to confiscate or expropriate lands in East
Jerusalem.

The Arab-Israeli conflict which we are considering -
and which is almost as old as the United Nations itself -
has entered, since the process began in Madrid in 1991
and thanks to the courage and wisdom of the parties and
to the good offices of the United States and the Russian
Federation, the positive framework of the peaceful
settlement of disputes, in what has come to be called,
specifically, "the peace process".

This process moved forward when, in a significant
and vital step on 13 September 1993, the Government of
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed the
Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government
Arrangements.

A few months ago, that peace process was once
again enriched by a significant event - the signing of the
peace treaty between the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
and the State of Israel.

The peace process is the negotiating framework that
the international community must help to preserve so that
all the parties to this conflict can continue to move
forward in the quest to meet the aspirations of their
peoples and, in this case, more specifically, those of the
people of Israel and the Palestinian people.
The Republic of Argentina, whose traditionally
friendly relations with all the peoples of that region has
been further deepened by the long-standing contribution
of immigration from the area, strongly supports the peace
process, whose objective it is to arrive at a permanent
solution based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

For all those reasons, the Republic of Argentina
considers that the latest measure taken recently by Israel
to confiscate or expropriate lands in East Jerusalem is not
in keeping with the spirit of the peace process now under
way, including the Declaration of Principles. Furthermore,
we feel, not without concern, that the implementation of
this decision is likely to put the important achievements
made thus far into jeopardy. The Republic of Argentina,
therefore, in the broadest spirit of friendship, urges the
Israeli authorities, as a matter of due responsibility and
prudence, to repeal or suspend this measure, in order to
avoid any faits accomplis that, by their nature would have
an adverse impact on the peace process at a time when it
is vital to maintain enough credibility to deepen it.

Now is a time to bolster hope and keep the dream
alive. And we should not forget that in diplomacy there
is no substitute for trust.

 

In conclusion, the Republic of Argentina once again
expresses its complete support for the peace efforts which
are under way. Only success in those efforts will make it
possible for the parties involved to live in peace and
cooperation. It is with this conviction that we are making
our appeal today.

