Mr. Celem (Turkey): It gives me great pleasure to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
November. We are confident that under your able guidance,
the Council will successfully carry out its responsibilities.
I would also like to pay a tribute to Ambassador Gambari
of Nigeria for the remarkable manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council in October.

Yesterday can become a historic landmark on the long
and difficult road to peace which will put an end to the
cruellest crimes against humanity since the Second World
War. For almost four years now, the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have suffered enormously. We hope that the
initialling of the General Framework Agreement for Peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina by the three Presidents in
Dayton will end this suffering and pave the way for a just
and viable peace. The process has begun. The commitments
undertaken with this Agreement should be honoured with
good will. The focus of the attention of the international
community should now be put on the bona fide
implementation of the Framework Agreement and the
reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina within its internationally recognized borders is,
and will remain, vital for a lasting peace and for stability in
the region. With this in mind, we welcome the Agreement
initialled yesterday, and the resolutions just adopted. These
resolutions will mark the beginning of the peace
implementation phase.

Turkey remains committed to shouldering its share of
the responsibility for a successful implementation of the
Agreement. As a coordinator of the Assistance Mobilization
Group established within the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, and on a bilateral basis, we will actively
participate in the rehabilitation and reconstruction work
ahead. Therefore, we attach the utmost importance to the
international conferences to be convened in the coming
weeks. Turkey stands ready to take part in these
conferences. We will contribute to the military and
civilian aspects of the peace implementation. Preparations
are under way for our participation in the implementation
force.

As the President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed on the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991,
Mr. Antonio Cassese, underlined in his statement to the
General Assembly two weeks ago, peace without justice
is no peace at all.

I must emphasize once again that we fully endorse
the following admonition of Mr. Cassese:

"If there is to be a lasting peace, it must be
accompanied by a sense of justice in the minds of
all the citizens and in particular the victims of
atrocities in the former Yugoslavia If at the end
of a war torturers and their victims are treated alike,
the war's legacy of hatred, resentment and acrimony
will not have been snuffed out; rather, it will
continue to smoulder. The existence of peace in such
a climate would be precarious indeed." (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, Fiftieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 52nd meeting, p. 12)

Indeed, if peace is to triumph, justice must prevail.
And only then can a climate be created in which the
people can live and work together free from fear. We will
continue to stand by the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their struggle for freedom and democracy.

