Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you and your Government, Mr. Minister, on Greece's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to thank your
delegation for taking the initiative to consider the role
of the Security Council in humanitarian crises, which is
indeed an important issue of concern to all. We
appreciate the fact that that is being done in an open
debate of the Council and with the participation of the
larger membership of the United Nations. We also wish
to pay tribute to last month's French presidency of the
Council.

My delegation is fully cognizant of the efforts
made by the United Nations to improve its system and
to respond effectively to the challenges posed by
violent humanitarian crises. While there have been
many successes, there have also been a number of
failures, when peace agreements collapsed before they
could be fully implemented and States relapsed into
conflict soon after. In many instances, conflict and
violence create humanitarian crises. How the United
Nations, including the Security Council, responds to
such crises remains a major concern. That merits
further discussion and investigation, to better
understand the issues before the Council today.

The Charter of the United Nations confers upon
the Security Council, acting on behalf of Member
States, the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. That includes
actions by the Council with regard to issues relating to
humanitarian crises where clear violations of
international law, international humanitarian law or
human rights have occurred in conflict situations that
threaten regional or international peace and security.

My delegation views any action that is aimed at
humanitarian intervention per se as having no basis in
the Charter and international law. It should therefore be
clear that while the Security Council has a role to play,
its response should be based on a distinction between
crises arising out of conflict situations and those that
result from other causes, including natural disasters.
While action to deal with conflict is laudable, it also
remains the Council's responsibility to ensure that
conflict is avoided. There is therefore definitely a need
to learn from past experience and to continue to find
ways and means to avert conflict. Today's debate
points us in the right direction.

We recognize that the Council has the
responsibility to address humanitarian issues relating to
situations of conflict, and that it has taken appropriate
action to deal with such situations. The Council's
consideration of those issues has laid the groundwork
for actions in the areas of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding and in preventing a return to conflict.
We agree that a return to conflict often hinges upon the
extent to which three key issues in post-conflict
situations are, or are not, adequately addressed,
namely, the promotion of the rule of law, security-
sector reform and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants. My delegation
supports the view that those pillars for post-conflict
security should be further strengthened in order to
achieve long-lasting peace.

In fact, during its Council presidency in July
1999, Malaysia initiated an open debate on the
question of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (see S/PV.4020). We continue to believe
that DDR remains an important aspect of peacebuilding
as well as of overall efforts to avoid relapsing into
conflict. It will be necessary to further develop that
aspect, together with the promotion of the rule of law
and security-sector reform, to ensure that some
common or unified standards are established and to
make certain that they are implementable. We welcome
the adoption of best practices arising from past
experiences in United Nations missions mandated by
the Security Council.

Malaysia has been supportive of actions taken by
the Security Council in averting humanitarian disasters
arising from conflict situations. We also support efforts
to deal with the culture of impunity so prevalent in
conflict situations. We recognize that it is important for
the Council to act in certain instances to ensure safe
and unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance, as
well as the safety, security and freedom of movement
of United Nations and other humanitarian workers.
Early action could be required in some cases. However,
the Council must act upon credible, reliable and
verifiable information to ensure that the right decisions
are made and that the right action is taken in
conformity with the Charter and international law and
are guided by the principle of respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of States.

It goes without saying that there is a need for the
Secretariat to enhance its early-warning capability. The
Secretariat should have adequate means to gather
credible, reliable and verifiable information and to
make appropriate assessments for the benefit of the
Security Council and all Member States. To a certain
extent, Member States with the capability to do so can
assist the Secretariat through the regular sharing of
vital information pertaining to threats to peace and
security. The Secretariat should also continue to
maintain and update a compendium of information on
all aspects related to this question for the use of
Council members and Member States at large.

The role played by the Security Council can
certainly be augmented by debate, dialogue and
discussion in the other principal organs of the United
Nations, namely, the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. That is all the more
pertinent with the recognition of the interconnectedness
of threats and challenges faced by the international
community and the need to face them in an integrated
fashion, taking into account the linkages among
development, peace and security and human rights. We
look forward to further discussion on that and other
issues in all United Nations bodies.

