The President: I thank the representative of Ukraine
for the kind remarks he addressed to the Canadian
delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Foreign Minister of Canada.

At the outset, I join others around this table who have
welcomed the Minister for External Relations of Angola. I
think it is vital that he be with us as we discuss an issue so
crucial to his country. We appreciate his taking the time
and making the effort to join us in this debate.

Tomorrow, we will be considering the role and
responsibility of the Security Council in protecting civilians
in armed conflict. Today we have the opportunity to take
resolute Council action where the need could not be more
acute. The endless and utterly senseless civil conflict in
Angola has only one enduring certainty: civilians
desperately need protection. Previous speakers have made
plain the dimensions of the threats faced by ordinary
Angolans. Angola is a place where more than a million
souls have perished in the violence; where a complete
humanitarian collapse looms never very far, with people
barely surviving from day to day; where for rural dwellers
it is literally too dangerous to set foot out of the house for
fear of being blown away by a landmine; where children
are in greater peril than anywhere else on earth; where
one in three people have been uprooted from their homes;
and where, quite simply, no one has escaped undamaged
by war in one way or another.

Angola is a very rich land that is very poor in
human security. Indeed, it is ironic and tragic that its very
riches - mineral and petroleum wealth - have been so
cruelly exploited to increase rather than diminish the
suffering of the Angolan people. The renewed violence
that has thwarted the prospects for peace might have been
impossible if UNITA had not been able to misdirect
earnings from those resources into the pursuit of violence.

To its considerable credit, the United Nations has
been engaged from the outset in efforts to resolve the
Angolan war and to establish peace. Thousands of Blue
Berets, civilian and military, have been sent there for that
cause, some paying with their lives; millions of dollars
have been spent in humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction efforts; countless negotiators have worked
for days, weeks and months to obtain commitments by
the parties to stop the fighting for good. However, there
has been little return on this enormous investment.
Lasting peace remains elusive. Yet, until peace prevails,
there is no alternative but to persevere.

Yesterday, the Council agreed to improve the use of
sanctions as an instrument to pursue peace and advance
human security. Today, we can translate that general
commitment into specific action for Angola. We can give
real meaning to the sanctions regime against UNITA as
a way forward. Denying UNITA the means to wage war
would help promote peace. To be sure, that was the
objective when measures to that end were adopted several
years ago. But it is no secret that non-adherence to the
relevant Council decisions, deliberate or otherwise, has
been the rule rather than the exception.

The Security Council took an unprecedented step to
reverse this trend a year ago when it approved the
creation of an independent Panel of Experts to collect
specific information on compliance and non-compliance
with the provisions of the sanctions regime, and to
provide the Council with recommendations on how to
make the sanctions work. The Panel, working

 

independently of the sanctions Committee and holding itself
to the most stringent of evidentiary standards, has produced
a comprehensive, well-supported and practical report for
which it deserves the Council's gratitude.

Along with the Panel, the Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, Ambassador Fowler, and his very able staff
also merit our appreciation - which many members have
expressed - for the single-minded determination and
vision with which this challenging initiative was pursued
and completed.

They have done their work, and now the Security
Council must do its work. The draft resolution before the
Council would operationalize many of the Panel's
recommendations through specific action aimed at stopping
the illicit trade in diamonds, petroleum and arms, while
reinforcing financial and other restrictions on rebel leaders.

Canada will certainly do its part to ensure that these
measures are followed through. We will provide $100,000
to assist the independent monitoring mechanism provided
for in the draft resolution to prepare its report on whether
to impose additional sanctions on parties found to be in
violation of the Angola sanctions.

As many speakers have properly pointed out,
neighbouring countries have a greater responsibility in
implementing sanctions regimes. However, that is not a
burden they can or should be expected to shoulder alone.
To that end, we are ready to give technical and financial
assistance to countries of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) to improve the
effectiveness of their efforts.

Finally, Canada is prepared to sponsor the meeting of
experts on the diamond trade called for in the draft
resolution. This would help devise a system of controls that
would allow for increased transparency and accountability
in the flow of diamonds from the source to the world's
diamond bourses.

As elsewhere, these new measures will work only if
the sanctions regime itself is linked to a wider process of
negotiation. To that end, we call upon both parties, UNITA
and the Angolan Government, to demonstrate leadership
and to negotiate and fully implement an agreement on the
basis of the Lusaka accord.

After 30 years of civil conflict, the people of Angola
deserve no less than lasting peace and stability. It is to be
hoped that the work of the Angola sanctions Committee
will contribute to reaching that goal. This ground-breaking
effort has, I believe, further and wider application for the
Council's activities and its efforts to promote human
security.

The Panel's work underscores the complexity of
imposing and enforcing targeted sanctions. It nevertheless
proposes practical ways of doing so. Without question,
these will require the commitment of considerable will
and resources. Without doubt, there is resistance in some
quarters to making them work. However, if successful,
these measures could serve as a template for focused
action against belligerents in other conflict situations.

The Panel's efforts have also highlighted the reality
and the impact of the new war economies - the nexus of
parties to armed violence, the exploitation of people and
resources and the commercial interests that profit from
them. In a growing number of conflict situations,
economic agendas coexist with political and military goals
in the perpetuation of violence and the victimization of
people. This highlights the large and growing importance
of non-State actors in conflicts, and as a result
emphasizes the need for the Council and Governments to
come to grips with this reality and to respond effectively.
Addressing the implications of the new war economies for
peace and security merits further reflection and will
involve the development of creative responses by the
Council.

Finally, the Panel's findings underline that, while the
Council's decisions reflect the will of the international
community, their implementation depends on the action
of individual Members. In applying targeted sanctions -
financial or arms embargoes, for example - this means
sharing know-how, experience and intelligence in dealing
with other threats, such as money-laundering and the drug
trade, where tactics for confronting them may be similar.
For some countries, Canada included, it may also mean
examining existing legislation and legal tools to determine
whether they could be adapted to better influence the
negative behaviour of actors operating in their or other
jurisdictions.

The Angolan war is a direct and devastating threat
to the security of the Angolan population. The Council is
right to remain involved. The work of the Angola
sanctions Committee and the Council's commitment today
will, we hope, bring a resolution of this conflict much
closer. In applying the broader lessons of these efforts, it
may also help the Council to protect not just Angolans,

 

but civilians victimized by armed conflicts wherever they
may occur.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker is the Minister for External Relations
of Angola, His Excellency Mr. J 0510 Bernardo de Miranda,
on whom I now call.

