Mr. Chambas: Mr. President, you have been very
kind to the ECOWAS secretariat. Under your
presidency, this is the second time you have given the
opportunity to the executive secretariat to address the
Council, which we deeply appreciate.

We have had the privilege of participating in two
meetings organized by the Council in the past two
months. Under the Guinean presidency, there was a
meeting on 18 March on the proliferation of small arms
and mercenaries in West Africa. Then, as you will
recall, Sir, under your presidency, on 11 April, we had
a meeting in this Council on regional organizations and
the Security Council facing new challenges to
international peace and security.

Certain themes were common in the discussions
at these two meetings: first, the link between instability
and deepening poverty; secondly, the link between the
easy availability of arms and the existence of a system
of violence and instability in certain subregions,
including our own; and thirdly, the link between
prolonged crisis and the emergence of a network of
mercenaries and unemployed youths ready for hire in
various conflicts.

The discussions of the Council at the two
meetings underscored the importance and the role of
regional organizations in breaking the cycle of violence
in their respective subregions and in taking the
necessary diplomatic and political measures -
supported, of course, by member countries in the
subregions to create conditions for peace and stability,
which are essential for fighting poverty and nurturing
democratic Governments.

ECOWAS has taken up this challenge. We have
shown no lack of political will to act and intervene in
conflicts in the subregion, whether in Liberia, Sierra
Leone and Guinea-Bissau, as seen in the past, or now
in Cote d'Ivoire.

Of course, our major limitation has been the lack
of financial wherewithal: the financial resources to
carry through with our commitments. That is what
faces us as we attempt to stabilize Cote d'Ivoire and
restore normality, peace and prosperity.

I believe that the Council is now challenged to
find ways in which it can support worthy subregional
efforts to maintain peace and security, which, after all,
is the primary responsibility of the Security Council. I
know that in this discussion there have been
suggestions, inter alia, that we might begin to look at
cases of successful subregional deployment of troops
under Chapter VIII to stabilize crisis situations and ask
ourselves whether it might not be prudent for the
Council to provide the requisite resources for such
forces. We think that the Council should indeed
encourage ECOWAS and other subregional
organizations to continue to play a leading role, for
instance, as we are doing in Cote d'Ivoire. Indeed, it
should encourage the creation of the right synergy and
collaborative working relationships between ECOWAS
and the Council to deal with these problems of peace
and security.

In that regard, we very much welcome the
scheduled visit by the Security Council to the
subregion during the presidency of the United
Kingdom. We look forward to continuing these
discussions during that impending visit.

