Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I am
grateful to you, Mr. President, for raising this important
issue, and to those who have already contributed to
today's debate. The private sector clearly has a crucial
role in promoting global economic prosperity and
sustainable development. Zones of conflict present a
particularly challenging environment for business. The
Secretary-General is to be congratulated on his
initiative to launch the United Nations Global
Compact, which sets out principles to help businesses
contribute to global sustainable development, thus
reducing the risk of conflict. The United Kingdom is
pleased to contribute to the costs of the Compact.

The key question is how business can play a
positive role in conflict situations. We should expect
business activities, as a minimum, not to make conflict
worse. But business can and does make positive
contributions to development and economic prosperity,
creating jobs and hope, as the President of the World
Bank put it. That is indeed key. But business can also
help develop the rule of law, for instance through
securing investments, defining property rights, forming
contracts and building up a body of commercial law.
And individual local business leaders have a clear role
themselves in working to transform the societies in
which they operate.

In terms of best practice, non-governmental
organizations and others have prepared specific advice
for business with respect to its behaviour in zones of
conflict. These underline the importance of companies
doing the following: respect human rights, their
employees and those on whom their operations have an
impact; avoid abuses of human rights by security
forces acting in protection of their security; insist on
maximum transparency; make it clear that they will not
accept or tolerate corrupt practices; and signal clearly
when their experience suggests that conflict may be
emerging.

Again, in conflict situations, companies should
refuse to do business or engage with any of the
following: individuals, companies or entities known to
have benefited from the direct assistance of
combatants; those supplying arms to forces involved in
the conflict; those connected with the smuggling of
natural resources; or those seeking to take advantage of
instability to secure lucrative contracts or concessions.

Many companies, of course, support such good
practice. The British Government is engaged in several
initiatives designed to encourage and support good
practice in business behaviour: first, as my colleague
from the United States has already alluded to, the
voluntary principles on security and human rights in
conflict zones; secondly, as the Secretary-General
referred to, the extractive industries transparency
initiative; and thirdly, the Kimberley Process, which
has already been mentioned by a number of colleagues.
Those kinds of initiatives offer new ways and means to
promote effective contributions from business to
conflict prevention and resolution.

But the role of business in conflict zones is
particularly acute in Africa. Africa has historically
suffered from many conflicts involving disputes over
control over exploitable resources. Today, one of the
three major ongoing conflicts in Africa involves
natural-resource issues, and several African countries
emerging from conflict have been experiencing
disputes over control of those resources. Africa
desperately needs private investment in its economic
development. The New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) has a crucial role to play in
this. Its focus both on the resolution and prevention of
conflict and on the promotion of the private sector
provides the basis for expansion. We note and welcome
work already under way to create standards in the
exploitation and management of resources in conflict
areas. We also welcome the NEPAD initiative under
way in South Africa that commits businesses to
conducting their affairs in compliance with high ethical
standards on corporate social responsibility. In general,
let me take this opportunity to underline the importance
of NEPAD to African development and the importance
of maximal international support for that welcome
initiative, especially as we approach next year's fifth
anniversary of the Millennium Declaration.

In conclusion, I would like briefly to say that it is
not the role of business to take the lead in resolving
conflict. But business can make a significant
contribution. It is in that context that the countries
involved should do the following: encourage
businesses to be aware of the vital role they have to
play and the damage they can do if they do not behave
responsibly; and advise businesses on the operating
environment in conflict zones and encourage them to
carry out risk assessment and management.

Our hope is that the Council today will encourage
all States to play their part in advising and encouraging
business in that way, and to accept a particular
responsibility to do so in relation to companies
headquartered in their own territories.

