Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I pay
tribute on behalf of Egypt to the personnel in the field who
are at work under the United Nations flag and to those
providing humanitarian assistance. They embody the loftiest
and noblest ideals of duty and sacrifice in the name of
helping those in need in many regions and many States that
have been the sites of man-made or natural disasters. I hail
those who have given their lives in the service of peace and
while providing assistance and humanitarian relief all over
the world. They embody the goodwill of the international
community; they are indispensable if the United Nations is
to play its very important role in today's world.

My delegation has closely followed the deliberations
on this issue, and ever year has been a proactive participant
in the General Assembly's work on it. We believe that the
Security Council's discussion today can help foster a better
understanding of this issue in all its aspects. At the same
time, we stress the importance of the division of labour and
of respecting the individual competencies of the main
bodies working in this field and those engaged in follow-up
within the United Nations.
Here, we applaud you, Mr. President, for proposing
today's debate on this important item.

Egypt fully supports the international community's
call for a decisive stance in confronting threats and acts of
violence, including hostage-taking and murder of United
Nations personnel. Such acts are crimes punishable under
international law. Indeed, the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court includes such acts as war
crimes falling within the competence of the Court. That is
a positive step towards giving such personnel the protection
they need and towards deterring anyone who might be
thinking of committing crimes of this kind.

Egypt calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to
respect the rights of United Nations and other personnel
working to provide humanitarian assistance, and to
safeguard their safety and security. At the same time, Egypt
calls upon such personnel, as they perform their duties, to
respect the principles of the United Nations Charter,
international law, and the laws, rules, customs and
traditions of the host countries, as well as the guiding
principles annexed to General Assembly resolution 46/182
of 19 December 1991. Egypt calls for full access to
civilians - men, women and children alike - who need
help in any State. Such access should be gained through
the proper legal channels: by humanitarian assistance
agencies, with prior approval from the host countries; this
would thus respect their national sovereignty. The
principle is that the host State should play the principal
role in initiating, organizing and coordinating any
operation of this kind on its territory. This would avert or
minimize any risks that humanitarian personnel might
face. Egypt has always stressed that any humanitarian
assistance operation should be committed to take no
action that could expose the unity, territorial integrity or
security of the host State to danger of any kind.

We are fully cognizant of the problems that arise
in places that for one reason or another lack a central
Government that is able genuinely to enforce law and
order on its territory, and we call upon the General
Assembly and the Security Council to play their proper
roles in identifying the measures that the United Nations
should take in such cases. This should be done in a
transparent manner and with the participation of all
countries, large and small, on an equal footing.

Egypt wants due attention to be paid to achieving
the highest level of coordination among all bodies
working in this sphere, whether within the United Nations
system or between the United Nations and other relevant
actors, first and foremost the International Committee of
the Red Cross. I wish also to stress the importance of
providing adequate financial resources for the provision
of humanitarian assistance commensurate with the huge
humanitarian challenges facing us today. Resources ought
also to be provided for security training for United
Nations personnel, as this will help the relevant bodies
shoulder their humanitarian responsibilities in the best
possible way.

I therefore take this opportunity to appeal to donor
countries and organizations to increase their contributions
to meet these needs and to fulfil the urgent requirements
of humanitarian organizations.

