The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Guinea.

This meeting is being held at a particularly
serious time. My country, which until the end believed
in a peaceful solution to the crisis, profoundly regrets
that the Council itself was unable to rise above its
divisions in order to adopt a common approach.
However, the tragic reality that we are now witnessing
with apprehension is challenging all of us. At this
stage, it is not the time for recriminations.
My delegation, which has always called for
Council unity, believes that this situation is so grave
that we must all demonstrate responsibility in order to
overcome the new challenges. In the days to come, we
must together strive to search for ways and means to
restore the unity of this body so as to give it the
effectiveness and dynamism it requires. More than ever
before, it is urgent that we set aside our differences and
concentrate on what is now essential: the fate of the
Iraqi people, confronted by a new trial.

Several days after the unleashing of hostilities,
the international community is questioning the
effectiveness of the Security Council, which,
nonetheless, initiated many actions aimed at a positive
resolution of the Iraqi question. However, we
understand the concerns expressed during this debate.

It was in that context that the Security Council
immediately agreed to hold this meeting, providing an
opportunity for all Member States that wished to
express themselves on this issue to do so. The
negotiations under way for the adoption of a draft
resolution based on Iraq's urgent humanitarian needs,
on the basis of the proposals made by the Secretary-
General, are also noteworthy.

In that regard, the risk of a humanitarian
catastrophe that the Iraqi population now faces is a
source of concern for my delegation. Far be it from us
to debate the merits of any war, but this one
undoubtedly affects a population already harshly
affected by several years of sanctions. Furthermore, the
suspension of the activities of the oil for food
programme highlights the precariousness of the
situation, given that more than 60 per cent of the
population was highly dependent on it in terms of
essential provisions.

I wish to reaffirm my country's attachment to the
central role of the United Nations in managing
international relations, particularly in preserving
international peace and security. We support the
Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to
mobilize the necessary financial resources to tackle the
urgent new situation prevailing on the ground and to
relieve the suffering of the traumatized Iraqi people.

In conclusion, as we express the hope for a swift
end to the war, we hope that it will have the lowest
possible number of victims, that the civilian population
will be spared and that damage to the economic and
social infrastructure will be limited.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The representative of Iraq has requested the floor
to make another statement.

