Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your delegation's initiative to convene this open debate
to address this issue to which my country attaches
particular importance, namely, the threats posed by
terrorism to international peace and security. We also
value the concept note (S/2016/306, annex) prepared by
your delegation, which contains key elements for the
discussion of this problem of global scope, with a View
to intensifying international efforts to prevent, combat
and eliminate this scourge.

We also welcome the presence of and briefing by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and thank him for his
valuable contribution to the topic of our deliberations
today. As usual, my delegation supports the statement
to be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Terrorism is not a new phenomenon, given the
fact that its use has been a constant feature in various
political conflicts in our modern history. However, in
recent years, terrorism has assumed new dimensions,
which greatly affect the manner in which it can be
combatted. Terrorism in the Middle East has become
an insurgency on the part of a sector of the population
that uses terrorist methods to achieve their political
goals. Those groups, actual armies, have been able to
take advantage of unprecedented military and logistical
capacities, which has enable their expansion into
significant countries in the Middle East, North Africa
and the Sahel, with significant impact even on other
parts of the world, including Europe and Asia.

The acts committed by terrorist groups endanger
the territorial integrity and political unity of States,
thereby contributing to the destabilization of legitimate
Governments and violating their constitutional order,
with the ultimate aim of overthrowing them. All of that
not only produces adverse outcomes for the economic
and social development of peoples, but also includes the
destruction of their infrastructure and institutions. In
that regard, we should ask ourselves what conditions
are conducive to the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism. The situation experienced today by the
brotherly peoples of the Middle East and North Africa
is no coincidence. It is due, in our opinion, to the
military intervention by major Powers in Iraq in 2003
and in Libya in 2011, directed towards overthrowing
the Governments of sovereign countries, which, in turn,
created the conditions for Da'esh, Al-Qaida and Ansar
al-Sharia, among others, to develop in those regions in
order to implement their strategy of destruction, based
on terror and denial of the Other.

Today, the violent actions of these terrorist groups
and their associated entities have inflicted sectarian
violence on several African and Middle Eastern
countries, leaving in their wake a trail of destruction,
which is worsened by the fact that, shielded by a
sectarian interpretation of religion, they are carrying
out ethnic cleansing of vast areas of Iraq, Syria and
Libya, among others. It is important to consider the
effect that the military interventions in the wars since
2003 have had on the societies of those countries.
Children who at the time of the interventions were six,
seven or eight years old are the young people today,
who are 20 or 25 years of age and have joined terrorist
groups en masse. They were children in societies that in
those years experienced a culture of death, a contempt
for life, sectarianism and intransigeance.
Terrorism and violent extremism are problems of
a global scope that threaten international peace and
security. This is reflected in the unprecedented threat
represented today by the self-proclaimed Islamic
State, which has been joined by at least 34 terrorist
organizations from different regions of the world - not
only in the Middle East and North Africa - and is
exacerbated by the grave phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters whereby more than 30,000 people,
including women and young people, from at least 100
countries from different latitudes, have joined these
terrorist groups, not to mention the threat posed by lone
wolves.

The use of violence and terrorism to subjugate
societies, civilizations, religions and beliefs is taking
on new forms, such as the recruitment of children,
kidnapping, the destruction of the cultural heritage of
humankind, slavery and sexual violence as a weapon of
war, as well as the use of chemical weapons. However,
deep down, those despicable practices, which have
severely impacted civilians - in particular ethnic
and religious minorities and the most vulnerable
groups whose human rights have been systematically
and deliberately violated leading to an unprecedented
humanitarian crisis - are still the result of practices
that respond to intolerance, violent extremism and
sectarianism. The experience of those actions paint a
clear picture of war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, and the perpetrators of those actions
must be brought to justice.

Experience teaches us that terrorist groups feed on
despair, injustice, frustration, lack of opportunities,
the denial of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
particularly in devastated societies, to promote
practices that resemble those of fascism, as well as
their criminal, ideological and political agendas.
Poverty; social and economic inequalities; political,
ethnic and religious intolerance; and violations of the
sovereignty of peoples and nations, among others, are
also part of the so-called push factors of terrorism. In
addition, protracted crises further exacerbate conflicts
and serve as a breeding ground for violent extremism
and terrorism to fuel organized transnational crime
and to facilitate the flow, financing and training of
foreign terrorist fighters, thereby enhancing terrorist
organizations' capacity for action. Hence the long-term
solution to the threats posed today necessarily involves,
among others, a political settlement of the conflicts in
countries, such as Syria, Libya, Iraq and Palestine.

We would like to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the elements that are mentioned in the
concept note and that we believe are crucial to be able
to have an effective counter-terrorism strategy. First
of all, we must determine how the terrorist groups
have achieved such a military and logistical capacity.
They are terrorist groups that have heavy weapons;
they are terrorist groups that have missiles; they are
terrorist groups that have chemical weapons. Who has
given those weapons to those terrorist groups and who
maintains them? The terrorist groups occupy wide
swaths of territory in Iraq, Libya and Syria. They are
capable of defeating and containing national armies
from those countries and they are capable of resisting
the actions of coalitions and other international efforts
aimed at defeating them. Not only do they occupy and
govern in those territories, but they also impose their
fascist and extremist ideology. That is only possible
with foreign support.

Furthermore, terrorist and extremist groups also
receive a great deal of financing, which is the result
of the illicit trafficking in oil. It is not easy to sell
oil illegally. There are mechanisms that are perfectly
monitored by all international organizations, and we do
not understand how they do not condemn or do not take
clear action to put a stop to that financing of terrorist
groups, which is the result of oil sales. To sell oil one
must transport it and store it. It must be transported
on ships. Therefore, the Security Council should act
honestly on the basis ofthe resolutions that it has adopted
in order to stop the illegal flow of those resources that
fuel terrorism. In addition, we ask ourselves how it is
possible that the international financing system, which
is controlled and regulated by the large centres of
power, is not capable of detecting and blocking those
financial flows. We believe that this is an activity that
should be tackled with genuine commitment.

Another serious problem is the trafficking of
small arms and light weapons. We have said that the
Security Council must promote a resolution to prohibit
the trafficking of small arms and light weapons, which
is a euphemism because small arms and light weapons
range from heavy submachine guns to missiles.
However, in the area with that technical designation,
we have allowed weapons to be distributed to violent
non-State groups. Those violent non-State groups then
become terrorist groups, which is what is happening
and has happened in Syria, where non-State armed
groups are trained, armed and equipped with advanced
destructive technology and then go on to join Al-Nusra
and other terrorist groups.

In order to defeat the Government of President
Muammar Al-Qadhafi, thousands of tons of weapons
and munitions were distributed in Libya. Today they
are in the hands of various militias and factions and
have been distributed and spread in Africa, especially
in the Sahel region, which is one of the main threats for
the security of those brotherly countries in Africa.

The issue of terrorism cannot be dealt with by
using a double standard. We cannot instigate the
creation of terrorist groups to defeat, combat and
destabilize Governments. This is not the first time
this has happened and experience has shown that these
extremist groups then become a problem and a threat
for the Governments that stimulated their creation. That
was the case in Afghanistan and it is the case in Libya.
We hope that we do not have to wait for documents to be
declassified to understand that this was one of the main
causes that has fuelled the current terrorist groups.

Furthermore, the concept note draws attention
to the use of social networks as an instrument to
destabilize Governments. The use of that mechanism
is nothing new. The fact that the tremendous and
penetrating capacity of social networks to destabilize
legitimate Governments is now being used has been
condemned on various occasions. That happened in
Iran and with other Governments. It is just that now
terrorist groups also use that platform to spread their
fascist and extremist ideology and recruit young people
around the world. The fact that more than 30,000
foreign terrorist fighters have entered Syria has a great
deal to do with the incitement that is carried out from
countries of origin against specific Governments. That
was the case of the brutal campaign in some European
countries against Syria, which has led young people,
for various reasons, to join the terrorist groups that are
fighting the Government of President Bashar Al-Assad.
We believe that the Security Council must act to combat
this problem, because all of the social networks use
technology platforms that are under the absolute control
of the large information technology corporations.

Finally, Venezuela condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. There are no good or bad
terrorists. We deplore the fact that the Security Council
did not express regret when the terrorist group Da'esh
occupied Palmyra last year and killed more than 500
people. They killed the archaeologist who was in charge
of protecting this world cultural heritage and then
began the destruction of the society of Palmyra. At the
time, the Security Council was not able to deplore those
acts. Nor was the Council, following the liberation of
Palmyra, able to express its satisfaction at the liberation
of the city of Palmyra and at the fact that its rebuilding
had begun.

The Security Council has the responsibility of
condemning all terrorist acts, whether or not for any
reason they favour their national interests. We believe
that all countries are victims of such terrorist acts.
On a daily basis, Syria, Libya, Nigeria, Iraq, Turkey,
Pakistan and European countries all are affected by this
phenomenon, which we must condemn.

Terrorism is a violent expression of the fascist
extremist ideology with clear political objectives.
Hence the response of the Security Council must
be a political and military one. The Council has the
responsibility of preventing conflicts that due to a lack
of political response, as in the case of Palestine and
Western Sahara, could turn into violent conflicts and
even lead to the expansion of terrorism as a result of the
frustration and despair of those peoples.

Lastly, our country supports an inclusive United
Nations counter-terrorism strategy that would be the
result of a broad-based debate in the General Assembly
and in which the Security Council, as the organ
responsible for international peace and security, would
take part constructively, in strict adherence to the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and in
particular international humanitarian law.

