Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May.

This debate is certainly timely in the context of
our ongoing collective effort to strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations to assist countries
emerging from conflict to attain lasting and durable
peace. There is general agreement that addressing the
long-term needs of countries emerging from conflict
requires a high degree of coordination and coherence
among the various international actors supporting
peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding goes beyond disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and beyond giving the
necessary assistance to refugees. It also involves
longer-term needs such as reviving the economy,
rebuilding infrastructure, strengthening the rule of law
and establishing democratic institutions. Addressing
those long-term needs is vital if we are to prevent a
recurrence or a slide back into conflict. In other words,
if the United Nations is to be successful, there needs to
be a focal point that deals with peacebuilding in a
comprehensive manner.

In his report entitled "In larger freedom"
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General too acknowledges
that significant deficits remain in the planning,
financing and implementation capacities of the United
Nations system. As a result, he has proposed the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission.

When a conflict is at its peak, there is usually a
myriad of interventions, starting with the involvement
of the Security Council in carrying out its mandate for
maintaining international peace and security. Once the
conflict subsides, all the interventions gradually
disappear. Yet, experience has taught us that this is the
most critical stage of conflict resolution since it is a
stage when peace agreements are most fragile and need
to be consolidated.

The challenge we face in our own African-led
peace initiatives is gaining the necessary political,
moral and material support from the international
community to ensure an effective transition from
immediate security and humanitarian needs to long-
term development, which is a prerequisite for
sustainable peace.

Over the past several years, both the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council have
come to recognize the importance of comprehensive
and long-term strategies for peacebuilding. The
establishment of the Economic and Social Council's ad
hoc advisory groups on countries emerging from
conflict, designed initially for Burundi and Guinea-
Bissau and, more recently, Haiti, bear testimony to that
awareness. We also note with appreciation that the
Secretariat has tried to exert efforts to ensure a
common approach to the work of United Nations
agencies, particularly those operating in conflict
countries.
However, as we have learned in both Burundi and
Guinea-Bissau, for conflict resolution to be effective,
there is a need to engage other role players, such as
international donors and the Bretton Woods
institutions, which already have their own programmes
in support of peacebuilding. The challenge is to
harness the efforts of all role players early enough to
ensure coordination from the start. Because it often
takes donors a long time to give critical support to
countries that have just emerged from conflict,
particularly in the context of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, it would be important
for the United Nations to take responsibility by
financing that important step from assessed
contributions until such time as other resources are
secured.

We believe that the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission would go a long way
towards bridging those gaps, and we have therefore
supported the Secretary-General's proposal for the
creation of such a mechanism. Countries in post-
conflict situations face significant challenges to the
establishment of lasting peace. Failure to properly
address those challenges could precipitate further
conflict or result in a sharp decline in social and
economic progress. If strategies to deal with those
challenges are to be effective and successful, they have
to be comprehensive in nature and address the root
causes and negative consequences of the conflict.

We wish to reaffirm that the United Nations has a
vital and fundamental role to play in post-conflict
situations. It is the only organization that has the
unique experience of helping people rebuild their
countries after the ruin of armed conflict. We believe
that the proposed Peacebuilding Commission can
provide the much-needed coordination.

We welcome you, Mr. Minister, to New York.
Your presence indicates how important this issue is.

