Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation extends a warm welcome to the honourable
minister of Romania and thanks Romania for
organizing this important and timely debate. We also
acknowledge the presence of regional organizations
participating in this debate.

We find this debate useful because regional
organizations play a vital role in maintaining peace and
stability in their respective regions. It is also timely, as
regional organizations have become increasingly
involved in conflict resolution and peacekeeping
missions, alongside those of the United Nations.
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter provides a
basis for a symbiotic relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security.

Numerous regional organizations have actively
participated in the settlement of local disputes, either
on their own initiative or by reference from the
Security Council. The active involvement of the
European Union in Kosovo, the Caribbean Community
and the Organization of American States in Haiti, the
African Union in Burundi and Sudan, and the
Economic Community of West African States in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire are just some of the
cases in point.

Several comprehensive reports have been issued
by the Secretary-General, noting the level of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The General Assembly has also passed
relevant resolutions on the subject, calling for, among
other things, assistance in strengthening the
institutional and operational capacity of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. The outcome
document of the High-level Plenary Meeting
underscores the need for a closer working partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations
such as the African Union

As the primary organ of the United Nations
responsible for peace and security, the Security
Council has the power and the prerogative to advance
that cooperation to a higher level in order to make it
more effective and responsive to challenges that
threaten international peace and security. We wish to
support your initiative, Mr. President, and that of your
delegation, in advancing the debate on the subject to
institutionalize cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. We also support
the practice of holding annual high-level meetings
between the Secretariat and heads of regional
organizations.

While appreciating the existing cooperation and
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we strongly believe that more can be
done to improve that cooperation. That is particularly
important in the areas of capacity and resource
mobilization. Regional organizations have the
advantage of physical proximity to conflicts as well as
a greater understanding of their causes, but they are
constrained by capacity and operational requirements.
Supporting stand-by arrangements and rapid
deployment capability is one of the ways to strengthen
regional peacekeeping capacities. The 10-year United
Nations programme to strengthen peacekeeping in
Africa, contained in the outcome document of the high-
level summit, is a most relevant initiative in that
regard.

The new Peacebuilding Commission will usher in
a new era of partnership between the African Union
and its subregions to stabilize peace and to anchor
good governance and sustainable development in
countries emerging from conflict in Africa. There is
also a need for political partnership between regional
organizations and the United Nations to prevent,
manage and resolve conflicts. The working relationship
that has evolved between the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union, as in
the cases of Cote d'Ivoire and the Sudan, needs to be
encouraged and institutionalized. It is a mutually
supporting partnership in a creative and
complementary division of labour. That kind of
partnership enhances multilateralism in promoting
collective security at all levels.

While we recognize the importance of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we are also mindful of the advantages of
horizontal cooperation among regional organizations.
That is important in facilitating the sharing of
resources, expertise and experiences. The European
Union, for instance, has been very helpful to Africa in
establishing the African Peace Facility, as well as in
providing technical assistance and financial support to
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States, the Inter-Governmental Authority on
Development and the Southern African Development
Community to support their conflict management
efforts. The ongoing partnership in Darfur between the
African peacekeeping mission there, along with the
support from the United Nations the European Union,
NATO and bilateral assistance, is a case in point.

It is our hope that this debate will contribute
positively to the efforts to establish a more coherent
cooperation framework between the United Nations
and regional organizations that will ensure effective
maintenance of international peace and security,
sustained by regional cooperation in the economic,
social and cultural initiatives undertaken by countries
of the various regions in a much more proactive
fashion.

We thank the delegation of Romania for
preparing the draft resolution on this subject, which we
fully support.

