Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for this month. You have the United Kingdom's
full support. I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the Permanent Observer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and His
Grace the Archbishop of Erbil for their briefings.

Today we very clearly heard how significant
the challenges facing Iraq are. The United Kingdom
supports the Iraqi people's right to peaceful protest as
enshrined in their Constitution, and as Britain's Foreign
Secretary Dominic Raab has made clear, we are deeply
saddened and shocked by the loss of life since the
protests started at the beginning of October. We call on
the security forces to respond proportionately, and we
are deeply concerned about the use of live ammunition
and the lethal use of tear gas and baton rounds. We
call on the Government of Iraq to ensure that credible
investigations into the violence are carried out and
that those responsible are held to account. We are also
concerned about the attacks on the Iranian consulates
in Najaf and Karbala, Diplomatic premises should not
be a target of violence.

We welcome the work that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has done to
facilitate dialogue between the protesters, Government
officials and the Council of Representatives. As we
look ahead to 2020, the United Kingdom calls for an
inclusive and transparent reform process that responds
to the challenges that Iraq is facing and to the legitimate
demands of the protesters. In particular, we encourage
the Government of Iraq to work with the United Nations
on credible electoral reform that ensures that the views
of the Iraqi people are heard and their representatives
held accountable. I was struck by what the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said about
a better future. We agree with her that stopping hate
speech does not mean stopping freedom of expression.

We are also encouraged by the steadily improving
relations between the Government of Iraq and the
Kurdistan Regional Government, including the recent
ministerial engagements to discuss the draft 2020
federal budget law, but we note what the Special
Representative had to say about those relations. We
urge for continued cooperation and progress in this
area in order to resolve outstanding issues in line with
Iraq's Constitution.

It is clear that Da'esh continues to pose a threat to
the peace and security of Iraq. The United Kingdom,
along with other members of the Global Coalition
against Da'esh, is committed to supporting Iraq in
addressing that threat. As we discussed a week ago
(see S/PV.8675), the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD)
continues to make progress. In that regard, we welcome
the logistical support that United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has been able to provide to
UNITAD. We must not forget the 1.4 million people
who have been the recipients of humanitarian assistance
so far in 2019. They should be treated with generosity
and respect. The reports of forced returns of vulnerable
internally displaced persons are deeply troubling.

We welcome the significant progress in the
implementation of resolution 2107 (2013). We hope
that the return on 8 August of the remains of some
of the missing Kuwaitis will provide closure to their
families once they have been fully identified. In that
connection, I thank the representative of Kuwait for
the additional information that he has provided. This
is a very important issue. Continued senior engagement
on both sides is key and serves as a reminder of how
important both Kuwait and Iraq consider this file.

I think that we in the Council will be united in our
concern about the number of fatalities and casualties
there have been since the beginning of the protests
and in our desire to see credible investigations to hold
to account those responsible for the excessive use of
force. I think we will also be united in hoping to see
Iraq, supported by UNAMI, take forward significant
reforms to address the popular concerns and deliver
stability and prosperity for their people.

