Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Before coming here,
I did what some of us normally do every morning. I
searched on the Internet to find out what happened on
this day in history. Here is what I found.

Exactly on this day, 26 November, in 1939, the
Soviet army orchestrated an incident by shelling the
village of Mainula, near the Soviet-Finnish border.
Then the Soviets claimed that the shelling had come
from the Finnish side and used that as a pretext for their
invasion of Finland on 30 November. That is how the
so-called Winter War started, which eventually led to
the expulsion of the Soviet Union from the League of
Nations. That is interesting, is it not? That is a story
about a failure to learn lessons.

(spoke in Russian)

Mr. Polyanskiy was the one to talk about who had
learned lessons and who had not.

(spoke in English)

We appreciate the convening of this briefing at the
request of Ukraine. I would like to sincerely thank the
members of the Security Council for the unwavering
support for my country that they have demonstrated
once again today. And, of course, I thank Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs Rosemary
DiCarlo for her very useful update.

We are convinced that it is of the utmost importance
to discuss the recent developments near the Kerch Strait,
since they constitute a clear threat to international
peace and security. Before delving into the subject, I
would like first to express my dismay at the attempt
of the Russian Federation to manipulate the agenda of
the Council and to have a meeting convened under an
agenda item with the deceiving title "Violation of the
borders of the Russian Federation". In that regard, I
have to emphasize that, according to the international
law, Crimea and its respective territorial waters are
Ukrainian territory, temporarily occupied by the
Russian Federation. Therefore, there are no Russian
borders in the area where the incident happened. I
repeat - there are no Russian State borders around the
Crimean peninsula.

The Council has already heard the Russian
interpretation of the events, which, as usual, has been
concocted to mix reality with fiction, in the ultimate
goal of misinforming, misleading and confusing
the listener. Instead of real details about yesterday's
incident, we heard epic stories about an apocalypse
in Ukraine. The Russian claim regarding a violation
of the Russian border by Ukrainian naval ships is an
outright lie that was invented just to cynically shift all
the responsibility onto the Ukrainian side, consciously
manipulating the facts and ignoring the evidence. In
order for all Council members to better understand the
situation, I would like to present the main facts of what
happened during the past three days.

First of all, in accordance with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and article 2 of the
treaty between Ukraine and the Russian Federation
on cooperation in the use of the Sea of Azov and the
Kerch Strait, the Ukrainian navy enjoys full freedom of
navigation in the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov and,
therefore, can pass through the Kerch Strait at any time.

On 23 November, a Ukrainian Navy boat group,
which included the small armoured boats Nikopol and
Berdyansk and the tugboat Yani Kapa, began a planned
transit from the Black Sea port of Odessa to the port of
Mariupol in the Sea of Azov. The route and procedure
of that passage were the same as in September, when the
two Ukrainian naval vessels Donetsk and Korets sailed
from Odessa to Mariupol. On 24 November, during
the naval movement, the commander of the Ukrainian
naval group received a notice from the Russian
authorities concerning the closure of navigation in the
Kerch Strait area. However, the international centre
for navigation control located in Spain did not confirm
that notification.

On 25 November, the Ukrainian commander
twice requested passage through Kerch Strait from the
Russian maritime control services. He did not receive
an answer. Later the Russian maritime control officer
directed the Ukrainian navy boat group to the so-called
area of waiting. It was stated that Ukrainian vessels
would soon be informed on the Kerch Strait passage
procedure. And then all hell broke loose.
At approximately 8.30 or 9 a.m., a Russian coast
guard ship rammed the tugboat Yani Kapu and damaged
it. The video of that attack is available online. A
viewing will clearly show that the Ukrainian boat was
trying to avoid the collision, while the Russian ship was
deliberately carrying out the attack. I also have to warn
viewers that if they happen to understand the Russian
language, they will hear lots of profanities from the
Russian sailors in that short video clip.

After the ramming, the Russian vessels blocked the
other two Ukrainian vessels from rendering assistance
to the damaged vessel. All the while, the Russian
vessels were trying to provoke Ukrainian seamen to
open fire. At 1.22 p.m., two Russian Ka-52 Alligator
attack helicopters approached the Ukrainian cutters
at their anchorage spot at a height of 50 metres. They
openly demonstrated their missile armaments and their
laser-aiming device. After completing the dangerous
manoeuvres, the helicopters departed towards the
Crimean peninsula.

From 1.40 pm. onwards, Russia physically blocked
the passage beneath the so-called Kerch Bridge with the
placement of first a tanker and then a cargo ship. After
7 p.m., due to the impossibility of passing through the
Strait, the Ukrainian navy ships headed back to exit the
Kerch Strait, turning away from the Strait and towards
the open sea. They were immediately followed by a
group of about 10 coast guard and Russian Black Sea
fleet vessels.

There are audio recordings of communications
among the Russian vessel commanders regarding
orders on how to proceed. Those recordings clearly
demonstrate that the Russian military vessels were
given orders to attack the Ukrainian vessels after the
latter started to withdraw from the area.

At approximately 8.30 p.m., the Russian side carried
out the shoot-to-kill order. I have all of those recordings
on my telephone, but I will not waste the Council's time
now in playing them. Instead, I will limit myself to
quoting a couple of exchanges that were intercepted.

There is a conversation between the base in Kerch
and the Russian boat Izumrud:

"Hands up, hands up, everyone on board, hands up.

Throw down your arms. We will shoot to kill."

And then, finally, on who ordered the shooting, there is
a communication from Izumrud.

"I cannot connect with Izumrud, there is commotion
in the air. They are shouting 'the Ukrainians
are sinking' and what is going on with them I
don't understand."

And then, the commander from Kerch asks, "Who gave
the order to shoot to kill?"

And the captain of Izumrad replies: "It was me.
According to your previous orders."

The Ukrainian vessels Berdyansk and Nikopol
were damaged. After that, Ukrainian vessels were
forced to stop and were seized by the Russian Federal
Security Service (FSB) special forces. Six Ukrainian
seamen are wounded, three seriously so and,
according to information we have received, one is in
critical condition.

The video footage of ramming and shooting, as
well as relevant audio recordings, have already been
posted online and everybody can consult them to see
what happened and how it happened.

Throughout all those events, the Ukrainian
side acted strictly in line with international law and
the existing bilateral agreement with the Russian
Federation. Ukraine's right to cross the Kerch-
Yenikale canal is guaranteed by paragraph 1 of article
2 of the 2003 treaty between Ukraine and the Russian
Federation on cooperation in the use of the Sea of
Azov and the Kerch Strait. The treaty clearly provides
for freedom of navigation for both civil and military
vessels of Ukraine and Russia in the Sea of Azov and
the Kerch Strait. This is the treaty in my hands, which
was signed by the current Russian Government.

(spoke in Russian)

Mr. Polyanskiy cannot deny that this agreement has
been signed by his side and needs to be upheld.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, the Russian Federation was duly
informed well in advance through traditional channels
of communication about the passing of the Ukrainian
navy's group through the Kerch Strait.

Thirdly, the Ukrainian Navy group strictly
followed the orders of the traffic control service. As the
Council can see, there were no provocations whatsoever
from Ukraine's part. Nevertheless, the Russian
Federation opted to purposefully block the passage
of the Ukrainian ships, thus violating the freedom
of navigation guaranteed by the Ukraine-Russia
cooperation agreement on the use of the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait.

Moreover, Russia committed an act of open military
aggression against Ukraine by targeting, firing on and
capturing three military vessels. I would like to remind
everyone that, pursuant to article 3 (d) of the annex to
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX),

"an attack by the armed forces of a State on the
land, sea or air forces, or marine and air fleets of
another State"

qualifies as an act of aggression.

Russia's recent belligerent acts constitute yet
another violation of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum, as well as existing bilateral agreements.
This is a conscious provocation aimed at aggravating
the security situation in the region with a view to
Russia establishing full control over the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait. There is irrefutable evidence that
the recent aggressive actions by Russia were planned
and authorized by top Russian military leadership.

Ukraine's restraint in its response clearly
demonstrates that we are committed to solving the
current situation by peaceful means and in full
compliance with international law and existing
bilateral obligations. Nevertheless, further escalation
of the situation by the Russian Federation should not
be ruled out. According to available intelligence, there
is a clear threat of invasion of Mariupol and the seizing
of Berdyansk. Further aggressive acts and provocations
by the FSB Border Guard Service and the Russian navy
remain a realistic possibility.

Due to those threats, yesterday the President
of Ukraine supported the initiative of the National
Security and Defence Council of Ukraine to propose
to the Parliament of Ukraine to declare martial law
for 60 days, but to cut it short to 30 days in order to
avoid unnecessary speculation. The imposed martial
law can be lifted at any time. It will have no negative
effects on respect for human rights and the functioning
of democratic institutions. In response to the Russian
delegation's scare stories about the alleged motives
of Ukraine's President regarding the declaration of
martial law, I will simply quote the statement that the
President made just a couple of minutes ago, which is
available online:

"The martial law will last 30 days and will be over
in the middle of December. In Early December,
I will submit a draft decision of the Parliament
regarding the date of the presidential elections,
which, according to the Constitution, are to be held
on 31 March 2019."

Ukraine is ready to settle the situation in through
political and diplomatic means. At the same time, we
are ready to use all available means in exercising our
right to self-defence, as provided for in Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

The Kremlin's criminal regime has once again
demonstrated that it will not end its aggressive policies
and is ready to commit any acts of aggression against
the Ukrainian State. The dramatic escalation of the
situation in the region demands a rapid response
from the international community. These events are
yet another testament to the relevance of the General
Assembly draft resolution prepared by Ukraine and a
group of like-minded States regarding the issue of the
militarization of Crimea, the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov.

Once again, we are grateful for today's strong
statements in support okaraine, calling on the Russian
Federation to guarantee freedom of navigation in the
region and condemning Russia's acts of aggression in
the Black Sea and the Sea ofAzov. Ukraine demands that
Russia immediately release the 23 captured Ukrainian
servicemen and all three Ukrainian ships. We also call
on the international community to implement a new
set of sanctions aimed at addressing the situation in
the region, including against Russia's ports on the Sea
of Azov. The increased political pressure on Moscow
would help to de-escalate the security situation at sea
and lift the block on the free crossing of the Kerch-
Yenikale canal. If unopposed, the Kremlin regime will
continue to commit other aggressive acts, creating ever
more widespread conflict in the region.

