Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, let me
thank today's briefers for their valuable contributions.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Acting Head of the Delegation of
the European Union.

Today's debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict comes at a crucial moment. Only last
week, the International Criminal Court announced its
intention to indict three Libyan officials whom it holds
responsible for organized crimes against humanity
perpetrated against civilians in Libya. Following the
landmark resolution 1970 (2011), that is an important
step in enhancing accountability for violations of
international law and ending the so-called culture of
impunity.

Regarding the responsibility to protect, let me be
clear - it is first and foremost the responsibility of
each State to protect its civilian population from
violence. However, the international community will
not turn a blind eye when there is a blatant disregard of
this obligation. That is a message that applies not only
to Libya; indeed, it goes beyond Libya.

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of violence in
armed conflict. Recent events in Cote d'Ivoire and
Libya reconfirm this fact in a tragic way. The
indiscriminate and excessive use of force against
civilians in all its various forms cannot and must not be
accepted by the Security Council and the international
community at large.

Let me briefly touch upon some of the situations
of particular concern to us. First, with regard to Syria,
we are deeply shocked by the violence and brutality of
the internal repression orchestrated by the Syrian
authorities against unarmed and peaceful protesters.

The use of tanks and heavy artillery against the civilian
population in Dar'a, Baniyas and other cities is deeply
worrying. The Syrian authorities clearly stand at a fork
in the road. We strongly urge the Syrian Government to
end its military repression of its own population and to
respect human rights. Those responsible for the killings
should be held accountable.

In order to make this message clear, we have
worked for the European Union to impose restrictive
measures against Syria and persons responsible for the
violent repression. These measures have come into
force today. The ongoing violence and the regional
implications also require that we continue to address
the situation in Syria in the Security Council.

On Afghanistan, we remain seriously concerned
about the intolerably high number of conflict-related
civilian casualties. The large majority of them are
caused by indiscriminate attacks by the Taliban, Al-
Qaida and other violent armed groups. We would also
like to take note of the continued progress made by
Afghan and international forces in minimizing civilian
casualties.

The situation of the civilian population in
Somalia remains a cause of grave concern, as are the
ongoing activities of the Lord's Resistance Army, in
particular the abduction of children in parts of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan
and the Central African Republic.

On Sri Lanka, Germany welcomes the report of
the Panel of Experts. The report reiterates the need for
accountability in that country. The findings of the
report should encourage the Government of Sri Lanka
to set up a credible investigation and accountability
process. We urge Sri Lanka to closely cooperate with
the United Nations in this regard.

Since the last open debate on protection issues in
November last year (S/PV.6427), the Security Council
has further developed its comprehensive normative
framework on protection issues. We note with
appreciation that four out of the current seven United
Nations peacekeeping operations with a protection
mandate have already developed comprehensive
strategies for the protection of civilians.

Heeding your call, Mr. President, and for the sake
of brevity, I will abridge my written statement and
conclude by drawing the Council's attention to one
group of civilians with particular protection needs in
armed conflict, namely, children. Children are sexually
abused, killed and/or maimed and sometimes even used
as suicide bombers by parties to a conflict. In armed
conflicts, schools and hospitals, which are essential for
the development and well-being of children, are
deliberately attacked and destroyed.

Together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, with UNICEF
and other United Nations agencies, the Security
Council Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict - which I have the honour to chair - has
continued to make tangible progress in demobilizing
child soldiers and in enhancing compliance with
international law by State and non-State parties to
conflict. I urge the members of the Council, as well as
the wider United Nations membership to continue to
lend their valuable support to this common endeavour.

