Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Under-Secretary-
General Lacroix and Special Envoy Haysom for their
respective briefings. As this is likely to be the last
time that Mr. Haysom briefs the Security Council in
his current capacity, let me express our appreciation to
him for all his dedicated efforts as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Sudan and South Sudan. We
congratulate him on his appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
and we look forward to continue working with him in
his new capacity.

We are pleased to have Special Envoy Ambassador
Wais via video tele-conference from Addis Ababa.
His briefing on developments regarding the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development-led
(IGAD) South Sudanese peace process is, as always,
exceptionally valuable. We in the region are indeed
very grateful to him and his team for their efforts
during this difficult peace process. They greatly
facilitated the successful completion of the High-level
Revitalization Forum.

I also thank Grace John for her remarks, and
welcome Ambassador Malwal of South Sudan to the
United Nations today.

We are now presented with a historic opportunity
to end the cycle of vicious violence in South Sudan
and bring about tangible results for the people of
South Sudan, who have suffered for far too long. The
South Sudanese parties should be commended for
demonstrating the necessary flexibility in order to sign
the final revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, done at
Addis Ababa in the presence of IGAD Heads of State
and Government. Efforts by the countries of the region
in helping the parties bridge their differences should
also be recognized. They really worked in unison to
ensure the successful completion of the IGAD High-
level Revitalization Forum.

What makes this final revised Agreement unique
is that, unlike its predecessor, all the parties signed it
without trying to add any reservations. Furthermore,
the peace process was conducted in an all-inclusive
and transparent manner. All political organizations,
including estranged groups, were fully involved in
the consultations and negotiations. Civil society
organizations, faith leaders, women's and youth groups
and eminent persons all participated actively. We hope
that will provide a firm and realistic foundation for the
full implementation of the Agreement.

We are of course aware of the divisions within the
ranks of the South Sudan Opposition Alliance over
the Peace Agreement. However, most of the member
groups of that umbrella organization signed the Peace
Agreement. We are optimistic that the holdout groups
will decide to embrace the Agreement and continue
to play a positive role in ensuring that South Sudan
remains on a positive trajectory.

We know very well that a difficult task lies
ahead. The full implementation of the revised Peace
Agreement must now be our priority, and that demands
the concerted efforts of all. We must ensure the full and
continued commitment of all parties; they are the first
and foremost guarantors of the implementation of the
Agreement. Given the actions by some parties in the
past, we can understand why members of the Council
have concerns about this. However, that cannot be an
excuse to ignore the significance of the revised Peace
agreement for peace and security - not only in terms
of its impact on South Sudan but on the whole region.
The parties themselves are aware ofthose concerns. We
believe they will do their utmost to demonstrate their
commitment to the full and effective implementation of
the revised Peace Agreement.

Throughout the long-drawn-out High-level
Revitalization Forum process, the support and assistance
of the African Union (AU), the United Nations, IGAD
partners and the wider international community were
indispensable. It is critically important that that support
now be extended during the implementation phase.
Maintaining unity of purpose among IGAD, the AU
and the United Nations in the search for lasting peace,
security and stability in South Sudan is necessary today
more than ever.

We believe that the Security Council has a
particular role to play in ensuring the implementation
of the revised Peace Agreement. The IGAD Summit
requested the support of the Council in ensuring the
full deployment of the Regional Protection Force and
a further review of its mandate so that it will be in a
better position to support the implementation of the
revised Peace Agreement. We hope the Council will
respond positively to that request. We will work closely
with the penholder and members of the Council to look
for the appropriate way to accommodate the request of
the IGAD Summit.

Humanitarian and economic conditions in South
Sudan remain dire. Therefore, we must remain
concerned about the fragile security situation. The
immediate cessation of all hostilities is absolutely
necessary to deal with such challenges. Last week,
the IGAD Summit called upon the Government and
opposition groups to prioritize the implementation of
the permanent ceasefire on the cessation of hostilities,
the protection of civilians and humanitarian access.
The restoration of a permanent ceasefire is essential
for unhindered access to the affected population
and for the safety of humanitarian personnel and
assistance delivery.

The continuous support of the international
community is also critical. It has done a great deal,
but the 50 per cent funding gap to the humanitarian
response plan for South Sudan means that the collective
ability of humanitarian actors to meet people's needs
is seriously constrained. We would hope that the
international community will step up its efforts in
providing the much-needed humanitarian assistance to
the affected population of South Sudan.

Let me repeat that we now have a real prospect
for responding effectively to provide solutions to the
problems in South Sudan. Now is the time to act. We
cannot afford to lose this opportunity.

