Ms. DiCarlo: I thank the Government of the
Dominican Republic for convening this timely
open debate.

The risks associated with climate-related disasters
do not represent a scenario of some distant future. They
are already a reality for millions of people around the
globe, and they are not going away. A report released
by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
last October predicted more heat waves, heavier rain
events, higher sea levels and more severe damage to
agriculture. These trends represent a security risk for
the entire world. However, their consequences are felt
most strongly in regions that are already vulnerable,
where climate change and extreme weather compound
existing grievances and threats.

The relationship between climate-related risks and
conflict is complex and often intersects with political,
social, economic and demographic factors. Sea-level
rise is an obvious primary impact of climate change,
and one that ultimately threatens the very existence of
coastal communities and small island States. Extreme
weather is another such consequence. In the space of a
month, hurricanes Irma, Harvey and Maria displaced
around 3 million people along the Atlantic Coast of the
Americas and the Caribbean. The worst impact was felt
by small island developing States of the region. In Haiti,
for example, a series of climate-related disasters has
struck the country since the devastating earthquake in
2010 and has contributed to instability and a prolonged
humanitarian crisis.

Climate change also affects peace and security in
indirect but no less serious ways. In the Sahel and the
Sudan, for instance, climate change has heightened
competition for diminishing land, forage and water
resources, fuelling tensions between herders and
farmers. In the Lake Chad basin, climate change
contributes to unpredictable rainfall patterns that
impede traditional livelihood options, compound
socioeconomic exclusion and reduce the opportunity
costs ofjoining armed groups.

Climate-related displacement has also become
an acute problem. Frequent and longer droughts in
Somalia have been a major factor in the displacement
of more than 2.6 million people, which in turn has
increased local tensions, as well as human trafficking,
child exploitation and recruitment by armed groups.

For the Security Council, this is not news. In recent
months, the Council has recognized the adverse effects
of climate change, among other factors, on the stability
of Mali, Somalia, West Africa and the Sahel, Central
Africa and the Sudan. The Secretary-General, for his
part, has articulated a broad vision for prevention and
made it a priority to improve our ability to address
wider stresses and shocks that can exacerbate crises
and lead to violent conflict. Across the United Nations
system, efforts are intensifying to leverage capacities
and sharpen responses. For example, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel has been
working closely with the Economic Community of
West African States to analyse climate-related security
risks in the region and to jointly develop regional
prevention strategies.

These regional approaches are also being applied
in Central Asia, where regional cooperation is fostering
progress in the area of transboundary water management
through ongoing consultations among Central Asian
States, supported by the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy. In country-specific
contexts, our missions are also building responses to
the consequences of climate change. In Somalia, the
United Nations is working to establish an effective
drought response programme.

Looking ahead, the United Nations will invest in a
number of actions.

First, we are strengthening our analytical capacity.
The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, the United Nations Development Programme
and the United Nations Environment Programme, in
collaboration with practitioners from across and beyond
the United Nations, are developing an integrated risk
assessment framework to analyse climate-related
security risks. Furthermore, in response to Security
Council presidential statement S/PRST/2011/15, which
requested more contextual information on the security
implications of climate change, the United Nations is
working to ensure that such analysis is better reflected
in our mandated reports.

Secondly, the United Nations is seeking to
strengthen the evidence base to support the development
of climate risk prevention and management strategies
at the field level. We invite Member States and other
interested actors to jointly undertake a review of good
practices that will inform this work.

Thirdly, we are strengthening partnerships to
leverage existing capacities with Member States,
regional organizations, civil society and the growing
research community on this issue. Addressing the
security implications of climate change is a collective
problem that requires a collective response.

Most important for all of us is the recognition
that deeds must follow words. Major armies and
businesses have long recognized the need to prepare
for climate-related risks, rightfully perceiving climate
change as a threat multiplier. We cannot lag behind. We
must act now, with a sense ofurgency and a commitment
to placing people, especially those most marginalized
and vulnerable, at the centre of our efforts. Given the
critical role and responsibility of the Security Council,
I am encouraged by today's debate. It signals our
willingness to establish a shared understanding of the
impact of climate-related security risks on international
peace and security. In this regard, I would like to again
thank the Dominican Republic for convening us on
this subject.

