Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by expressing
our appreciation to Nigeria for convening this quarterly
open debate, which will allow the Council to take stock
of recent developments in the Middle East, including
the State of Palestine. I would like to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his comprehensive briefing
earlier today.

It is unfortunate that the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, which began in late July 2013 with
the aim of reaching a deal within nine months, ended
without any outcome. There is no doubt that the dialogue
process generated hope as it came after a hiatus of more
than two years in talks between the parties. We express
regret that the parties failed to seize the opportunity
presented by direct negotiations to strike a peace deal.
It is a serious setback to the Middle East peace process.
We hope that both sides will demonstrate the necessary
political will to return to the negotiating table and that
they will strike a mutually acceptable political solution
to the crisis.

In the West Bank and East Jerusalem, the plight
of ordinary Palestinians is worsening every day due to
roadblocks and the related infrastructure of occupation
that put restrictions on the free movement of persons
and goods. The blockade of Gaza is also continuing and
adversely affecting humanitarian assistance services,
economic activities and infrastructure development. It
is also driving militant elements to vent their frustration
through violence, thereby further complicating
the situation on the ground and increasing Israel's
vulnerability and security concerns. We firmly support
a negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue
that would result in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel.

As a member of the Council in 2011 and 2012, India
supported Palestine's bid for full and equal membership
of the United Nations, and continued our support as a
co-sponsor of General Assembly resolution 67/19 in
November 2012, which upgraded the status of Palestine
to that of non-member observer State. The proclamation
by the United Nations of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People was a
positive step, and the Indian delegation fully supports
the activities of the Council on the exercise of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to make
this a meaningful year. India has always supported the
nation-building efforts of Palestine through technical
and economic assistance, including budgetary support.
We are also implementing a series of development
projects under the India-Brazil-South Africa Fund in
Palestine.

Turning to Syria, the removal of almost 92 per cent
of Syria's declared stockpile of chemical weapons out
of Syria is a positive development. However, we regret
the stalemate in the political process. We hope that
both parties will resolve their differences and return
to the third round of direct talks with strong political
will and commitment. We also urge both sides to
sincerely implement resolution 2139 (2014), ensuring
humanitarian access, to immediately cease attacks
against civilians, and to lift the siege ofpopulated areas.
Those measures, we believe, can go a long way towards
alleviating the human suffering caused by the conflict
that began some three years ago. Unilateral sanctions
that adversely impact on the population of Syria must
be lifted in order to alleviate humanitarian suffering.

Before I conclude, I would like to stress that there
can be no military solution to this conflict. India fully
supports a Syrian-led, inclusive political dialogue that
resolves the current crisis and meets the legitimate
aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.

