Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, on behalf of my delegation, I wish to
express to you, Mr. President, our sincere
congratulations and our thanks for having taken the
initiative to organize this debate on this question,
which is so crucial for the international community,
namely, threats to international peace and security
caused by terrorist acts.

Terrorism is no doubt one of the most serious
threats we in the international community currently
face given the fact that it attacks not only the
foundations of human security but also the principles
and values of tolerance, openness and peaceful
coexistence and, in the end, our very humanity. The
savage attacks that occurred in several places in the

city of Mumbai that took the lives of many innocent
people have shown that the war on terrorism, despite
the exceptional efforts that have been made
internationally, is far from being won. Thus, I wish
here to renew to the people and the Government of
India our most sincere condolences.

The scope and intensity of the terrorist threat that
we see in diverse, complex and new ways should
prompt us to recognize that the individual actions of
States, no matter how much human and material
wherewithal are invested, cannot compensate for the
impact of a sustained collective and effective
commitment with much solidarity aimed at thwarting a
real cross-border danger that is likely to emerge in any
country and to evolve in any society without
distinction as to religion, race, culture, development
level or geographical position. In this regard, my
delegation, believing that terrorism is the negation of
all religious, ethical or human values, expresses its
total rejection of any attempt, whatever its source, to
associate terrorism with a religion, race, culture or
ethnic or racial group.

For Member States, the United Nations represents
the legitimate, universal and appropriate framework for
forging and strengthening a collective response to
terrorism. Member States have benefited from this
multilateral framework to develop a legislative
framework structuring their common action against
terrorism.

It is in that framework that we should focus our
common commitment to finalizing as soon as possible
the draft comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, which would complete the legal arsenal that
presently exists. My delegation continues to attach
great importance to concluding the comprehensive
convention and remains ready to contribute to ongoing
consultations to overcome the obstacles that are
preventing its successful conclusion.

These efforts should be based on the positive
climate and constructive spirit that we recently saw in
the review meeting of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy held in September. It is
now up to Member States to develop the Strategy
individually and collectively and to strive for its
effective and comprehensive implementation at the
national, regional and international levels. Morocco
emphasizes the need for close, concerted and
coordinated international cooperation to combat
terrorism that brings together political commitment,
legal frameworks and operational action.

The Kingdom of Morocco has suffered from this
scourge and once again reiterates its full and
unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. We expressed this position the very
day when, in 1979, the initiative was taken to inscribe
the issue of counter-terrorism on the agenda of the
General Assembly.

Morocco unequivocally condemns terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations because it is one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security
and threatens the most fundamental human rights -
the right to life.

My country shares the concerns of the
international community regarding terrorism and has
acted for many years now in the framework of
international efforts to fight this scourge. For example,
we have adopted an integrated legal arsenal in keeping
with the requirements of the rule of law and in
harmony with international commitments assumed by
Morocco.

My country is determined to build its national
capacities in a preventative sense, strengthened by the
mobilization of all components of its population and by
their support for the counter-terrorism efforts
undertaken by the Government authorities. That said -
and we cannot say it enough - national efforts, no
matter how strenuous, are insufficient unless
accompanied by proactive and effective regional and
international cooperation.

In this context, my country will spare no effort to
contribute to all initiatives in support of collective
actions in this area. In that respect, by way of
illustration, the Fifth Conference of Justice Ministers
of Francophone African countries was held in Rabat
from 12 to 16 May 2008 to ratify and implement
universal instruments against terrorism, with the
effective assistance of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime.

In this same spirit of mobilizing against all forms
of terrorism, in 2006 my country held the inaugural
meeting of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear
Terrorism. In October 2008, we also hosted the second
anniversary of the launching of the Initiative, which
now has 75 member States.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its absolute
and total condemnation of all forms of terrorism and its
commitment to participating in implementing global,
concerted action to strengthen international
cooperation in this area. The counter-terrorism efforts
of the international community cannot be fully realized
unless they operate in a global and multidimensional
framework that attacks the underlying causes of
terrorism through the resolution of regional and
international conflicts, the strengthening of our
commitment against underdevelopment, and the
promotion of values of dialogue among cultures,
religions and civilizations. Thus, only an approach
combining the security and causal dimensions of this
phenomenon will overcome this scourge.

