Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): There is
great urgency in Syria, as well as for the Syrian people.
In the past five years more than 250,000 have been killed,
while 4 million have become refugees and 13.5 million
have been displaced. The terrorism of Daesh has struck
the heart of its cities. There is an urgent need to resolve
this crisis, which, far beyond Syria, poses a threat to
international peace and security.

In this context, resolution 2254 (2015), which we
have just adopted unanimously, represents a glimmer
of hope and is what I might call a road-map resolution.
We all know, as participants in it, that a still-tenuous
political process was initiated in Vienna on the basis
of the Geneva communique, whose principles remain
obligatory for us. The process has brought together,
in an unprecedented manner - and this is a positive
thing - all of the relevant international partners.
The international community must provide a credible
framework for negotiations to be held between a
delegation from the regime and a delegation from the
opposition, under the auspices of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, our friend Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, so as to establish a transitional authority and
facilitate a ceasefire. The Council is today endorsing
the initial results of the process.

Allow me to quickly emphasize a few points.

First, with respect to the opposition, we have
heard some ask, what opposition? Several meetings in
various formats have been held on this topic, but allow
me to underscore the success of the recent conference
convened by Saudi Arabia in Riyadh, upon request of
the Vienna Group. That success should be stressed,
because the Syrian opposition responded by joining
together. Indeed, all of the various movements of the
political and armed opposition came together around
a common platform and expressed their commitment
to a political solution: a free, secular and democratic
Syria that has space for all of the components of
Syrian society. So we have an interlocutor guided by
the Geneva communique. Indeed, the Special Envoy
of the United Nations, with the High Negotiations
Committee, now has an opposition interlocutor. At this
stage, we note that, as far as we can see, the Syrian
regime has not yet demonstrated a clear desire to enter
into serious negotiations on the basis of the terms of
reference established.

Secondly, at the political level, there are plans to
hold inter-Syrian talks as soon as possible. However,
they will bear fruit only if, with our support and
guarantee, the credible political framework defined by
the Geneva and Vienna communiques is in fact created.
That framework is based on several principles. The first
is an effective political transition, meaning the handover
to a transitional authority of full executive power,
in particular control over the military and security
apparatus, as set out in the Geneva communique. That
step should be taken soon.

Secondly, there must be institutional reform, in
particular in the area of security, in order to provide
Syria with a framework that respects the diversity of
the Syrian people.

Finally, there must be safeguards regarding the exit
of Mr. Bashar Al-Assad, which is necessary not just
for moral reasons, but also, as we have stressed earlier,
ones of effectiveness. Indeed, how could a person
possibly bring together a whole people when he has
played such a large part in massacring them? In that
respect, whatever our views might be, we simply cannot
ignore an undeniable political reality: that as long as
Mr. Bashar Al-Assad's Government remains in power,
a lasting and genuine reconciliation between the Syrian
people and the State appears unattainable.

Finally, allow me to share a few thoughts on the
ceasefire. It must be national, viable and verifiable,
and we believe that for it to be lasting, at least three
conditions should be met.

First, we believe that the ceasefire should
accompany, not precede, the transition, and that only
the advent of this transition can provide the opposition
with the necessary security conditions.

Secondly, we believe that the ceasefire must
be prepared for by taking immediate humanitarian
measures aimed at alleviating the suffering of the
people and giving credibility to the political process.
Compliance with international humanitarian law is
a sine qua non, in particular the immediate halting
of indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
unhampered access for humanitarian assistance.
Confidence-building measures would be most welcome
so as to create a foundation for the ceasefire.

Finally, after such violence, monitoring of the
ceasefire will be quite difficult and will require creative
solutions not only on the ground but also on the political
front. A mechanism will be required through which
the members of the International Syria Support Group
that are most concerned, as well as the permanent
members of the Security Council, can hold the parties
accountable for compliance with their obligations.

By way of conclusion, let me say that I spoke earlier
about a glimmer of hope and a road-map resolution.
All of us around the table must contribute in good
faith to creating conditions conducive to a genuine
political transition in Syria. We must all bring our
influence to bear to induce the Syrian parties to uphold
the guidelines that we have set out, in particular as
inter-Syrian talks are set to begin under the auspices of
the United Nations and of Staffan de Mistura.

France, for its part, will remain active and vigilant
so as to ensure that all military forces are focused on
combating Daesh and eradicating terrorism. We will be
vigilant in order to ensure that the parties, and first and
foremost the regime, engage in talks and uphold their
humanitarian obligations. And we will be vigilant so
that the international community effectively commits
to a credible transition and a lasting ceasefire. Only
these clear objectives and this rediscovered unity will
enable the international community to, as we hope,
triumph over terrorism and put an end to the Syrian
tragedy.

