Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Luxembourg and you personally, Madam President, for
your decisive leadership on the compelling challenge of
children in armed conflict. Ithank the Secretary-General
and Executive Director Lake for their statements,
and Special Representative Zerrougui for her tireless
exemplary efforts. I would particularly like to thank
Alhadji Babah Sawaneh for his personal account. We
so often talk in the abstract in this Chamber. We need to
hear from individuals like Alhadji - powerful beacons
of a better future - much more often.

We know that armed conflict continues to have
a horrific impact on children, so many of whom are
recruited or used by armed forces and armed groups.
There are reportedly some 6,000 child soldiers in the
Central African Republic. Thousands of children are
killed in deliberate attacks on civilian areas or caught
in the crossfire. Over 10,000 have already lost their
lives in the Syrian conflict. Many children are abducted
and subjected to sexual violence. Attacks on schools
and hospitals continue to deny children an education
and desperately needed health care. The denial of
humanitarian assistance is depriving children of food
and basic necessities. That is a terrible stain on our
efforts for peace and security.

I would like to touch on three areas where greater
efforts are needed to protect children during armed
conflict: ending recruitment by Government forces
and non-State armed groups, addressing the military
use of schools, and ensuring accountability. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
has noted, eight Government armed forces are listed
in the Secretary-General's most recent report (see S/2013/245) as having recruited or used children. Six
of those Governments have committed, through the
signing of action plans, to ending that practice. The
aim of ending child recruitment by Government forces
therefore appears achievable, and we strongly support
the "Children, not soldiers" campaign, launched
yesterday, to reach that goal by 2016. We welcome the
restatement of commitment to that aim made by the
eight States affected yesterday. In our own region, we
are pleased to be supporting UNICEF's efforts to help
the Myanmar Government implement its action plan to
end the recruitment and use of children by the armed
forces.

While we welcome efforts to end recruitment by
Government forces, we must not lose our focus on
violations against children committed by non-State
armed groups. In fact, the majority of groups listed in
the Secretary-General's report as having recruited or
used children - 46 groups out of 55 - are non-State
actors. Many of those non-State armed groups have
recruited children persistently for more than five
years. It is crucial that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General continue her efforts to conclude
action plans with non-State armed groups, difficult
though that is to achieve. However, in order for her to
do so, Governments must allow United Nations access
to those groups to address child protection concerns.
The Council must keep a very close eye on progress
with that.

In many conflict situations around the world,
schools are attacked or used for military purposes.
In Syria, almost a quarter of all schools have been
damaged, occupied or destroyed. It is essential that
all parties implement resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian access in Syria, which was adopted by
the Council two weeks ago and which demanded that
all parties to conflict in Syria demilitarize schools. It
was a unanimous and powerful demand by the entire
Council.

In so many conflict situations, schools have
been used as military barracks, detention facilities,
interrogation centres and weapons storage facilities.
Using schools for military purposes gravely endangers
the lives of children and is contrary to international law.
We cannot deny generations of children an education
through the destruction or misuse of school premises.
We must work decisively on that.

It should be axiomatic, as Alhadji has reminded us
today, that those responsible for serious international
crimes committed against children during conflict
be held to account. Where national authorities are
unable or unwilling to investigate and prosecute such
crimes, the International Criminal Court can play a key
instrumental role. The International Criminal Court's
unanimous conviction of Thomas Lubanga for the war
crime of enlisting and conscripting children under the
age of 15 years and using them to participate actively in
hostilities was a landmark decision. Only by ensuring
accountability can we deter future crimes.

In conclusion, we must never just accept the risk
to children during armed conflict. We know they are
the most vulnerable and least able to withstand its
ravages. As Ambassador Gasana has just reminded
us, they are often the first victims. Their protection
must remain central to our efforts in the Council to
protect civilians - the primordial core of the Council's
work. We cannot do enough to achieve that. As Leila
Zerrougui has said this morning, hundreds of thousands
of children have their eyes on us.

