Mr. King (United Kingdom): We are grateful to
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting,
and to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) for his briefing.

Like others, we would like to take this
opportunity to offer our best wishes to the new
Chairman of the CTC, Ambassador Konuzin of Russia,
and to the new Executive Director of the CTC
Executive Directorate, Ambassador Ruperez. The
United Kingdom subscribes to the statement to be
made shortly by the Netherlands on behalf of the
European Union.

The threat of terrorism remains as acute today as
it has ever been. Terrorists are tireless in their pursuit
of impossible goals. They know no distinctions of race,
religion or geography. They are united in the disdain
they show for innocent life. So, we must be united in
combating terrorism - from tackling terrorist funding
to tackling the resentments that encourage terrorism.

Since its creation, the CTC has achieved a good
deal. It has helped build unity among States in the fight
against terrorism. It has helped sustain the momentum
of the international community's efforts to implement
resolution 1373 (2001). It has made States accountable
for their counter-terrorism efforts and, crucially, it has
assisted States in those efforts. But more needs to be
done, and, frankly speaking, there has been a sense that
activity has been levelling off a little as time has gone
on.

So now we need to exploit the appointment of the
new Executive Director and the reinforcement of the
CTC Executive Directorate to take activity to a new
level. We should take this opportunity to review how
the CTC works. It should maintain the best traditions
of efficiency and effectiveness; it should continue to
promote transparency, equal treatment and cooperation
with regional organizations. And the new structure
should also enable it to develop stronger links with
other parts of the United Nations system - notably the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights - allowing the CTC to draw them more
closely into its work and to draw on their expertise,
authority and contacts. The CTC should continue and
develop its close cooperation with the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee.

It is also right that we take this opportunity to
review what the CTC should do. We should look at
what more the CTC could do to provide technical
expertise to Member States. We welcome plans for an
additional effort to build links with potential donors of
assistance and better to match Member States' needs
and requirements with available assistance. The CTC
should continue to produce focused, proportional
judgements, building on appropriate reporting
requirements of Member States. And we should look at
the possibility of regional reporting returns so that
some smaller States could focus scarce resources on
implementation rather than on reporting requirements.
As a number of speakers have already noted this
morning, we should also look again at how best to
work with, and deal with, those who have not reported
or responded to the CTC. That will be a key issue for
the next period.

The bottom line is that terrorism remains an
ongoing threat which no one can ignore. We must all
play our part within and beyond the United Nations to
reduce that risk.

