Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): The Republic
of Korea sincerely appreciates the initiative of the
Russian presidency to organize today's open debate
on new trends in peacekeeping operations. We are also
grateful to the Secretary-General for his participation
and insightful briefing.

Peacekeeping operations remain an essential tool
for the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. However
peacekeeping missions increasingly face diversified
threats and multifaceted challenges. They are now
evolving to better meet the new demands, including where
there is no peace to keep, as described by the Secretary-
General. It is therefore incumbent on the Council to
seek prudent and realistic strategies to qualitatively
upgrade United Nations peacekeeping operations.

The Republic of Korea, which accomplished post-
war State reconstruction with the full support of the
United Nations, attaches great importance to all United
Nations peace efforts and has actively participated
in peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. Today, I would like to share some of our
thoughts on how to achieve the proper balance between
peacekeeping principles and the new demands.

First, regional and subregional ownership is
crucial for peacekeeping operations to carry out robust
mandates. In reality, impartiality does not guarantee
the safety of peacekeepers and sometimes triggers
anti-United Nations sentiments. The key in that regard
is the clear and broad support given to a peacekeeping
mission. The support granted to the Force Intervention
Brigade in the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to
which the host Government consented at the explicit
request ofa regional body, is a good example.

Secondly, the quantitative expansion of
peacekeeping operations should be balanced with the
focused prioritization of mandates and the streamlining
of staff. Clear, credible and achievable mandates enable
missions to achieve their goals. The possible overlapping
of roles of peacekeeping civilian components, the
United Nations country team and other development
partners should be avoided. Sequencing the deployment
of troops, police and civilians is recommended, as in the
case of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
in particular when inactivity is expected in the case of
simultaneous deployment.

Thirdly, inter-mission cooperation can benefit
from past lessons. Recently, the experience of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan illustrates that
such cooperation requires more time and greater costs
than expected. Securing critical enablers is always a
tremendous challenge. A prolonged crisis will test the
capability of the dispatching missions and give rise to
the option of a new force generation. To maximize the
usefulness of inter-mission cooperation, we request that
the Secretariat establish more systematic guidelines.
taking into account all relevant factors, including a
cost-benefit analysis and the scope of cooperation.

Fourthly, we believe that modernizing peacekeeping
operations could provide solutions to some challenges
that we face. Unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), for example, can monitor the movement of
conflicting parties and help to prevent a possible
crisis. The UAVs utilized by peacekeeping operations
do not even need to be equipped with state-of-the-art
technology. The use of UAVs can be cost effective
and practical, especially in risky areas or those that
are difficult to access. Efforts should be made to take
political and legal concerns into account in meeting the
requirement of respect for sovereignty, transparency
and confidentiality. We look forward to the report
of the expert panel organized by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support in that regard.

Fifthly, discussions related to peacekeeping
operations in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly and the Security Council need to be linked
with a view to enabling a comprehensive review of the
military, legal, civilian and budgetary implications.
We would like to propose that the Secretary-General
establish a system-wide cooperation framework
among peacekeeping operation-related entities and
submit a comprehensive report on the direction of the
development of such United Nations operations.

As the Secretary-General also pointed out, since
the landmark Brahimi report of 2000 (8/2000/809),
there has been a sea change in the environments where
peacekeeping operatiosn carry out their mandates. It
is true that the Security Council should carefully avoid
burdening peacekeeping missions with tasks that
exceed the principles of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. However, the role of a peacekeeping
operation 10 years ago was different from that of
today. It is natural to assume that its role 10 years from
now will also go beyond today's boundaries to meet
the upcoming challenges. We would therefore like to
emphasize the importance of keeping an open mind to
embracing the necessary changes.

