The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative the Central African Republic in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Poukre-
Kono (Central African Republic) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
report of the Secretary-General of 19 September
2001 (S/2001/886) submitted in accordance with
the statement of its President on 17 July 2001
(S/PRST/ZOOl/IS), particularly his
recommendations on how the United Nations
might further contribute to the recovery of the
Central African Republic.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation of the continuing work of the
Secretary-General's representative, General
Lamine Cisse, and of the United Nations Bureau

for the Peace-building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA).
"The Security Council expresses its
continued deep concern at the precarious situation
in the Central African Republic. It reiterates its
call on all parties for political dialogue, national
reconciliation and respect for human rights in the
spirit of the 1998 National Reconciliation Pact. In
this respect, it has taken note of the appeals for
national unity made by the Central African
authorities.

"The Security Council calls on the Central
African authorities to follow the internationally
accepted standards for due process in the course
of investigations and court trials of individuals
involved in the coup attempt in May 2001. These
procedures should be transparent and should not
be allowed to aggravate the inter-ethnic relations
in the Central African Republic. The refugees
who left the country after the failed coup should
be able to return in safety without fear of
persecution on an ethnic basis.

"The Security Council encourages the
international community to make a substantial
and urgent contribution to the recovery of the
Central African Republic and emphasizes that the
efficiency of such a contribution will greatly
depend on the efforts the Government of the
Central African Republic itself makes to this end.
The Council emphasizes that the crucial issues of
external debt and payment of arrears of salary for
civil servants need to be urgently addressed.

"The Security Council encourages the
United Nations Development Programme and the
international financial institutions, particularly
the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
and the African Development Bank, to consider,
in consultation with the Government of the
Central African Republic and the Secretary-
General's representative, ways of strengthening
the capacities of the Government of the Central
African Republic in the management of its
economic and financial affairs, including through
secondment of high-level experts. The Council
invites the Secretary-General to keep it informed
of actions taken in this regard when he presents
his next report on the Central African Republic.
In addition, the Council urges the Bretton Woods

institutions to show exceptional solicitude
towards the Central African Republic.

"The Security Council takes note with
interest of the intention of the Secretary-General,
in coordination with the Government of the
Central African Republic, to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Bureau for the Peace-
building Support Office in the Central African
Republic and to strengthen it in accordance with
paragraph 29 of his report of 19 September 2001
(5/2001/886).

"The Security Council underlines the need
to continue the restructuring of the Central
African armed forces to enable them to fu1fil their
role effectively, loyally and impartially, in the
service of the Central African people. It also
recalls the importance of implementing an
effective arms»collection programme. In this
regard, it supports the recommendations in
paragraphs 17 and 18 of the report of the
Secretary-General.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it regularly
informed of the activities of BONUCA and the
situation in the Central African Republic,
particularly in the areas of political dialogue,
national reconciliation and respect for human
rights."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/ZOOI/ZS.

At the last meeting of the Security Council, on
the situation in the Central African Republic, held on
21 September, in my capacity as the representative of
France I requested the Secretariat to give an assessment
of the financial cost of the desired strengthening of
BONUCA. The Secretariat has now informed me that
the cost would be $1.4 million. Extending BONUCA's
mandate for the year 2002 would cost approximately
$449 million.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.

