Mr. Sahovic (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia):
Before I address the issues that are the subject of our
debate today, let me express my satisfaction at seeing
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council
deliberations for this month. I also take this
opportunity to thank Mr. Guehenno for his, as usual,
very interesting and in-depth briefing and analysis.

We are all aware of the important and sensitive
political phase that is quickly approaching, since there
are just two and a half months before the scheduled
elections in Kosovo and Metohija on 17 November. A
number of issues deserve our collective attention and
were mentioned in the briefing we just received and in
subsequent statements by the members of the Council
and other colleagues. So allow me, therefore, to make a
few comments.

First and foremost, since our last debate here my
Government has intensified its efforts to promote direct
and prompt communication with the international
presence in Kosovo and Metohija. With this in mind,
the Governments of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Serbia have established a
coordinating centre for Kosovo and Metohija, headed
by Mr. Nebojsa Covic, the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia. The Centre's primary goal is to enhance
cooperation with the international community in
solving the common problems and achieving the shared
aims of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in the
province. It is hoped that this will also help to improve
the confidence of Kosovo Serbs in UNMIK and KFOR.

The results of the efforts are already visible.
Important meetings have been held between
Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic to discuss a number of
outstanding issues. Indeed, as Mr. Guehenno stated,
some progress has already been made, and we certainly
hope for more.

Also with the objective of facilitating
communication and solving practical problems, just a
few days ago my Government adopted guidelines for
the transport of KFOR personnel and equipment
through Yugoslav territory. This is, of course, in our
opinion a temporary measure, pending the conclusion
of the status of forces agreement and the status of
mission agreement, in accordance with the established
United Nations practice for similar missions.

Unfortunately, in spite of all these efforts
unnecessary misunderstandings and incidents continue
to occur, such as the one that took place on 7 August
on the Federal Government premises at Gracanica.
Another step in the wrong direction was the
introduction of the guidelines of the Special
Representative providing for 96-hour notice by any
Yugoslav or Serbian official who wants to visit Kosovo
and Metohija. This measure will certainly not facilitate
our efforts to encourage the non-Albanian population
to register for the elections. If anything, it will
discourage them.

I want to reiterate that these misunderstandings
are really unnecessary, and I hope that we can avoid
their occurrence in the future through our mutual
contacts here, through the UNMIK office in Belgrade
and, of course, through the contacts between
Mr. Haekkerup and Mr. Covic.

Speaking of registration, as has already been
mentioned here today, the highest Yugoslav and
Serbian officials have repeatedly called on the Kosovo
Serbs to register. Also, the Serbian Commissariat for
Refugees and Displaced Persons has signed a
memorandum of understanding with the International
Organization for Migration enabling registration
outside of Kosovo and Metohija, with the participation
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. So far, however, the response of potential
voters has not been enthusiastic, to say the least.

The reasons are many, I think. It is clear that the
basic preconditions for free and fair elections have not
yet been created and that UNMIK has to do much more
to ensure safety and liberty for all in Kosovo and
Metohija, regardless of ethnicity. Continued violent
attacks by armed Albanian extremists and terrorists -
not only against non-Albanians, but also against
Albanians and even UNMIK and KFOR personnel-
provide telling evidence that a proper atmosphere that
would allow important decisions to be taken regarding
the future of this southern Serbian province has not as
yet been created.

In this context, it is also important to note the
recent independent reports that shed some light on the
overall human rights and law and order situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, especially the reports of the
ombudsperson for Kosovo. These reports identify a
number of instances of clear incompatibility between
UNMIK regulations and practices and recognized
international standards. We are of the view that these
findings should be carefully analysed and that urgent
action should be taken to rectify the situation.

I am grateful to the Council members for
expressing readiness to lift the arms embargo that was
instituted by resolution 1160 (1998). This would be a
very important step in normalizing our relations with
the international community.

Allow me also to use this occasion to bring to the
Council's attention the situation in the ground safety
zone in southern Serbia. So far the plan - which has
been supported by the Council - for the peaceful
resolution of the crisis in this area has been
implemented successfully. The training of a multi-
ethnic police force is well under way. In addition, the
Yugoslav army and KFOR have concluded an
agreement providing for the full control of the zone by
the Yugoslav army and enhanced cooperation between
the army and the international security presence in
Kosovo and Metohija.

Finally, regarding the other issue of concern for
the region - an issue which is also closely related to
the situation in Kosovo and Metohija - let me
reiterate Yugoslavia's strong support for the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Republic of
Macedonia. In the past weeks and months Macedonia
has been on the brink of war due to unacceptable
terrorist activities of armed ethnic Albanian groups,
often supported and supplied from Kosovo and
Metohija. The recently signed Framework Agreement,
which Yugoslavia supports, and the deployment of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization contingent to carry
out the disarmament of armed ethnic groups raise
hopes that the existing problems will be resolved
through the reforms and processes agreed upon by the
political factions in the country.

We continue to firmly believe that the use of
violence and terrorism in pursuit of political goals must
not be allowed. For their part, UNMIK and KFOR have
clear responsibility to prevent any future actions to
destabilize Macedonia emanating from the area under
their control and administration.

In conclusion, let me once again emphasize that
we rely on the Security Council to ensure the full
implementation of its resolution 1244 (1999), to which
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is committed. We
also think that it is high time for the region-
supported by the international community, including
the Security Council - to intensify discussions on how
to embark on the road towards lasting stability in our
part of the world.

