Mr. Onanga-Anyanga (spoke in French): It is
a great privilege for me to take the floor today on
behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to inform
the Security Council of the implementation of the
mid-term mandate of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB), in accordance with the relevant
provisions of resolution 2090 (2013), of 13 February
2013, in particular paragraph 13.

Allow me to convey to the Council my warmest
congratulations for its sustained interest and forthright
support for the efforts of the Organization, alongside
the Government and people of Burundi, aimed at peace,
development and national reconciliation.

I left Bujumbura following the holding, on 15 and
16 July, of the first sectoral conference organized by
the Government in order to ensure effective follow-
up to the Conference of Development Partners, held
in Geneva on 29 and 30 October 2012. It is now more
essential than ever to implement the promises made
at that important meeting with respect to the second
generation strategic framework for growth and poverty
reduction, which guides the efforts of the Government.

That is so because Burundi is at a crossroads. It
is both urgent and essential that the many advances
made to bring the country out of its monstrous cycle
of violence be converted from the basic management of
violent upheavals into a profound national ownership
of principles that are capable of promoting institutional
transformation based on the rule of law and democratic
values.

However, there are still enormous challenges on the
path towards achieving the lofty goals that the people
of Burundi and their authorities have set. At the outset,
I would like to echo the appeal made by the Secretary-
General for continued, multilateral support for economic
recovery in Burundi. Helping Burundi to overcome the
current economic problems that threaten to undermine
the gains of a still-fragile stability requires taking part
in the dynamic set in motion by the Security Council
and following through on the peacebuilding process in
the country in a holistic manner, as reflected by the
criteria and indicators known as the benchmarks - in
this case the benchmark pertaining to economic and
social development - so as to make the dividends
of peace, without which stability could be called into
question, even more tangible.

The Secretary-General of course wishes to
underscore that the primary responsibility lies with
Burundians themselves, particularly through bold
reforms and uncompromising governance. However, in
the light of the many burdens that might impede growth
and the emergence of a more effective economy that is
more strongly linked to the East African Community,
Burundi should receive essential support from its
development partners in order to better strengthen its
foundations and more effectively deploy its potential.
The priority areas of energy, infrastructure, youth
employment and agriculture should be developed,
including through foreign direct investment, as the
levels in the latter area remain far too low.

It is therefore in a spirit of mutually sustained
commitment that I would like to present the following
oral report on the situation in Burundi, which I have the
honour to deliver following the publication of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/36).

(spoke in English)

I am pleased to report that we have seen significant
advances in terms of political dialogue since my most
recent briefing to the Security Council (see S/PV.6909).
As indicated then, from 11 to 13 March, BNUB

organized a workshop on electoral lessons learned with
all Burundian political parties and actors, with the aim
of helping to prepare the way ahead to the elections
in 2015 by drawing lessons from the 2010 electoral
process. The country's First Vice-President addressed
the opening session of the workshop, which was
attended by the Home Affairs Minister and other senior
Government officials, representatives of all political
parties, political actors who played a key role during
the 2010 elections, and a range of senior Government
officials and eminentpersons, such as former Presidents.
In one particular development, several opposition
politicians who had remained in exile abroad following
their boycott of the 2010 elections returned to Burundi
to participate in the workshop.

It is worth stressing that, for the first time since
2010, all Burundian political actors came together to
discuss their country's political future. Discussions
during the three days were open, frank and constructive.
Despite diverging views on several issues, participants
agreed on a number of key principles going forward, as
documented in the elements of a road map that emerged
as the workshop's immediate outcome. Such principles
included, inter alia, the need for inclusive political
dialogue, the creation of a security environment
conducive to the holding of free and peaceful elections,
and the freedom of all political parties and actors to
carry out their activities. The Home Affairs Ministry
assumed responsibility for moving the process forward
in an inclusive manner, and is to be congratulated for
the constructive approach it has taken towards that
aspect of dialogue.

As the first in a series of follow-up activities
envisaged to move the preparations forward, the
Government, with the support of the United Nations,
organized a workshop from 22 to 25 May in the northern
town of Kayanza, to discuss possible revisions to the
electoral code, which was one of the elements that the
March seminar had agreed to discuss. That workshop
was again a success, and ended with broad agreement
on the provisions of the electoral code that should be
proposed to lawmakers for revision. Recommendations
included the combination of presidential, legislative
and communal elections; the distribution of tally sheets
to political party agents at polling stations; and, most
important, an agreement on the use of a single-ballot
system, which had been a long-standing and divisive
matter in Burundi. While some of the participants
lamented a lack of preparation, they mostly appreciated
the Government's initiative and the degree of openness
that was shown by the inclusive list of invitees and the
way the discussions were managed.

In our views, the implementation of the conclusions
reached in Kayanza would represent a major step
forward on the path to organizing free, fair and
transparent elections. It is encouraging that, on various
occasions, the President of the Republic reaffirmed
his Government's commitment to ensuring that those
recommendations be endorsed through the established
legislative process when revising Burundi's electoral
law in the coming months. Another crucial element, as
key political party leaders emphasized during a meeting
I held with them on 7 June, is a dedicated discussion
on the establishment of a political environment that is
conducive to the elections. The Government and BNUB
have begun preparations for an inclusive meeting, to be
held by September, that would specifically focus on this
key issue.

I wish to emphasize that the return of key political
figures to Burundi marks significant progress and is
an encouraging sign of the increasing willingness
of all political actors to collaborate in the interest of
preparing for peaceful, free and fair elections in 2015.
The returning politicians have since resumed their
activities, with some political parties having already
been able to make progress in terms of reaching out to
their members in different parts of the country.

Such major advances on political dialogue
have played a key role in reducing restrictions of
political space, which have had the negative impact
of curtailing the ability of political parties and actors
to freely conduct their day-to-day activities. Yet,
there is more to be done, since the activities of some
members of the Imbonerakure - the youth league
of the ruling party, the Conseil national pour la
defense de la democratic-Forces pour la defense de
la democratie (CNDD-FDD) - and overzealous local
authorities continue to raise concerns. On numerous
occasions during the reporting period, members of the
Imbonerakure have harassed citizens and committed
crimes - often, it is alleged, for political reasons.

We welcome the recent statements by the
President of the ruling party and the President of the
Imbonerakure, echoed by Cabinet members, in which
they all emphasized that the CNDD-FDD and the
Government did not endorse violent acts and called on
the courts to prosecute violations in accordance with
the law. Leaders of other political parties have similarly
encouraged their youth to refrain from violence. Given
the country's violent history, we strongly urge all
stakeholders to ensure that youth wings of political
parties perform their activities peacefully and do not
become a source of intimidation and, at times, actual
danger to the population, including those who may be
politically active, thus affecting negatively the political
environment ahead of the 2015 elections. BNUB has
intensified contacts with youth-group leaders to that
end, and is planning to facilitate a meeting among
them later this year, to assist in reinforcing peaceful
approaches ahead of the 2015 elections.

The questions of land and the handling of disputes
by the Commission Nationale des terres et autres biens
(CNTB) relating to land and other assets unlawfully
seized during the 1972 crisis have also been the
subject of controversial discussion in Burundi during
the first six months of this year. In some cases, the
implementation of the Commission's decisions has
elicited public, and at times violent, responses.

The issue of land and other assets is one of the most
sensitive in the Burundian context and does not lend
itself to easy solutions. Burundi is a landlocked country
with one of the highest population densities in the
world. In view of the divisive nature of this matter, and
the risk of its opportunistic exploitation for political
gain, including along ethnic lines, BNUB has called
on all stakeholders to handle it with great care, in the
spirit of the Arusha Accords, with a view to furthering
justice, reconciliation, social cohesion and peace. We
have therefore been encouraged to see the beginnings
of a broader and more open discussion concerning the
handling of land disputes in general, notably with a
workshop chaired by President Nkurunziza on 24 June,
which underlined the need for the CNTB to be guided by
the principles of the Arusha Accords, while promoting
justice and reconciliation.

With regard to benchmark II, concerning security
and stability, overall, Burundi continued to enjoy a
commendable level of security and stability. However,
occasional clashes among Government forces and
armed groups continued during the previous reporting
period, including cross-border incursions from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, with armed groups
claiming responsibility for some of the attacks. As such
incidents show, the ongoing instability in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to adversely impact Burundi. In a bid to help stem
regional instability, Burundi has actively participated
in regional and international efforts to strengthen peace
consolidation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through the International Conference of the
Great Lakes Region and, most recently, through its active
support to the Kampala process and the implementation
of the mandate of the United Nations Special Envoy for
the Great Lakes Region, Ms. Mary Robinson. Burundi
has also maintained its laudable commitment to peace
in Somalia through its significant contribution to the
African Union Mission in Somalia, an engagement that
the international community continues to appreciate
strongly.
BNUB has continued to support the Government's
efforts to professionalize and enhance the capacity of
the national defence and security services, together
with bilateral partners, including through the training
of trainers on human rights and the prevention of
gender-based violence, and through the marking and
registration ofweapons. On 28 May, Burundi took a step
forward in the fight against the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons when the First Vice-President
launched a second civilian-disarmament campaign,
which will now be carried out with support from the
United Nations and other partners.

With regard to benchmark III, concerning
transitional justice, the transitional justice mechanisms
foreseen by the Arusha Accords have yet to materialize.
In his address to the nation on the occasion ofBurundi's
Independence Day, the President reaffirmed his
Government's commitment to establishing a truth and
reconciliation commission, noting that a draft law to that
effect was before the Parliament and preparatory work
was well advanced. In anticipation of the discussion
of the draft law in Parliament, BNUB continued its
activities with regard to raising awareness among
national stakeholders as to international standards
and best practices, notably by organizing a workshop
for parliamentarians on the topic. Those efforts will
continue to assist in the adoption of a law that is in
conformity with international norms and national
expectations.

No other process is as challenging as revisiting and
owning the Burundian past. Yet, as hard and painful a
path as that is, it remains vital to rebuilding the nation
so that it can at last live free of fear, identity-conflict
and impunity.

On benchmark 4, concerning governance, Burundi
must be commended for its efforts to strengthen
governance and the accountability of institutions.
BNUB has been encouraging the Government of
Burundi to press ahead with the implementation of the
National Strategy of Good Governance and the Fight
against Corruption, especially given the current efforts
to work with donor partners on the follow-up to the
commitments made at last year's partners conference
in Geneva. Building on the positive developments
reported last year, we have been able to note sustained
improvement in the business environment and an
ongoing reform process in the economic sector.

However, Burundi currently finds itself in an
extremely difficult fiscal position. After three strong
years of revenue growth, driven by the important work
of Burundi's Office Burundais des Revenues, collected
revenues in Burundi showed a marked decline in the
period from February to May 2013. The country now
appears likely to miss its 2013 revenue targets by a very
substantial margin, threatening development outcomes
and currency exchange. If not properly handled, that,
in turn, could pose a serious threat to the hard-won yet
still fragile stability.

A recent mission to Burundi by the International
Monetary Fund identified a number of urgent alterations
in fiscal policy that the country must pursue in order
to balance its books. It will be critical for Burundi's
leaders to take the painful steps necessary to ensure that
the situation is rectified and revenue growth resumes.

On benchmark 5, concerning the rule of law,
following the adoption of the sectorial strategy of the
Ministry of Justice in 2011, BNUB continued to work
closely with the Ministry of Justice and other relevant
partners on the planning of an inclusive and open
conference, the Etats-Generaux de la Justice, which is
now planned for August 2013, after lengthy and difficult
consultations. The judicial system as a whole still faces
considerable challenges, as evidenced, for example, by
the continuing gaps in the promotion of magistrates. It
is hoped that the Etats-Ge'ne'raux will help define the
way forward in addressing the challenges in the justice
sector with inputs from all relevant stakeholders. In a
positive development, on 3 April a new criminal code
was signed into law by the President, marking significant
improvements in procedures in a number of important
areas and enhancing oversight and accountability.

On benchmark 6, concerning human rights, the
picture regarding the overall human rights situation
during the first six months of this year is mixed.
There has been a great deal of improvement, with
persistent challenges. We have noted far fewer cases
of killings that may have been politically motivated
than in the past. In the first six months of 2013, BNUB
documented 20 cases of extrajudicial executions. It
needs to be emphasized, however, that a large number
of those grave violations were associated with a single
event, on 12 March, in the commune of Businde, in
Kayanza province. Seven followers of a self-proclaimed
prophetess, Eusebie Ngendakumana, were killed after a
violent confrontation with the police. Eleven cases of
torture and 80 cases of cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment also occurred. Those figures,
regrettably, mark an increase over the comparative
period of the previous year. It must be noted that the
excessive and inappropriate use of force by State
security agents, mostly the police, appears to have
been the cause of the majority of the cases of human
rights violations that have been documented since the
beginning of this year.

The Government has attributed the Businde incident
to a lack of adequate training of the police with regard
to crowd control and managing public demonstrations.
It is worth noting that the police indeed seem to have
started adopting a more cautious approach when dealing
with similar incidents. It is imperative to now build on
those advances so as to prevent further tragedies such
as the incident on 12 March and to ensure that the
freedom of religion and the freedom of assembly are
respected while public order is upheld in accordance
with the relevant legal provisions.

Efforts continued aimed at improving judicial
follow-up to grave human rights violations, in a
somewhat encouraging trend that began in 2012.
Continued efforts will therefore need to be exerted to
ensure that all perpetrators of crimes are duly prosecuted
and sentenced, with a view to ending impunity.

The promulgation of the new press law on 4 June,
after much controversial debate, has proved to be a
highly divisive issue. Preoccupied by the risks of a
decline in the freedom of the press and democratic
space, the Secretary-General and a variety of bilateral
and international partners, as well as local and
international civil society organizations, called on
the Government to uphold the freedom of expression.
Among the concerns are provisions that broaden the
conditions under which journalists can be forced to
reveal their sources and give disproportionate fines and
other penalties for certain press offences. It is therefore
reassuring that the Government of Burundi has since
indicated its intention to apply the law leniently and to
ensure that the freedom of the press continues to be
a feature of the vibrant democracy Burundi aspires to
be. We remain confident that the same attitude will be
observed during the review and adoption of two further
laws, on public meetings and demonstrations, and on
non-profit organizations, with a view to protecting
freedom of association and expression.

On benchmark 8, concerning socioeconomic
development, overall Burundi continues to struggle
with high rates of extreme poverty. Food security
and nutrition remain major challenges, and most
Burundians continue to face a daily struggle to make
ends meet. Projections for 2013 indicate a slightly
increased growth rate of 5.3 per cent, which is, however,
insufficient to significantly reduce the poverty level,
given the continuing high rates of population growth.
On 27 January, the central market of Bujumbura burned
down completely, profoundly affecting the economic
and social life of the city and the country as a whole.
The incident has negatively affected local merchants,
farmers, transport workers and other citizens,
exacerbating an already difficult economic situation
for many.

Income generation also continued to be a major
challenge for those Burundians who returned from
the Mtabila refugee camp in Tanzania at the end of
2012, mostly due to the lack of land for agriculture and
related land conflicts, despite the reintegration support
provided by the United Nations and other partners.
Burundi remains host to more than 50,000 refugees,
mostly from the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the majority of whom are women and children. Almost
80,000 people continue to be internally displaced in
Burundi.

Despite many advances made at the national
level and the commendable efforts undertaken by
the Government, the private sector and citizens
themselves, Burundi remains in need of strong support
from its partners in order to overcome the numerous
challenges it faces on the socioeconomic development
front. In that regard, a key area of focus during the first
half of this year was to ensure effective follow-up to
the commitments made by international partners at
the October 2012 Geneva Conference. As I mentioned
earlier, the Government successfully organized a first
sectoral follow-up conference, which took place in
Bujumbura from 15 to 16 July. A second conference,
focused on governance and energy, is being planned
for October. We are grateful to Burundi's partners
for their steadfast support, and urge the international
community to stay engaged and help ensure that the
country remains firmly set on its path to sustainable
development and lasting peace consolidation.

In that regard, work has also continued to advance
in the more area of peacebuilding in Burundi. The
implementation of the reintegration programmes for
war-affected populations, funded by the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF), is expected to be completed before the end
of the year. Efforts to plan for a possible third tranche of
PBF funding for Burundi have begun. In his capacity as
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Paul Seger visited Burundi
from 21 to 28 June. Allow me once again to commend
Ambassador Seger for his leadership and tireless work
to promote lasting peace and development in Burundi.
I have found in Paul a strong ally in our joint efforts
to enable Burundi to achieve its own national strategic
objectives for peace, development and reconciliation.

I would also like to express my appreciation to
Special Envoy Mary Robinson for her exceptional work
to advance peace and stability in the region. Burundi
recently hosted a regional conference on women,
security, peace and development, co-organized by
Ms. Robinson's office, which led to the adoption of
a regional action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as to a renewed commitment to collaborate in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We look forward to seeing this
encouraging process continue, and to supporting the
Government of Burundi and other national stakeholders
in their work on this important initiative.

(spoke in French)

In accordance with paragraph 13 ofresolution 2090
(2013), of 13 February, the Secretary-General will soon
inform members of the Council in greater detail about
the implementation of BNUB's mandate based on the
report to be provided to him by the strategic assessment
mission, which he will deploy shortly. For its part,
BNUB will tirelessly pursue its mission to support the
peacebuilding process and to strengthen democratic
institutions in Burundi.

In that respect, the preparation for the forthcoming
2015 elections, which are already giving rise to much
debate and are the subject of intense preparations,
deserve special attention. The holding of its next
elections will sorely test the young Burundian
democracy. The positive trends in the current political
scene bode well for the success of that important event
for the Burundian people and their history.

At the request of President Nkurunziza, the
Secretary-General is preparing to deploy a mission
during the third week of August to assess Burundi's
electoral assistance needs. Carried out in the broader
context of the multilateral reforms under way while
effectively addressing the various issues that I have
referred to, and with effective support for the country's
efforts to improve growth and combat poverty,
Burundi's democratic experience could be a foundation
for building a nation that is more united, prosperous
and confident in its future.

In recent months, I had the privilege to hold lengthy
meetings with all senior Burundian officials, including
with the Permanent Representative, who is here in the
Chamber, on all the issues that Ijust mentioned. I was
thus able to take good stock of the importance that
the authorities attach to the task of modernizing their
country.

I am grateful for the quality of the reception and the
cooperation that I enjoyed in exercising my functions.
That demonstrates the great respect that Burundi has for
the United Nations, and for international cooperation
in general. I also took the time to listen to other
stakeholders in Burundian society ~ political parties,
representatives of civil society, religious groups,
women's organizations and youth groups. Everywhere
I noticed a great deal of confidence in the future they
want to build together patiently, jointly and with mutual
respect.

Allow me to pay tribute to the members of the
international community present in Burundi for their
support to the country. I am also grateful to all my
colleagues from BNUB and to the United Nations
family in Burundi for their dedication.

I would like to conclude by referring to what an
astute Burundian observer once solemnly told me,
which was that his country continued to make progress
despite the weight of history and the daily challenges. I
found his words rich in meaning and hope - hope for a
better tomorrow, forged from the hard work ofBurundi's

men and women. They will need the outstretched and
reassuring hand of all their partners, and, undoubtedly,
the continued engagement of the Security Council.

