Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I should like to thank you and your
country for your initiative of holding a meeting of the
Security Council to mark the fiftieth anniversary of
the Israeli occupation of Arab territory, particularly
Palestinian and Syrian territory. I thank Mr. Ahmed
Aboul-Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States, with whom I have had the honour and privilege
of working here in the United Nations in a previous
capacity, and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for the very
comprehensive briefings they delivered to the Council.

Today's meeting indeed represents an important
fresh appeal for peace in the Middle East based
primarily on resolving the core issue in the region,
that is, the Palestinian question. Our discussions today
have served to remind the world of the outlines for a
resolution to this issue, in particular the need to put an
end to the longest-standing occupation in the modern
history of humankind, an occupation that began on
5 June 1967.

The sheer length of the occupation of the
Palestinian territories and the decades-long absence of
justice for the Palestinian people has led many to doubt
the effectiveness of the international Organization, the
international system as a whole and the Security Council
in preserving and upholding the rights enshrined in
the Charter of this House, as well as to deliver on the
purposes that led to the creation of the United Nations,
that is, the right of peoples to self-determination.

Some are questioning the effectiveness of
addressing this issue within the United Nations going
forward, saying that this hinders prospects for a genuine
resolution or represents an attempt to impose a fait
accompli on certain parties. We reiterate that the actions
of the United Nations, including the Security Council,
have never, since the very outbreak of the crisis, had
the purpose of acting as an aggressor against, isolating
or besieging a State or of detracting from its legality.
Rather, the goal has been to complement the efforts
made by the Organization for the past 70 years, since it
decided to establish two States: Israel, which has been
duly established, and the second, which we hope will
soon enjoy full sovereignty over its own territory.

We have never asked the United Nations to, or
hoped that it would, impose a solution, which would be
unrealistic and impossible. We remain convinced that
negotiations remain the best means of bringing about a
just and lasting peace in the region.

Until a peace agreement is reached, our international
Organization must remain the key organ with respect
to, and the legitimate guarantor of, the inalienable legal
rights of the Palestinian people and the parameters for
the hoped-for negotiations.

Against that backdrop, we would like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive
briefing this morning. We would also like to thank him
for having presented the second report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016), and his comments on the resolution's provisions
and parameters. We have followed very closely and with
a great deal of interest the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) and we would call upon both parties - once
again, the Palestinian and Israeli sides - to listen very
carefully to Mr. Mladenov, to be guided by him, to
implement the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) and
to refrain from any unilateral measures, in particular the
current unprecedented and illegal settlement activity we
are seeing in the occupied Palestinian territory, which
risks the prospects for the two-State solution. We would
also recall the various Security Council resolutions that
set out the key parameters agreed by the international
community, in particular the two-State solution on the
basis ofthe 1967 borders, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

We thank all those who are working on the
humanitarian track to try mitigate the suffering of the
Palestinian people in that territory, and indeed outside
the borders of this territory, namely, those who are
refugees. These humanitarian workers provide crucial
services to successive generations of Palestinians
who have known no other fate than the occupation
and its nefarious practices. We particularly thank the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which, for a
long time now, has provided services to millions of
Palestinian refugees.

I call upon all current stakeholders concerend to
work to overcome the financial crisis facing UNRWA
via the options put forward by the Secretary-General in
his report. Mitigating the suffering of the Palestinians
under the boot of occupation is the very least that the
international community should and could do currently.
It would be a key step forward towards a definitive
solution of the question, and failing to do so would have
a very adverse impact.

In the past, some have tried to relieve the suffering
of the Palestinian people through partial solutions,
which is how they have tried to heal the wounds, but
this has essentially been a cover for preserving the
status quo. An attempt to preserve things as they
currently stand will only have the impact of leading
to greater division, discord and deterioration of the
relationship between the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, and it will also lead to the further embedding
of a de facto situation that jeopardizes a bright future
for both parties, including the Palestinians. The right
to live in safety is the right of all peoples in the region,
including, we acknowledge, the right of the Israelis to
live in peace within their duly agreed borders and in the
framework of a policy of good-neighbourliness with the
States in the region, particularly the Arab States, which
are Israel's neighbours.

But I am sure that members ofthe Council will also
agree with me that the equality of rights of all peoples
is the bedrock of justice and stability. All must enjoy
full equality. It is impossible to imagine peace, security
and prosperity being enjoyed by these people as long as
the suffering of the Palestinian people continues.

A reduction in the levels of violence, which are
very high in this conflict, even when compared with
other conflicts in the region, means grappling with the
importance of the Palestinian issue, really giving it is
just due and understanding the risks that surround it.
But those who believe that the Palestinian question is
any way lesser than other conflicts in the region are
mistaken in that belief. We believe that dealing with the
Palestinian question is vital for the freedom of millions
of people around the world, including in particular
people in the region. It would also be upholding justice
as it is truly to be seen on the global stage.

The injustices meted out for so long now against the
Palestinian people are evidence ofa most deeply rooted
crisis and point to dysfunction in terms of the delivery
of justice in this region. We must always keep this
background in mind and remember that this has been
the truth for some time now, as the Palestinian people
have aspired to freedom and liberty for so long, having
been forced out of their homes, faced with destruction,
forced to live as prisoners, blockaded and separated
from one another physically, given that their territory is
physically divided between the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, which has become a ticking time bomb. We must
bear in the mind the successive generations for whom
this has been the plight, who have been imprisoned in
this way throughout their lives without any political
solution in sight that might allow them to dare to hope
for a brighter future.

I do not want to touch upon, or give any weight to, the
jumble of facts that we heard in today's meeting during
the intervention by one of the speakers. That speaker
ignored the injustice endured by the Palestinians and
the seizure of their land during the period from 1948
to 1967, and even before the capture of the West Bank
and Jerusalem. He also ignored the global movement
that President Nasser led against colonialism all over
the world, especially in Africa and in the Arab World.

We are not here to discuss historical facts full
of conflicts. I am deeply surprised that the speaker
ignored the fact that Egypt was the first country to
conclude a peace treaty with Israel. I am also surprised
at his boldness in justifying the occupation of others'
land by force and at his support for the ongoing forced
deportation, demolition of houses and crimes against
humanity committed by Israel against Palestinians
for decades. Regrettably, that extremist approach for
justifying crimes is in itself capable of rekindling
conflicts once again, despite all efforts towards peace.

The historic appeal launched by the Arab States
remains the best proof that we are commited to the
principles of peace as upheld by the international
community, and we see it as the basis for ending the
conflict and ushering in a land ofpeace. The most recent
Arab League Summit reiterated the determination
of the Heads of State and Government in the region
to stand behind the Arab Peace Initiative, as they
marked the fiftieth anniversary of the occupation of the
Palestinian territory.

We would like to reiterate our congratulations to
the United States Government for its determination to
find a lasting solution to this issue. Egypt will support
those to forge contacts with Israeli and Palestinian
partners so that this laudable goal may be achieved.

Finally, it is high time for those who have a stake in
this conflict to understand that the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples share a common destiny and a common future,
as they live side by side. The aspirations of the two
peoples are for peace and security, and those aspirations
can be met only by accepting the reality that the two
peoples are neighbours and that they must therefore
live side by side and coexist as two independent States
living in peace - an Israeli State and a Palestinian
State, whose capital would be Al-Quds Al-Sharif- on
the basis of the 1967 borders.

