Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank both briefers for their insights and
analysis, and we echo what my colleagues from the
United Kingdom and Germany have just said. I would
like to focus on three points. They are our concern
about the situation, the urgent need to do everything
we can to prevent Darfur from again relapsing into
conflict and the call for suspending the withdrawal of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID), given the current circumstances.

I should first explain our deep concern about the
situation in the Sudan. France strongly condemns
the violence in the Sudan in recent days. Peaceful
demonstrators were repressed with severe brutality.
Such disproportionate use of force is unacceptable. We
urge all actors to exercise restraint and not to resort
to violence. The Transitional Military Council has
the primary responsibility to ensure the safety of all
Sudanese people. In the light of Pramila Patten's very
worrying statement, France calls for a full investigation
into the abuses committed, including sexual violence,
and for those responsible to be brought to justice.

The challenge today in the Sudan is the resumption
of political dialogue and the negotiated transition to
civilian-led rule. We call on all parties to resume talks,
to show restraint and openness and to seek compromise.
We recall that the deadline agreed by the African Union
for the transfer of power to a civilian-led transitional
authority will expire on 30 June.

France welcomes the African Union's firm and clear
position. We hope that the United Nations can fully back
the mediation efforts of the African Union, with the
support of Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed. This
is what France has called for in recent days, including
at the meeting between the French Minister for Europe
and Foreign Affairs and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission in Paris on 11 June.

In that regard, I welcome the mission entrusted by
the Secretary-General to his Special Adviser, Nicholas
Haysom, to support the African Union mediation.
The initial results are encouraging; the mediation has
brought both parties back to the negotiating table,
which is a very positive step. We call on all partners
of Sudan, particularly the countries of the region and
Sudan's closest partners, to join their energy to support
an African Union mediation. The stability of the Sudan
can be ensured only if we all work toward the same goal
and speak with one voice.

My second point is that we must do all we can
to prevent Darfur from being set ablaze again. We
are extremely concerned about reports of violence in
Darfur in recent days, particularly in Jebel Marra,
which show that the situation today is once again very
volatile. As we know, Darfur remains a fragile region,
where the root causes of the conflict, including access
to land and the future of 2 million displaced persons,
have not really been settled. We must do everything we
can to prevent the region from collapsing again.
UNAMID must therefore remain in the strongest
position to enable it to carry out its missions, particularly
the protection of civilians. We were particularly
shocked by the attack on and looting of the El Geneina
camp in mid-May. The involvement of members of the
Sudanese defence and security forces is unacceptable.
We call on the authorities to shed full light on those acts
and ensure that those responsible are brought to justice.

In addition, I would like to reiterate the importance
of combating impunity in Darfur. Serious crimes,
including those against children and sexual violence,
have been carried out for a long time and continue. I
recall that all parties to the conflict have an obligation
to cooperate fully with the International Criminal
Court and its Prosecutor, in accordance with resolution
1593 (2005).

Finally, in the current context, we must defer any
decision on the withdrawal of UNAMID. It is more
necessary than ever to advocate for a responsible and
prudent withdrawal of the mission. We must postpone
any decision on its withdrawal for several months, for
two reasons.

First, we cannot, in the space of two weeks, decide
to transfer the remaining 15 bases to the Sudanese
authorities when we have no legitimate and reliable
interlocutor in the Government in Khartoum. On the
contrary, last week's violence compels us to exercise
the utmost caution. UNAMID was right to freeze
the transfer of its bases as long as the decree by the
Transitional Military Council last month - which said
that UNAMID camps should be handed over to the Rapid
Support Forces - is in effect. That decree contravenes
the agreements concluded between the Sudan and the
United Nations and must be annulled, as stated in the
communique issued yesterday by the Chairperson of
the African Union Peace and Security Council.

Finally, the situation in Darfur is so unstable and
volatile at the moment that the presence of UNAMID
will still be necessary in the coming months. I am
thinking in particular ofthe mission to protect civilians,
report human rights violations, resolve intercommunal
conflicts, facilitate humanitarian access and protect
humanitarian personnel. Given the current conditions,
my delegation supports the proposal of the United
Kingdom and Germany for a technical renewal of the
mission's mandate.

