Mr. Benomar (spoke in Arabic): Yemen has just
witnessed a historic milestone. On 23 November,
it marked the first anniversary of the signing of its
Peace and Transition Agreement. Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon personally attended the ceremony to
commemorate that achievement. At that time, he
assured the people of Yemen of the full support of the
United Nations for their peaceful transition. During the
preceding months, most people would not have believed
such an agreement possible. Indeed, during that period,
in Yemen, I saw a nation in turmoil and a State on the
verge of collapse.

I saw the capital city, Sana'a, divided and under
artillery fire, making life for the civilian population
unbearable. I saw and was among demonstrators calling
for change, as, for months, they camped out in tents on
the streets and squares of the capital and other major
cities. I went to the north of the country, where armed
conflict persists and armed clashes still occur. I was
also in the south, Where the future unity of the country
remains an open question.

During this period, most Yemenis have been living
in darkness, suffering from shortages in basic food
supplies and cooking fuel. Moreover, we all observed
with increasing alarm how Al-Qaida managed to
expand its influence, at one point gaining control over
significant swathes of territory in the south. Conflict
and insecurity prevailed, and there was a real threat
that the situation would degenerate into a full-scale
civil war.

During that period of protracted stalemate, the
Secretary-General took the initiative to utilize his
good offices to help resolve the deadlock when the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) initiative failed to
be implemented. In the end, after six intensive trips to
Yemen, we managed to find a way forward and reach an
agreement, building on resolution 2014 (2011) adopted
in October 2011, which called for a political settlement,
and on the tremendous efforts of the GCC.

The Transition Agreement, which we named the
Implementation Mechanism of the GCC initiative, was
signed on 23 November 2011. It engaged the former
regime and opposition in a clear process for a transition
to good democratic governance. The Agreement went
far beyond simply replacing one individual or governing
party with another.

Rather than resigning, President Saleh agreed to
transfer his powers to his deputy and to make way for
early presidential elections. All sides agreed to support
a consensus candidate who commanded the trust and
respect of all. A Government of National Unity would
exercise power during a two-year transition phase,
during which the military and security forces would
be restructured under a unified command, a National
Dialogue Conference leading to a constitution-draft
process would be held, the resulting draft constitution
would be approved by referendum and, finally, a fresh
set of elections would be set for February 2014.

We made sure the following elements were included
in the agreement: a path for fundamental reforms in the
practice of governance and redress for the wrongs of
the past; recognition of the role of youth and a clear
path for their participation in the transition and the
realization of their aspirations; a focus on political
inclusion that could give an opportunity for the people
of Yemen to shape their country's future and establish
a new constitutional order; and the full participation of
women throughout the entirety of the process.

Through that framework, the handover of power to a
Government of National Unity took place successfully.
In February 2012, the second phase of the transition
was ushered in when President Mansour was elected
by an overwhelming majority, in a poll that was at
the same time a kind of referendum on the November
agreement and on the transition itself. Today, one year
later, an air of normality has taken hold in most parts
of the country.

I wish to take this opportunity to commend
President Mansour for his leadership. I also commend
the efforts of Prime Minister Basendwah's Government,
which have allowed the country to move forward. The
fight for control ofthe cities by rival militias has ended,
with freedom of movement restored throughout major
urban centres.

However, we cannot overlook the fact that the
road ahead remains long and arduous and that Yemen
continues to face grave challenges on multiple fronts.
First, there is the difficult issue of restructuring the
military. The armed forces remain divided between
two sides. One camp, the powerful Republican Guards,
is led by the former President's son, and the other,
the 1st Armoured Division, is led by General Ali
Mohsen, who broke from the regime during last year's
uprising. Corruption remains widespread throughout
the institution. A system of patronage favours loyalty
to military leaders and not the State. Some top military
leaders are publicly engaged in business and politics.
Army commanders are able to engage in murky business
dealings, including the smuggling of subsidized fuel,
inflating the numbers of those in service and pocketing
the excess income from ghost positions. President
Mansour has taken initial and courageous steps to
address military reform. However, the formidable task
of integrating the military and security forces under one
command will remain a serious challenge during the
transition, and will require comprehensive, systemic
institutional reform.

State authority remains limited in parts of the
country. Clashes between the Houthis and Salafists
and tribal groups associated with the Islah party have
left dozens of people dead in the north. The country
remains awash with arms, with new shipments still
reportedly coming in.

Terrorism remains a serious threat. In June,
Government forces under President Mansour's
leadership were able to dislodge Al-Qaida elements
from areas that had fallen under its control. However,
that has led Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula to desert
the open areas and instead disperse and infiltrate major
cities. The continuous spate of terrorist attacks against
Government targets in Sana'a is evidence of that
development, including last week's abhorrent killing of
a Saudi military attache.

In terms of governance, one year into the transition,
it is clear that the honeymoon period is over. Yemenis
now expect the Government to deliver concrete
results - to provide better security for the nation
and basic social services. Coalition Governments are,
however, often the product of unhappy relationships and
are bound together in unnatural partnerships. In this
case, the distrust between the two principal political
blocs that constitute the Government of National
Unity has never dissipated and remains entrenched.
Disputes over civil service appointments are just
one example of the issues polarizing the two sides:
the Genereal People's Congress (GPC) feels that it is
being unfairly targeted for removal, while the former
opposition, which is now in the Government, complains
of insufficient representation and remains adamant in
seeking appointments for key positions.

While both sides signed on to take part in a
Government of National Unity, their war continues
through the media. Partisan reporting by media outlets
owned by each side continues to inflame an already
acrimonious and tense relationship. Former President
Saleh remains active as the leader of the GPC party- and
often acts as the leader of the opposition, demonizing
the Government of National Unity - despite it being
half-composed of his own party and allies. What many
politicians fail to realize is that the political landscape
is changing, with prospects for shifting alliances. They
continue to view the situation with a perspective locked
in the past and in static alliances, rather than looking
ahead to the future and to new realignments.

Unrest in the south has its roots in the
marginalization and discrimination of southerners
that has taken place since unification, including their
perceived lack of access to resources and opportunities.
Long-standing grievances have left many in the
south feeling excluded. Since 2007, southerners have
mobilized to demand equal access to employment and
Government services, land reform and a certain degree
of local autonomy. That movement, known as the
Hiraak, began as a rights-based movement demanding
equality under the rule oflaw. Years of empty promises
have deepened resentments and radicalized some in the
movement toward a maximalist agenda for a separate
State.

In my outreach to Hiraak leaders in Aden and Cairo,
I explained to them that the National Dialogue provided
an opportunity to address the southern question
through dialogue and compromise, and in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. 1 urged them to
renounce violence and to participate in the process with
no preconditions. I also urged the Government to take
confidence-building measures to address the grievances
of southerners - of those who were unjustly dismissed
from the civil service or discharged from the military
in the aftermath of the 1994 war, as well as those whose
land and other properties were confiscated. Concrete
progress with regard to those two matters would provide
an enabling environment for a constructive start to the
National Dialogue.

Yemen's humanitarian situation remains in acute
crisis. Our humanitarian colleagues and workers tell
us that nearly half the population of Yemen are food
insecure, with an alarming number living on the edge
of starvation. A quarter of a million children are
severely malnourished and at risk of dying without
proper nutrition interventions. Access to clean water
eludes more than half the population, and basic health
care remains an aspiration for nearly a quarter of the
population. Struggling to provide basic services, Yemen
is nonetheless one of the most generous refugee-hosting
countries, with more than 230,000 refugees and
500,000 internally displaced persons. The 2012
Yemen Humanitarian Response Plan, which requires
$585 million dollars, is only 57 per cent funded. That
leaves a funding gap of more than $250 million.

On the economic front, there are modest signs of
progress. Inflation is decreasing and the decline in
economic activity has slowed. The exchange rate, which
fluctuated during 2011, has now stabilized and reached
the same levels as before the crisis. The momentum
of Yemen's transition and recovery must be sustained
with strong support from the international community,
especially its regional partners. Through meetings
in Riyadh and in New York, Yemen's partners have
confirmed their commitment by pledging more than
$7.5 billion to help Yemen with its economic recovery.
The continuous engagement of Yemen's development
partners, together with the establishment of a new
intra-governmental coordinating body to support
the implementation of the pledges, will help channel
funds effectively, so that Yemenis can start seeing an
improvement in their daily lives.

The upcoming National Dialogue provides an
opportunity for Yemenis to build a future that meets
the aspirations of all. In that regard, the preparatory
committee for the National Dialogue, as an all-
inclusive body, may serve as the crucible for the new
Yemen. My team and I have spent many long days
and hours working with the committee. It has been a
great inspiration to see youth, women, civil society
and representatives of political parties, along with
representatives from the south and of the Al-Houthis,
participating constructively within the committee.
Indeed, the diverse composition and deliberative
style of work of the committee, often with a good
spirit resulting from the genuine commitment of the
participants, have helped them reach decisions based
on consensus and compromise.

A few days ago, the committee became deadlocked
over the issue of representation and the allocation of
seats at the upcoming Conference. At their request, I
put forward ideas to help the National Dialogue process
move forward, while stressing that there is no one
ideal formula that could satisfy all stakeholders. I am
pleased that, with that last contentious issue resolved,
the committee's long hours and efforts are coming to
a conclusion. The fruits of their efforts will soon be
seen in the delivery ofa final report and other elements
finalizing the rules and structure of the Conference.
Fully consistent with United Nations standards, we
have been successful in supporting the demands of
local women's groups that women should constitute at
least 30 per cent of those taking part in the National
Dialogue.

We have been actively supporting preparations for
the National Dialogue through initial funding from
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund. We have
now established a multi-donor trust fund to channel
international support for the process in a coordinated
fashion and to encourage all donors to contribute so
as to ensure the timely launch of an effective National
Dialogue Conference. Our assistance will continue
through the period of the constitution-drafting process
and the holding of elections.
I am pleased to report that a new electoral
commission has been established by presidential
decree. In order to keep within the transition timeline,
it will be critical for the new commission to focus on
creating a new voter registry. The road towards new
elections remains long and difficult.

For the country to move forward, a true reckoning
with past injustices, as well as steps to heal old wounds,
are essential. There is a strong sense among Yemenis
that the transition will remain in suspension in the
absence of reconciliation efforts, including restitution
or compensation for victims as well as guarantees
against recurrence and an end to impunity. With those
aims in mind, we hope that an amended draft law on
transitional justice and national reconciliation will be
adopted by consensus.

The transition is threatened by those who have still
not understood that change must occur now. Spoilers
of all sorts have not given up. They remain anxious to
impede the transition and to profit from instability. In
the past few days, Yemenis have once again been left
in darkness without electricity. Oil and gas pipelines
continue to be subject to attack, causing the Yemeni
treasury losses amounting to hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue. Many Yemenis expect the Security
Council to keep a careful watch on the spoilers' actions
and to hold them to account.

We will continue to work closely with members of
the Security Council, the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the European Union and other international partners,
in particular with the active diplomatic community in
Sana'a, to support Yemen's transition. We count on the
continued consensus in the Security Council, which has
played a crucial role in supporting a peaceful transition
in Yemen, to keep the transition on track to deliver
within the agreed timeline.

We are all determined to continue supporting
a transition that is unique in the region, one that is
based on a clear road map. The transition enjoys
the overwhelming endorsement and support of the
population. It is a transition that offers an opportunity
for meaningful participation by all - men, women,
young and old. And it is a transition that offers a genuine
opportunity to unlock the potential that we all see in
Yemen. Yet, while there are tremendous challenges,
I am convinced that Yemen has the potential to be a
prosperous country, one that can become stable and
governed according to the genuine will and aspirations
of its population.

Change in the region has all too often been
accompanied by sacrifices that should not have been
necessary and that we cannot ignore. The Yemenis have
shown us, however, that the time of the gun as a tool
for answering the legitimate aspirations of citizens has
passed and that a peaceful transformation can emerge
from the ashes of conflict. As the Secretary-General
observed during his visit to the country two weeks
ago, Yemeni men and women have armed themselves
instead with the principles of wisdom, mutual respect
and peaceful interaction, and have thus avoided the
abyss of civil strife. Let us continue our work together
to support the profound transformation that the country
is now undertaking.

