Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Ms. Bintou Keita for the important updates that she has
given us. We also want to commend the efforts of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
which, despite the difficulties it encounters, continues
to operate in a hostile environment, thanks to the
multiple obstacles that it still faces in carrying out
its daily activities. Senegal welcomes the practical
progress seen in the deployment of the Regional
Protection Force and encourages UNMISS, the South
Sudanese authorities and all the troop-contributing
countries, whose dedication we salute, to take all
necessary measures in that regard.

In a humanitarian context that remains fragile, I
would also like to emphasize that we are concerned
about the obstacles facing humanitarian workers,
including the increasing attacks on them, which we
condemn. In that regard, we call on all parties to allow
free and unhindered access for humanitarian actors
to the affected civilian populations, and we urge the
Transitional Government of National Unity to assume
its full responsibility for ensuring the protection of
civilian populations and the security of humanitarian
workers. And as the countries of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have already done,
we also condemn the ongoing human rights violations
by both the Government and the opposition.

We all agree that settling the conflict in South
Sudan requires more than a negotiated political
solution. In that regard, we welcome the increasingly
active leadership being shown in the region and
encourage the initiatives that its countries have
announced to revitalize the political process. The fact
is that regional actors have a key role to play in the
quest for lasting stability and peace in South Sudan.
My delegation would therefore like to reiterate its
support for the high-level revitalization forum in
bringing together the two parties to the 2015 peace
agreement and other influential stakeholders outside
the current arrangement in order to make progress in
its implementation. We also welcome IGAD's decision
to provide an update as soon as possible on the progress
made with regard to the initiative of the forum, in order
to enable the Council to take appropriate measures in
support of its decisions.

The efforts of the African Union are also
important. They include the decision taken by its Peace
and Security Council at its 720th meeting, held on
20 September, on the report of the Chairperson of the
Commission on South Sudan, according to which the
African Union Commission and the Government of
South Sudan should urgently conclude a memorandum
of understanding on the establishment of the Hybrid
Court in December, in accordance with the time lines
agreed. In that context, the Peace and Security Council
called on the Transitional Government to ensure that
the memorandum is integrated into national legislation
through the Transitional Legislative Assembly.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that it is also
imperative to tackle the worrying economic situation
in South Sudan, since, in addition to the country's
insecurity and humanitarian crisis, it is one ofthe causes
of the displacement of the population. On top ofthat, it
is contributing to the weakening ofthe South Sudanese
State, particularly its ability to manage its entire chain
of command and implement all its commitments in a
timely way.

