Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes this Security
Council debate on the issue of non-proliferation. We
believe it will undoubtedly help improve the draft
resolution currently being considered by the Council.
From the outset, we have supported holding such a
debate at an early date.

Preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) and their means of delivery is
conducive to the maintenance of international peace
and security and is in the international community's
common interests. For years, United Nations Member
States have made important efforts in that regard. In
the new international security environment, it is crucial
to strengthen international cooperation aimed at
developing and improving the existing international
non-proliferation regime so that we can respond
effectively to the threat of terrorism.

China opposes the proliferation of WMD and of
their means of delivery, and we have taken an active
part in international non-proliferation efforts. China
has always advocated the complete prohibition and
thorough destruction of all kinds of WMD. The
fundamental purpose of non-proliferation is to maintain
and promote international and regional peace, stability
and security.

The proliferation of WMD and of their means of
delivery has itself complicated factors that have
everything to do with the international and regional
security environment. Pursuing the universal
improvement of international relations and accelerating
fair and rational settlement of the security issues of the
regions concerned will help to attain the goal of non-
proliferation. At the same time, the role of the existing
non-proliferation machinery should brought into full
play, and proliferation issues should be resolved
through dialogue and international cooperation. To
effectively push non-proliferation efforts forward, we
must guarantee the legitimate rights of all countries -
including developing countries - to utilize and share
dual-use scientific and technological advances and
products for peaceful purposes.

China supports the United Nations in its efforts to
play its proper role in non-proliferation, and we favour
the adoption of a Security Council draft resolution in
that area on the basis of broad consultations. The
Chinese delegation has participated in the consultations
on this draft resolution in an active, serious and
responsible manner. China's proposals are reflected in
the current draft, and a reference to interdiction was
deleted at the request of the Chinese delegation. We are
of the view that the current draft is an effort to enhance
and strengthen international cooperation, on the basis
of existing international law, and to deal with
trafficking in WMD and their means of delivery and
related materials by non-State actors, so as to prevent
further proliferation of such weapons.

Non-proliferation is closely related to the
interests of all countries, and it requires joint efforts on
the part of all members of the international community.
To gain the understanding and support of the
overwhelming majority of the international community,
it is essential that we ensure a fair, rational and non-
discriminatory non-proliferation regime. Both the
improvement of the existing regime and the
establishment of a new one should be based on
universal participation by all countries and on
decisions made by means of the democratic process. It
is, therefore, our consistent position that the opinions
of all Security Council members and of the majority of
United Nations Members must be fully taken into
account and their reasonable proposals and suggestions
reflected in the current draft resolution. That is
essential in order to deepen international understanding
and to move the international non-proliferation process
forward.

We are pleased that the sponsors have made a
number of amendments to the draft resolution on the
basis of previous discussions in the Security Council. It
is my belief and hope that, by means of today's debate,
the Council will be able to draw on its collective
wisdom to further improve the current text and that it
will proceed to adopt a more comprehensive and
balanced draft resolution by consensus.

