Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We listened carefully to the briefing by Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock but, clearly, he did not have time to stay and listen to us and the Syrian representative. That is a shame. I am sure that it would have been useful for him to hear what we have to say, and I hope that his colleagues will convey to him exactly what we have to say. Despite the continuing trend towards stabilizing the situation in a large part of the territory, the return to Syria of a peaceful life and the restoration of the socioeconomic infrastructure, there - still remain hotbeds of tension and the population needs humanitarian assistance. In that regard, we note the active participation of the representatives of the relevant United Nations bodies, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and non-governmental humanitarian organizations in providing assistance to the population in coordination with the Syrian authorities. The situation in territories that are not under the control of the Syrian Government remains extremely worrying - in Idlib, on the east bank of the Euphrates river and in the area around Al-Tanf. At the beginning of January, the Russian and Turkish forces again tried to establish a ceasefire in Idlib. However, radical groups led by the recognized terrorist organization Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham once again ignored that and continued to shell positions of the Syrian forces and nearby towns, particularly Aleppo. The number of those attacks is as many as 60 incidents a day. Naturally, such armed provocations, which have already claimed dozens of lives and injured hundreds of civilians this month alone, cannot go unanswered. The Syrian Government forces have been forced to respond to the terrorist attacks, conduct limited operations to counteract the terrorist activity and mitigate the threats coming from Idlib. Today, we have heard statements that duplicate one another about schools, hospitals, markets and internally displaced persons (IDPs) camps being bombed. We were given supposedly accurate figures for the number of people killed and injured. We have heard that before, word for word. I again wonder where that reliable data is coming from. Where were so many medical facilities that have already been bombed found? They now run into the dozens, if not hundreds, in Idlib province alone. The escalation in Idlib is due not to the operations of the Syrian forces but rather to the intentional provocations carried out by terrorists. Three humanitarian corridors have been operationalized since 13 January to facilitate the withdrawal of civilians from the de-escalation zone. Temporary accommodation centres in the province of Hama have been prepared for persons without permanent residence. Unfortunately, terrorists continue to use the practice of human shields, holding civilians hostage and preventing them from escaping and shelling checkpoints. That is further proof of the position that we have repeatedly stated that the problem in Idlib cannot be resolved as long as it is overrun by terrorists who have been recognized as such by the Security Council. The situation in the area beyond the Euphrates has improved, thanks in large part to the implementation of the Russian-Turkish memorandum of 22 October 2019. Regular Russian-Turkish patrols have been established on agreed border points. Moreover, Russian forces are undertaking energetic efforts to rebuild destroyed infrastructure, provide medical care to those in need and deliver food and basic necessities. The most acute problem, in addition to Idlib, remains the humanitarian situation in the major refugee and IDP camps located in American-controlled areas: Rukban in the south and Al Hol in the north-east. The United Nations plan to evacuate the remaining residents of the camps has been delayed for five months due to the refusal of the fighters to give the necessary securityguarantees to United Nations personnel. Humanitarian convoys cannot resolve the problems that Rukban is facing. Furthermore, assistance often does not reach refugees but instead remains in the hands of the militants. Efforts must be continued to fully evacuate people from the camps. Mr. Lowcock today did not give a particularly positive assessment of the cross-line assistance. We recall that the lion's share of assistance to and within Syria is cross-line aid, including to the north-east in Al-Hasakah governorate. All humanitarian agencies of the United Nations, apart from the World Health Organization, deliver humanitarian assistance to the north-east from Syrian territory. I would also like to address the recent adoption of resolution 2504 (2020). The resolution explicitly and implicitly focuses the United Nations on cooperation and finding ways to resolve problems with the legitimate authorities of Syria, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 46/182, as it should, and international law. Instead of whipping up passions here, we would recommend that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs establish, as quickly as possible, effective cooperation with the legitimate authorities in Damascus. That is in the interest of the United Nations and in our own interest. We expect that the February United Nations report will provide information about alternative routes for the delivery of humanitarian assistance from Syrian territory. As we have already said, an alternative to Al-Yarubiyah and the ability to deliver humanitarian assistance to Al-Hasakah governorate exist. We would like to hear about the steps that have been taken to that end and the results that have been achieved. I would now like to offer a few statistics, which speak for themselves. One million people in Idlib are covered by cross-border assistance. The remaining 10 million people in Syria are covered by regular humanitarian programmes, as confirmed in the latest Secretary-General report (S/2019/949). With respect to the alleged lack of cooperation on the part of the Syrian Government, the number of humanitarian convoys agreed to with Damascus is steadily growing each month. The statistics were provided at the meeting of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Syria Humanitarian Task Force in Geneva. What is stable is the financing of the humanitarian response plan for Syria, which remains at around 60 per cent. The interesting point is that as more territory comes under the control of the Syrian Government, the fewer donor contributions there are for the humanitarian response plan. The humanitarian principles of humanity and impartiality were mentioned; where are they? We agree with those who have said today that the humanitarian issue in Syria has been unacceptably politicized, including in post-conflict recovery. Some of our colleagues brag about politicizing it by imposing more requirements on the Syrian authorities. We call on the United Nations and members of the international community to join post-conflict recovery projects and to lift unilateral sanctions in the interest of normalizing the lives of Syrians - that is, of course, if members of the Council really do care about the well-being of Syrian civilians.
