Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her report on the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories. We also thank the
other briefers from the non-governmental organization
EcoPeace Middle East.

We are sorry to have to note that the Middle East
is still going through a turbulent period. The region is
plagued by many crises, old and new, of which one of
the most serious continues to be the terrorist threat.
Its scope indicates the need for a concerted effort by
the international community to establish the broadest
possible counter-terrorism front, which Russia has
repeatedly called for. The issue of a Palestinian-
Israeli settlement is central to the instability in the
Middle East, and we have lately been observing an
increase in dangerous trends on that front, in practices
such as taking unilateral steps and aggressively
revising previously agreed arrangements. For us, the
internationally recognized basis for a settlement of
the issues in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles, remains firm.

We have not passed the point of no return. The
2016 report of the Middle East Quartet of international
mediators lists the actions that must be taken to restore
trust among the parties and revitalize a sustainable
political process. First and foremost, Israel's
settlement activity in the West Bank and its policy of
demolishing Palestinian property must stop. Violence
must be rejected and the terrorist attacks ended. Both
Palestinians and Israelis must refrain from aggressive
and provocative rhetoric, which is exactly how we view
the announcements of plans to annex settlements in the
West Bank.

We firmly believe that no one can achieve a
breakthrough acting alone, as the history of the
Middle East has repeatedly confirmed. In our view the
mechanism of the Quartet, whose function has been
approved by several Security Council resolutions, isjust
as relevant and needed more than ever, and we are willing
to mobilize its efforts on the political front. Russia will
continue to cooperate in establishing a constructive
agenda for a settlement in the Middle East, including
by expanding its cooperation with regional actors. The
most recent meeting of the Russian-Arab Cooperation
Forum, held in Moscow on 16 and 17 April, confirmed
that our approaches to finding lasting solutions to
the crises in the Middle East coincide. Our proposal
for holding a summit in Russia between the leaders
of Palestine and Israel remains open. We should point
out that the Palestinian leader has repeatedly affirmed
his consent to it. It will be important not to give up
determined efforts to restore unity in the Palestinians'
ranks. The latest intra-Palestinian meeting in Moscow
in February was useful, especially in the context of
the efforts of regional players, particularly Egypt
and Jordan.

We also need active international efforts to mitigate
the dire humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. Any
assistance in Gaza must be provided in coordination
with the legitimate authorities under President Abbas,
and should contribute to dealing with the problem of
restoring Palestinian unity. That was behind our recent
decision to supply Palestinians in Gaza and the West
Bank with 2,000 tons of flour. We will continue to
support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose activities
have a political as well as a humanitarian dimension
and an important stabilizing effect in the Palestinian
territories and the countries of the Middle East.

Collective diplomacy must be urgently intensified
in order to prevent the collapse of the international
community's efforts to create the conditions for
achieving a two-State solution, the only viable one
for the Middle East, through direct talks between
Palestinians and Israelis. We believe that sending a
Security Council mission to the Middle East would
help us strengthen our unity and our cooperation with
the parties. We urge our colleagues on the Council
to consider creative approaches to relaunching our
work on a Middle East settlement. However, any ideas
should take into account the agreed-on parameters for a
settlement, including the Arab Peace Initiative adopted
by the leaders of the Arab States, which enshrines the
important principle ofland for peace. In that context, we
want to once again affirm that there can be no question
that the Golan Heights is Syrian territory, occupied by
Israel as a result of the 1967 war and illegally annexed
14 years later.

The instability in the Middle East demands that
responsible members of the international community
work for unity. However, rather than taking the direction
of imposing an outdated bloc mentality, which was how
many perceived the Warsaw conference, it should be
with a view to creating a platform for dialogue that
enables us to pursue a non-confrontational quest for
solutions to the security issues in the Middle East.
The Secretary-General was directed to make efforts in
that regard in accordance with resolution 598 (1987),
and there is interest in this possibility among regional
players, which was once again affirmed during the
recent conference in Baghdad of parliamentarians from
Iraq's neighbours. We believe that the Russian concept
of security measures in the Persian Gulf could serve
as a good basis for a future regional architecture in
that regard.

Improved relations among the countries of the
Middle East would give impetus to activities aimed at
ending the most acute conflicts, of which one of the
most significant is that the concept of a political and
diplomatic settlement should continue to be the central
direction. Attempts to achieve a solution by force or
encourage various illegal armed groups to realize
geopolitical goals must be a thing of the past. We are
ready to cooperate constructively with partners on
every item on the Middle East agenda. We must increase
our coordination, develop consolidated approaches and
continue taking steps towards unity. Analyses confirm
the importance of efforts in that direction.

