Ms. Lajous (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
situation in Afghanistan is complex. The political
forces advocating inter-ethnic reconciliation,
democracy and respect for human rights - ideals that
were expressed in the Bonn Agreement - coexist with
sinister forces advocating anarchy and extremism. For
that reason, the international community must give its
firm support to the building of the national institutions,
as was expressed by the Afghans themselves - which
Sir Kieran Prendergast stressed in his presentation.

Mexico welcomes the progress made by the
Interim Administration. We are delighted that the
schools have reopened and that the process of
convening an emergency loya jirga is under way. We
note with celebration the advances of Afghan women
in the country's public life and in other aspects that, in
other countries, would seem quite unremarkable but,
given the circumstances in Afghanistan seem quite
extraordinary. We consider that the Security Council
must be unanimous in its support of Afghan women
through the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We must give our support so that these women can
reach positions of leadership in their country.

We view with admiration that approximately
700,000 refugees have returned to their homes, which
is approximately half the target of 1.2 million foreseen
for this year. Those statistics reflect not only the effort
and support of the international community but also the
Afghan people's greater overall expectations for the
future. We must not allow the hope of an entire people
to vanish.

However, we are concerned that there are still
problems that threaten security and the democratic
project that is just beginning to crystallize.

Despite the efforts and resources expended, the
problem of drug production and trafficking continues
to exist. The production of drugs is not just a problem
of public health but also corrupts society, promotes
violence and the illicit trade in arms and generates
great quantities of resources that can be used to finance
political groups whose sole aim is destruction and
terror.

In this context, much remains to be done, and the
responsibility, it must be said, falls not only to the
Interim Administration. The problem of drug
trafficking has two main elements: production and
consumption. Countries where drug consumption is
widespread also have a responsibility to prevent the
criminal networks created by the sale of heroine in
urban centres from subjecting Afghan farmers to
extortion and pressure on the part of traffickers who
foment the illicit crops - especially when we have
been informed that it is precisely those criminal
networks that substantially contribute to financing
terrorism.

Additionally, the presence of hold-outs of Al
Queda and the Taliban contribute to prolonging a
climate of insecurity in the country and the region. At
the same time, rival factions fight for political power in
some areas of the country, and some even threaten to
destabilize the Interim Administration. Faced with this
situation of insecurity, the Council's response has been
to strengthen the defence capacity of the Afghans.

In this context, Mexico wishes to recognize the
work carried out in recent months by the United
Kingdom at the head of the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF). We also wish to thank
Turkey, who will soon assume that responsibility. We
are ready to vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us to extend the mandate of ISAF by six
months.

The convening of an emergency loya jirga will be
a watershed in the history of Afghanistan because it
will produce the basic agreements that will define the
structure of political power in the country and
determine its destiny.

According to the timetable established by the
Bonn Agreement, the convening of the emergency loya
jirga will signal that we have completed a quarter of
the actions scheduled for Afghanistan. We therefore
call on the international community to redouble its
efforts for Afghanistan and not to celebrate too early
and later fall to indifference. A strategic a strategic
association has been formed in Afghanistan between
donor countries, the United Nations system, the Bretton
Woods institutions and non-governmental organizations
to support the Afghan people in their quest for lasting
peace. The international community must be persistent
in this effort in order to consolidate the process of
laying the groundwork that will enable the sustainable
economic development of Afghanistan on a democratic
basis.

Mexico wants to see a democratic Afghanistan
that respects human rights, with an economic future
free from drug trafficking. We do not want Afghanistan
to fall once again into anarchy provoked by domestic
wars or for it to be a shelter for terrorists once again.
The Afghan people deserve a better future.

