The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

Ijoin earlier speakers in thanking the Chairs of the
three subsidiary bodies for their respective presentations
to the Council. Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to and support for the work of the subsidiary bodies
of the Security Council, including the important
work undertaken by the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011)
concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities; the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism; and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

We wish also to place on record our appreciation of
the important role played by the 1267/1989 Monitoring
Team, the Group of Experts, the Ombudsperson, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and other actors for their important
contributions to and support for the Committees.
Malaysia's location, which straddles global shipping
routes, and our status as a trading nation requires a
clearly defined approach to the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In living up to its commitment,
Malaysia has put in place the necessary legal and
policy framework, anchored in the Strategic Trade Act
2010. In order to ensure effective implementation at
the domestic level, the Government held nationwide
outreach programmes, including with the private
sector and enforcement agencies. This approach
resulted in an increased awareness of the progressing
non-proliferation obligations, as well as higher levels
of compliance from the private sector. As such, we
see the merit in similarly targeted outreach activities
by the Security Council Committees related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

Malaysia has also undertaken initiatives at the
regional and subregional levels to complement and
strengthen international non-proliferation mechanisms.
As current Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), Malaysia, together with Canada
and New Zealand, hosted the 2015 ASEAN Regional
Forum Intersessional Meeting on Non-Proliferation
and Disarmament. The two-day meeting, concluded in
Kuala Lumpur earlier today, provided an opportunity
for ASEAN and its partners to discuss, inter alia, the
way forward following the 2015 Review Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, international non-proliferation
mechanisms and capacity-building in the area of WMD
threat reduction.

In that regard, I am encouraged by the fact that
the Chairs of the three Committees have underlined
their commitment to coordinating on common regional
approaches by taking into consideration geographical
and political similarities. Malaysia has officially offered
assistance through the 1540 Committee to other Member
States. We will consider such requests in the areas of
legal and regulatory infrastructure, implementation
and resources for fulfilling the provisions of the
resolutions. In that connection, we will support efforts
to streamline the matchmaking mechanism between
donor States and assistance providers so as to ensure
the effective delivery of such assistance.

With regard to the work of the 1267/1989
Committee, my delegation joins others in thanking
Mr. Alexander Evans, coordinator of the Monitoring
Team, and the Team as a whole for bringing more
energy and substantive focus to the Committee's work.
We wish Mr. Evans all the best and look forward to
working with his successor. Like others, we, too, look
forward to receiving the report on the implementation
of resolution 2199 (2015). We note the increasing
volume of listing and delisting requests addressed to
the Ombudperson and the Focal Point for delisting. We
hold the view that increased resort to those mechanisms
indicates increased awareness and confidence in the
sanctions mechanism.

Given the Ombudsperson's role in balancing
security and human rights concerns, Malaysia continues
to believe that there is scope to explore the possibility
of extending such role and mandate for other sanctions
Committees. On the Ombudsperson's mandate, it is
important that the Council agree on the way forward in
appointing Ms. Prost's successor.

In noting the excellent support for and cooperation
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) by CTED,
Malaysia commends the focus and concerted efforts
initiated by the CTC geared towards the implementation
ofresolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015),
on preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
including the upcoming special meeting in Madrid to
be hosted by Spain. We continue to believe that sharing
information, to the extent possible, on the work of the
sanctions Committees constitutes an important step
towards building trust and confidence in the United
Nations sanctions regime as a whole. In that regard, we
remain supportive of the practice of open briefings by
the Committee Chairs.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

The meeting rose at 6. 35 pm.
