Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and High Commissioner
Guterres for their briefings. I would also like to thank
the French presidency for its initiative in calling for
today's meeting, which comes at a very important
moment.

The Syrian people are in urgent need of our
support. We have heard today that the humanitarian
situation is dramatic and worsening by the day. We
are grateful to the Governments and people of Jordan,
Lebanon, Turkey and Iraq and commend them for the
crucial support they have provided to Syrian families
fleeing the brutal violence of the Al-Assad regime and
its militias.

My Government, as part of the international effort,
is providing substantial financial support for relief
efforts undertaken by United Nations agencies and
the International Committee of the Red Cross, both
within Syria and in neighbouring States. I assure the
Council that we will continue to do so. It is essential
that humanitarian access inside Syria be improved in
order to help the people in need. We therefore call on
all parties to facilitate humanitarian access in all parts
of Syria.

The humanitarian situation will not improve
unless the Syrian people can live free from fear. The
Al-Assad regime's continuing attacks on civilians and
massive human rights violations must stop. The use of
heavy weapons, helicopter gunships and fighter planes
shows the extreme brutality that Damascus employs
against the Syrian people. Today's meeting also comes
only a few days after reports of yet another massacre
committed by the regime and its militias against
civilians, including women and children.

Accountability for such crimes must be ensured.
The independent commission of inquiry has made
important findings and compiled a list of those deemed
responsible. That provides a solid base for possible
follow-up action, including by the International
Criminal Court. We also call on the opposition to
respect international humanitarian law and protect
civilians. More leadership and dedication is required.
The publication ofa code of conduct for the Free Syrian
Army is a first step in the right direction. Humanitarian
law applies to all sides.

My Government will continue to work towards a
political solution to the crisis. That includes a political
transition aimed at achieving a democratic and tolerant
Syria that embraces all Syrians and assures their
human rights, irrespective of origin or religion. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role in
supporting the Syrian people in their quest for a political
settlement and embarking upon a democratic transition.
The same is true for the Arab League, which has played
an active and constructive role from the start. I would
like to assure the Joint Special Envoy Lakhdar Brahimi
of Germany's full support for his challenging new task.

We are also engaging closely with the opposition,
both bilaterally and within the Friends of Syria Group,
to prepare the ground for a post-Al-Assad Syria. It is
in all our interests to avoid a total breakdown in Syria,
which would also pose a serious threat to regional
stability. Our position is clear: there can be no future
for President Al-Assad in a new Syria. We call on him
to step aside to avoid further bloodshed.

The stocks of chemical weapons in Syria pose
a serious threat. The use of chemical weapons would
be a disastrous escalation of the situation, with
unpredictable consequences for Syria and the entire
region. We urge Syria to strictly abide by its obligation
under international law not to use chemical weapons
under any circumstances. We also call upon Syria to
guarantee the secure and safe storage of those weapons
of mass destruction.

