The Secretary-General: I thank the Portuguese
presidency for focusing the Security Council's
attention on three of the defining challenges of our
times: transnational organized crime, pandemics and
climate change. I also thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Portugal for taking the time to preside over
this very important meeting.
None of these challenges is new. What is new,
however, is that they are increasingly transnational,
increasingly acute and have ever greater implications
for human, State, regional and international security.
They are increasingly transnational because of the
growing ease with which people, goods and money can
cross borders.

The recent movie Contagion was more science
than fiction. Organized crime groups are particularly
adept at exploiting the openness of globalization to
traffic humans, drugs and weapons. Climate change is
the quintessential global challenge. These threats are
also increasingly acute because the combined stresses
of crime, pandemics and climate change are pushing
many poor and fragile countries close to the breaking
point.

Some have seen their life expectancy cut in half
by HIV/AIDS - a horrible toll not only on families
and loved ones, but also on the labour force,
businesses, the civil service and the armed forces.

Organized crime groups use corruption and
violence to hollow out weak institutions from the
inside. In addition, the extreme weather and other
consequences associated with climate change are
exacerbating already difficult struggles with
desertification, drought, floods and volatility in food
prices.

By undermining State capacity and State
institutions, these threats have clear and increasing
implications for peace and security. As the World Bank
pointed out earlier this year in its World Development
Report, countries affected by violence are home to
43 per cent of people living with HIV/AIDS.

Criminal groups, in their efforts to control
trafficking routes, spread fear and insecurity, and, in
some cases, have triggered the outbreak of political
violence. Today, many more people die as the result of
criminal and gang violence than in civil wars. We are
seeing an increasing convergence between organized
crime and terrorist groups. Climate change, in some
regions, has aggravated conflict over scarce land and
could well trigger large-scale migration in the decades
ahead. In addition, rising sea levels put at risk the very
survival of all small island States. These and other
implications for peace and security also have
implications for the United Nations itself.
11-60560

First, no country and no region, no matter how

powerful, will be able to address these threats alone.

They can be addressed only through regional and

global cooperation. The United Nations will continue
to play a lead role in fostering such cooperation.

Secondly, these are complex and multilayered
threats that require multidisciplinary responses. The
United Nations is well placed to promote an integrated
mix of political, development and capacity-building
responses. All present here have heard me talk about
connecting the dots among energy, food, health,
disaster risk reduction and other issues in our response
to climate change. That idea is relevant to today's
discussion as well. We are all aware of the risk that a
warming world will facilitate the spread of deadly
diseases.

But there are other links as well. In some parts of
the world, drug trafficking has led to an increase in
intravenous drug use. This, in turn, has become one of
the main drivers in the spread of HIV/AIDS.

Our response to crime, meanwhile, cannot be
limited to law enforcement. It must encompass public
health, institution-building and human rights. Our
economic and social development efforts must become
more crime-sensitive. More broadly, it is crucial to
address the social inequalities and economic injustice
that give rise to frustration and unrest. Ultimately,
security must be rooted in opportunity, freedom and
hope.

I am pleased that at this meeting, the Council will
hear from my colleagues Antonio Guterres, United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC); and
Ms. Margaret Chan, Director-General of the World
Health Organization (WHO).

The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and UNODC have
constructive ties with the Security Council. At the same
time, there is ample room to increase contact with
WHO, and I hope the Council will pursue this.

I thank the Council again for addressing such
issues. As the nature of the threats that we face
continues to evolve, the Council, so central to our
ability to keep the peace, must also keep pace.

