Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Wane for his very
illuminating briefing.

I would like to begin my statement by reiterating
France's full solidarity with Burkina Faso in the
aftermath of the terrorist attack on a restaurant in
Ouagadougou, which led to the deaths of 18 people.
Our condolences go also to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and to Togo and Mali following the
death yesterday of a Togolese peacekeeper and seven
Malian civilian and military personnel during attacks
against MINUSMA camps. Those attacks, sadly,
remind us of the intensity of the terrorist threat faced
by the countries of the Sahel today, as well as the need
for an urgent response.

The terrorist threat in the Sahel not only
jeopardizes the stability of the countries of the region;
it also has a direct impact on the security of many other
countries - in Europe and throughout the rest of the
world. It calls for mobilization by the entire international
community in support of the efforts of the countries of
the region, while not neglecting any dimension of the
crisis. France is fully playing its part in that effort by
deploying to the field the 4,000 soldiers of Operation
Barkhane, who are carrying out counter-terrorist
actions in the region at the request and in support of
the countries of the Sahel. Twenty of them gave their
lives doing so. In addition, during the Summit of the
countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
held in Bamako on 2 July, President Macron launched
an alliance for the Sahel aimed at addressing the deep-
rooted causes of terrorism in the G-5 Sahel countries,
including projects in the areas of education, agriculture
and renewable energy, as Assistant Secretary-General
Wane just mentioned to us.

Moreover, the security situation in the Sahel
remains directly linked to the situation in Mali. In that
regard, it is crucial that the Malian parties speed up the
concrete implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, without which there will be
no lasting peace or stability in the Sahel.

The specific modus operandi of terrorist groups
in the Sahel, which take advantage of borders and
sustain themselves on trafficking of all sorts, especially
in drugs and human beings, requires us to provide a
concerted and comprehensive response. It is precisely
with that goal in mind that the G-5 Sahel countries
set up the joint force, which is intended to provide a
coordinated response on the security and economic
fronts, as well as at the humanitarian and developmental
levels. Their initiative was endorsed by the African
Union and by the Security Council, with the Council
providing clear and unanimous political support in the
framework ofresolution 2359 (2017). The establishment
of the joint force is also fully in line - and this must
be pointed out - with the Council's views in favour
of establishing an African security architecture
bringing together the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of a
partnership approach.

The G-5 Sahel joint force will support and
complement MINUSMA's efforts in Mali by conducting
counter-terrorist activities in the Sahel region as a whole
that are outside the mandate and geographic scope of
MINUSMA. That will enable MINUSMA to focus
on its priority tasks and implement its mandate more
quickly. The joint force will also act in coordination
with the French forces of Operation Barkhane, which
supports its operationalization. It will be important
that the force's operations take place fully in line with
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
as set out in its concept of operations.

We welcome the determination and the
concrete actions taken by the G-5 Sahel countries to
operationalize the joint force as soon as possible, with
the aim of carrying out by October initial operations
in the Liptako-Gourma priority zone, located in
the shared border area between Mali, the Niger and
Burkina Faso. The finalization in the coming days of
the construction works at the Sevare' central command
post is an important first step in that direction. The
commitment of the G-5 Sahel countries each to allocate
$10 million annually for the financing of the force, in
addition to their current contributions to peacekeeping
in the region, also reflects the high priority they attach
to this issue. We must support their efforts.

While it is the G-5 Sahel countries' responsibility
to take a leading role in establishing the joint force,
we also believe that the international community has a
moral and political duty to support the African States
in the region that have joined together to fight terrorism
by supplying resources to complement the Council's
peacekeeping operations. We are therefore pleased
that the European Union has already announced a
contribution of €50 million intended in part to finance
the operations of the joint force's command structures.
France is also making a national contribution of major
material assistance amounting to more than €8 million,
in addition to Operation Barkhane's engagement on
the ground.

Lastly, along with our European partners, we will
continue to support the G-5 Sahel countries in mobilizing
the backing of international donors. After a first such
event, held in Paris in June, Germany and France will
hold a second workshop in Berlin on 18 September,
in order to solicit European countries' contributions
in support of the force's initial deployment. Beyond
that, the donor conference to be held in December and
provided for in resolution 2359 (2017) will pool the
entire international community's contributions, this
time with the goal of enabling the joint force to reach
full operating capacity by March.

However, France, together with a large majority
of Council members, still firmly believes that United
Nations support to the G-5 Sahel joint force is essential.
To start with, on the political front, it is an irreplaceable
guarantee that lends international legitimacy and
legality to the G-5 Sahel countries' commendable
efforts to fight terrorism and its underlying causes.
Operationally, it is also the best way to ensure, first, that
the actors involved in combating terrorism in the region
are well coordinated; secondly, that our resources are
being used as effectively as possible; and thirdly, that
the joint force will receive the invaluable logistical,
medical and mechanical support from international
forces that it needs in a complicated situation. We
should understand that without that support, the joint
force's operations will have a very limited scope.

Lastly, France will continue to work to ensure that
the Council follows up diligently on this issue, which
affects the security of us all. In that regard, we will
soon propose sending a Security Council mission to the
Sahel with, among other things, the aim of assessing
how far the joint force is operationalized on the
ground. During France's presidency of the Council, our
Minister for European and Foreign Affairs will also
convene a ministerial-level meeting on the G-5 Sahel
that will enable us to continue our consideration of the
international community's modalities of support to the
joint force in the follow-up to resolution 2359 (2017) and
the Secretary-General's report on the subject, which is
due in October.

The G-5 Sahel States have courageously shouldered
their responsibilities by uniting in their effort to combat
terrorism, which concerns us all. The establishment of
their joint force is giving rise to great expectations on
the part of the Governments and peoples of the region
who want to see terrorism and its causes eradicated.
The Council's responsibility is to ensure that those
expectations are not disappointed and to live up to the
commitment of the G-5 Sahel and its duty to maintain
international peace and security. It can count on
France's determination and involvement in that.

