Mr. Lamego (Portugal): Allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on the assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the current month and to pay tribute to the
productive term of your predecessor, Ambassador Alfredo
Lopes Cabral.

I would like to salute the Foreign Ministers and other
members of the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) delegation, whose presence here today reflects the
importance that organization attaches to bringing peace to
Angola.

I would like to extend a very cordial greeting to His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Angola,
Mr. Venancio De Moura.
In the course of this debate, the representative of
Ireland will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union. Portugal associates itself fully with that statement.
Nevertheless, I would like to make some remarks
concerning the situation in Angola, not only because we are
a member of the troika of observer States but also because
of Portugal's long-standing commitment to the Angolan
peace process and to Angola itself.

Portugal is naturally concerned over the absence of
significant progress in the implementation of the peace
process due to the constant delays and promises not
fulfilled. It is now imperative that positive signs of political
will be shown in order to accelerate the peace process. We
therefore urge UNITA to integrate into the national armed
forces the last remaining group of its generals, as well as to
increase the number of UNITA soldiers incorporated into
the Angolan Armed Forces. These steps will constitute a

 

positive action by UNITA, but they must be followed by
the completion of a broader number of tasks, as
enumerated in the mediation document prepared by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative. In fact,
UNITA and its leadership must now demonstrate to the
international community that they do not merely take
measures on the eve of the adoption of Security Council
resolutions, but are committed to the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol by fulfilling their commitments at a
steady pace.

We note with concern the increasing number of
desertions in the quartering areas and the reports that such
desertions are not spontaneous but, on the contrary, that
they occur in an organized manner. We urge UNITA to
proceed with the return to the National Assembly of all
elected Deputies before the end of October. In this regard,
we would like to underline the importance and the
legitimacy of the normal functioning of the bodies,
following the 1992 elections, until conditions for holding
new elections in Angola are met. Until those conditions
are met, it is important that the international community
continue to fulfil its pledges to provide assistance to
Angola. At the same time, the Angolan parties, which are
ultimately responsible for the successful implementation
of the peace process, must show clear signs that they are
worthy of such assistance. That is why Portugal welcomes
the efforts of the Government of Angola to implement the
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol and expects that both
the Government and UNITA, in a spirit of cooperation,
will uphold their obligations and the commitments they
made.

Almost two years have passed since the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol. As the report of the Secretary-
General rightly indicates, its implementation is far behind
schedule despite the efforts of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the observer States and other
Member States concerned.

I take this opportunity to express the appreciation of
my Government for the tireless and committed work of
the Special Representative, Maitre Beye, throughout the
critical stages of the peace process. UNAVEM. III,
currently the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operation, has also shown itself to be a key element in
fostering the much-needed trust between the parties
concerned and in promoting the stability the Angolans so
rightfully deserve, which is why we believe it is so
important. It is therefore crucial that there be a continued
and effective presence of the United Nations in Angola.

 

Portugal will continue to work closely and in a spirit
of unity with its partners in the troika of observer countries
in order to make the Angolan peace process a reality.
Nevertheless, I must once again recall that the Government
of Angola and UNITA bear ultimate responsibility for the
success of the peace process. Now, more than ever, it is
time for them, and especially UNITA, to show that they are
clearly willing to implement fully the "Acordos de Paz" and
the Lusaka Protocol. The failure to do so would constitute
a serious setback in the international community's
expectations for a successful conclusion of the Angolan
peace process.

At such a crucial stage, the Security Council should,
in the absence of substantial progress in the remaining
military and political issues to be resolved, be prepared to
consider the imposition of measures. However, we believe
that the implementation of such measures should be decided
upon only after a further evaluation of the situation by the
Council following the next report of the Secretary-General.

We believe that the expeditious fulfilment of the
above-mentioned provisions is a priority and will pave the
way for the successful completion of the Angolan peace
process so desired and deserved by the Angolan people.

