The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt, Israel and Saudi Arabia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and His Royal Highness
Prince Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia.

In accordance with the request made in a letter
dated 8 January 2009 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to be issued as
document S/2009/24, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to participate in the present meeting in accordance with
the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/23, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.

Despite the difficulties, we are meeting in the
Security Council for the joint purpose of achieving a
ceasefire. The draft resolution that has been submitted
is commensurate with the very grave situation in the
Middle East today. The mobilization of the Council and
of such a large number of ministers from the region
attest to that.

Gaza is facing an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. The toll of the violence has been extremely
heavy. Our thoughts tonight are with many victims of
this tragedy and with the bereaved families on both
sides. The immediate cessation of the fighting is the
overriding priority.

Like many others here, the European Union,
France and President Sarkozy have worked
continuously for the past 10 days to find a way out of
this situation.

We do not place States on the same level - and
of course I am referring to the State of Israel as well as
to the Palestinian State that we so desire - as
movements whose sole ambition is to destroy the peace
process through violence.

The draft resolution includes the framework
principles for a way out of the crisis, namely, an end to
the launching of rockets and to Israeli military
operations and a permanent ceasefire, which includes
in particular the opening of crossing points and
effective measures against weapons trafficking.
European Union ministers proposed that framework at
their meeting in Paris on 30 December. The President
of the French Republic negotiated it with the States of
the region during his visit to the Middle East.
Following that initiative, President Mubarak proposed
a peace plan to which the leaders of the region
responded positively. That plan provides us with the
sole viable way out of the crisis and the only hope for
peace. We are pleased that the draft resolution
encourages those efforts. The ongoing contacts
between the Israelis and the Egyptians give us a
measure of hope.
09-20414
Tonight, as a country that has always advocated
the essential role in the Middle East of the United
Nations and the Security Council, we have but one
regret, namely, that, despite our persistent calls, it has
not been possible for the Council to find a bit more
time to consider the points of view of the negotiators
on the ground and to endorse the results of the
negotiations under way to achieve a permanent
ceasefire. That message of hope must be heard without
delay. The ongoing negotiations to which I have
referred must be concluded very quickly. Peace is
essential.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2009/23.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Viet Nam

Against:
None

Abstaining:
United States of America

The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1860 (2009).

I now give the floor to His Excellency Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon.


