Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I also
would like to thank Mr. Gambari for his briefing and
would like to welcome the determination he shows, as
well as the personal determination of our Secretary-

General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who really continues to try
to move things forward in Burma. The statement by
Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi, read by the Special Envoy, and
the possibility given the Nobel Peace Prize winner to
meet leaders of the National League for Democracy, on
the one hand, and Minister Aung Kyi, on the other, are
steps in the right direction. These are modest but
significant steps. For the first time in a long time, we
are now able to see the possibility of real dialogue
between the Government and democratic forces with
the active support of the United Nations.

Thanks to the growing mobilization of the
international community, the Burmese authorities seem
to understand better and better that the return to the
situation as it was before is no longer an option. I
would like to stress the irreplaceable role of the
countries in the region, and particularly the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), but also China
in this development.

We must continue to work together towards
common goals, which include an inclusive political
dialogue, national reconciliation, the respect for human
rights and the transition towards democracy. It is in this
vein that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France,
Mr. Bernard Kouchner, recently visited several
countries in the region, notably Singapore and
Thailand, which have an essential role to play here.

What we see, however, at the moment, is only a
timid first step and it remains to be confirmed. We are
still a long way away from, and this has been stated by
several speakers, the expectations expressed by our
Security Council on 11 October, when the Council
asked for the Myanmar authorities to cooperate fully
with Mr. Gambari in the execution of his mission. The
Special Envoy met a number of obstacles during that
particular visit.

The absence of significant gestures in relation to
political prisoners, for example, and those detained
following the demonstrations constitutes for us a
source of serious concern. The arrests continue and we
have just learned, with consternation, of the arrest last
night of one of the young figures of the democracy
movement, Ms. Suu Suu Nwe. We are still awaiting
replies to questions about those who have disappeared
during the repression of the democratic movement. We
hope that the visit of Mr. Pinheiro, to which France
attaches a great deal of importance, will enable us to
make quick and rapid progress on this subject.
It is essential that we remain vigilant and
mobilized. Ms. Aung San Suu Kyi has shown her
preparedness towards dialogue without any ambiguity.
The ball is now in the court of the regime. They must
respond to this offer by engaging in dialogue without
conditions and, by lifting, without delay, the
restrictions placed on her. She must be able to consult
with the leaders of political parties, ethnic groups and
civil society as much as she feels is necessary. The
current discussions are not an end in themselves. They
must lead quickly to a high-level dialogue, which, to
use Aung San Suu Kyi's own words, must be serious
and must be tied to a timetable. This process must
bring on board all political forces that are represented
in the country, as well as ethnic groups.

France has taken steps to strengthen the European
Union's sanctions on Burma. Those targeted measures
send a strong message to Burmese leaders without
affecting the population, which is already suffering
from the situation and living in precarious conditions.
However, we believe that the international community
must be prepared to react positively if genuine political
dialogue begins in Burma. For France, the essential
criterion is the beginning of genuine negotiations
between the military and the opposition, once the latter
is free to move about and speak freely.

The European Union has set the example by
being prepared to review, or even lift, its targeted
sanctions if true progress is made. It has also
designated Mr. Fassino as special envoy. It would be
useful if he were able to consult with Mr. Gambari and
Mr. Pinheiro as soon as possible, in order that they can
mutually reinforce their efforts.

Another approach under the aegis of the United
Nations could perhaps entail the establishment of a
trust fund for humanitarian and development projects.
In that vein, France would favour the establishment of
an informal group of friends to support the mission of
the Special Envoy. That group could channel the
support of the international community to Mr.
Gambari. In time, it could also ensure the international
community's follow-up to the reconciliation process
that we expect will take place. Similarly, if approved,
the establishment of a permanent liaison office would
also constitute significant progress.

Following the tragic repression of the democratic
movement, there is now a ray of hope for the Burmese
people. It is up to them to nourish that hope with an

eye towards the future; but they need our active
support to do so. It is therefore now up to us not to let
up on our efforts - to the contrary, now is the time for
us to intensify our efforts towards national
reconciliation and democratic transition, so as to
emerge from the current crisis and move ahead. In that
connection, it is crucial that Mr. Gambari return to
Myanmar soon and that he convince the Burmese
authorities to genuinely cooperate with him in order for
him to make tangible progress. He has our resolute
ongoing support in that endeavour.

