Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Under-
Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Nakamitsu, for her briefing
and for highlighting the threat to peace and security
posed by illicit trading in small arms and light
weapons. The Secretary-General's report (S/2017/1025)
also indicates that the poor regulation of such weapons
is a key enabler of armed conflict and a means of
sustaining it.

Small arms and light weapons must therefore be
seriously considered by the Security Council so that
multilateral efforts aimed at preventing and combating
the uncontrolled circulation of such weapons can be
strengthened to reduce their excessive and destabilizing
accumulation throughout the world. The spread of illicit
weapons impedes the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and all other global processes
aimed at achieving a sustainable and safer world.

Therefore, action must be taken to prevent the
illegal diversion of small arms and light weapons into
the criminal sphere. The following measures must be
applied in a universal manner: improving stockpile
management, with adequate monitoring in terms of
protection; controlling the sales, exports and imports
of small arms and light weapons and related mediation;
protecting military arsenals; disrupting the network
of transnational organized syndicates and eliminating
their weapon- storage sites; improving border control
and customs mechanisms; and enhancing vigilance over
the storage conditions of weapons. The age of booming
digital technology requires greater control of trade in
arms and arms trafficking on the Internet, in particular
through the trading platforms of the dark web. In that
context, we must fully support the Secretary-General's
recommendations to overcome the multidimensional
challenges encountered.

Kazakhstan calls for closer collaboration, transparency,
enhanced legislation and stricter control - not just at the
national and regional levels but also at the international
level. The ability to implement the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects in
each country will determine the global success. We also
underscore the gender-based implications of the illegal
trading in small arms and light weapons, which results
in conflict-related deaths - with several thousand
men, women and children killed each day.

The small arms and light weapons dimension
should become an integral part of the mandate of all
peacekeeping missions of the United Nations and of
the African Union. An adequate response to the issue
will mitigate the impact that those weapons have on
conflicts and will allow us to prevent unnecessary
deaths and reduce terrorism and extremism.

Peacekeeping operations should also include a
comprehensive long-term programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. That will require work
on harmonizing the relevant legal instruments, export-
control programmes, mutual information-exchange
and implementing joint law enforcement activities,
including cooperation between customs and border
guard units. Likewise, small arms and light weapon
considerations should be an integral aspect of all
sanctions committees, so as to prevent the illicit flow
of weapons in and out of specific countries under
sanctions regimes.

Kazakhstan is constantly implementing strict
control measures over manufacture, export and supply
to mitigate any possible illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. We are also focusing on
the region of Central Asia, with the aim of enacting
regional inter-State legislation in the area of exports
control, as well as focusing on a regional approach
and collaboration with specialized organizations, such
as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL.

We consider the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms to be the most important component
of the export-control system, and therefore provide data
on military expenditures on a regular basis. Kazakhstan
recently ratified the Arms Trade Treaty and we will
implement it on the national level. In that effort, I
assure the Council of Kazakhstan's full commitment to
other Member States and to the United Nations in order
to achieve our common goals.

