Dr. Piot: Just one year has passed since the
Security Council made history with its first debate on
AIDS, and already I am appearing before the Council
for the third time on this subject.

As someone who is immersed full-time in global
AIDS politics and practice, I can tell the Council that
its deliberations on AIDS have been enormously
helpful. I do not think that can be overestimated. The
simple fact that the world's ultimate tribunal on
questions of peace and security devotes its attention to
AIDS sends a very powerful message.

In acknowledging the significant difference the
Security Council has made, I must also pay tribute to
its leading advocate, Ambassador Richard Holbrooke. I
can think of no better legacy to leave the world than to
have ensured that the United Nations Security Council
now regards the global fight against AIDS as part of its
core business. Thank you for that.

The Security Council has helped transform the
way in which AIDS is viewed. Only when we
understand AIDS as a fundamental issue of human
security can we grasp the extent of destruction it has
caused, how insidiously it has exacerbated conditions
of poverty and vulnerability, and the long-term effects
of its impact.

The global resolve to tackle AIDS has increased
markedly in the six months since the Council's meeting
held on 17 July. Many countries have revamped their
AIDS plans, have made them more central to decision-
making across government and have sought new
resources and ways to direct them to the local
community level. Many heads of State or Government
at the Millennium Summit highlighted AIDS.
Initiatives placing HIV in the mainstream of
development took place at the G-8 meeting in
Okinawa, in the European Commission and among
many bilateral donors. Regional efforts have intensified
as well, notably, in the Caribbean under the auspices of
the Caribbean Community, with the commitment of the
Association of South-East Asian Nations to a summit
on HIV in South-East Asia and with a summit of the
Organization of African Unity coming up in April in
Nigeria.

Last month the Economic Commission for Africa
hosted the African Development Forum for the second
time. Its theme, "AIDS: The greatest leadership
challenge", was given weight by the seven heads of
State or Government who attended and their
interaction with leaders of civil society, including
people with HIV/AIDS and youth. Ms. Graca Machel
articulated the sense of urgency at the meeting, saying,

"any international support can only be
additional to our own efforts and it will be our
own efforts that bring us rewards in this
struggle".

One recent important opportunity has been new
debt relief agreements, which have liberated resources
and helped integrate AIDS into national planning. They
have already resulted in some of the poorest countries
in Africa allocating $20 million more for AIDS in 2001
out of their own budgets, thanks to debt relief.

However, much, if not most, of the global agenda
on AIDS is unfinished, including the continuing
inequities in access to effective care and treatments and
even to life-saving materials, such as condoms. Last
year saw increasing acceptance by Governments and
industry of the moral legitimacy of equity pricing. This
is the idea that poorer countries should be able to buy
essential drugs at lower prices than wealthy countries.
But creating mechanisms to implement equitable
access has been painfully and unacceptably slow. Let
us not forget that the progress on comprehensive HIV
care will have to advance on multiple fronts
simultaneously.

Meanwhile, as members have heard, the HIV
epidemic advances. In the report we released for World
AIDS Day last month we estimated that there were 5.3
million new HIV infections around the globe last year.
Over 3 million people died as a result of AIDS - more
annual deaths than ever. This global situation is the
context within which the UNAIDS secretariat and co-
sponsors have been addressing Security Council
resolution 1308 (2000).

In January, a year ago, I made four key
commitments to the Security Council. The first was to
intensify the International Partnership against AIDS in
Africa. This we have done, and its Framework for
Action, with specific milestones, has been widely
endorsed, including by the Organization of African
Unity summit in Lome last July. Over the past 12
months much of the work of the UNAIDS secretariat
and co-sponsors in Africa has focused on the
development of this Partnership. This work culminated
in its formal launch by Secretary-General Annan in
Addis Ababa at the African Development Forum,
where he declared,

"that from now on across all of Africa it will be
the focus for a new spirit of cooperation in
building the response to AIDS."

The second commitment I made a year ago was to
have regular follow-up with the Security Council. Here
we are today. This we have done at Security Council
meetings and in our regular reports focusing on AIDS
in relation to peacekeeping and humanitarian efforts.

The third commitment I made was to intensify
information flow on international responses to the
epidemic. This we have done with updated
epidemiological and response information from the
Mapping the AIDS Pandemic project, with information
management networks for West Africa, in South and
South-East Asia and in Latin America. At last month's
African Development Forum we released a UNAIDS
country-by-country report that documents both the
impact of AIDS on Africa country-by-country and the
strengthening of national responses. We are now
expanding this work to other parts of the world.

Fourthly, I undertook to make specific plans to
address HIV/AIDS in emergencies and the uniformed
services. The UNAIDS Humanitarian Coordination
Unit, established in June 2000, has, with the significant
involvement of our co-sponsors, made country
assessment missions to Ethiopia and Eritrea, East
Timor and Burundi. A mission to Sierra Leone will
take place very shortly. The missions are to assess
locally specific risk factors for HIV, prepare AIDS
prevention strategies and train trainers in prevention
and behaviour change so that peacekeepers can become
agents of change and HIV prevention.

In July the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) Administrator Mark Malloch
Brown and I wrote to United Nations Resident
Coordinators in particular countries affected by conflict
to ensure that AIDS, as a humanitarian and security
issue, was at the top of the agenda of the United
Nations system in these countries.

Jean-Marie Guehenno mentioned earlier that a
strategy meeting to examine AIDS as a security issue
was held in Stockholm in December, involving
Governments, military representatives, the United
Nations system and representatives of non-
governmental organizations. The report and
recommendations arising from the meeting are
currently being circulated among the meeting's
participants and will soon be finished.
We have been working with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, alongside our co-sponsors -
in particular UNDP, the United Nations Children's
Fund, the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Population Fund - to focus on the elevated
risk of HIV in conflict and humanitarian situations.
HIV has an impact on refugees, United Nations and
non-governmental organization personnel and host
communities. So HIV prevention and care must be core
concerns because of the interaction of these
populations, and therefore preventing the spread of
HIV and ensuring the availability of adequate care is
equally important to them all.

As members just heard, earlier today I joined
Jean-Marie Guehenno to sign a cooperation framework
agreement between UNAIDS and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Under this framework, we
commit to improving the capacity of peacekeepers to
become advocates of and actors for the awareness and
prevention of HIV transmission.

The agreement will support our ongoing work in,
first, training; secondly, in the development of codes of
conduct; thirdly, in voluntary and confidential
counselling and testing; fourthly, in civil-military
cooperation; fifthly, in the care and treatment of
affected personnel; sixth, in guaranteeing an
uninterrupted supply of male and female condoms; and
lastly, in disseminating best practices. At the field
level, together with representatives of local populations
and non-governmental organizations, we will cooperate
to promote sustainable measures to prevent HIV
transmission.

It is incumbent on the United Nations to set the
highest possible standards for the conduct of the troops
deployed under its flag. Every effort must be made to
ensure that peacekeepers conduct themselves according
to appropriate codes of conduct and have the best
possible means to protect themselves and the
populations with whom they are in contact.

The role of HIV testing in peacekeeping
operations is a complex issue, and nothing raises the
emotional temperature of these debates more quickly.
But for that reason I have decided to establish, in
conjunction with Under-Secretary-General Guehenno,
a senior expert panel to analyse and formulate a
comprehensive position on the issue of HIV testing for
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel.

The global response to AIDS gathered momentum
last year. It must build even further this year. I am
greatly heartened by the Council's close attention to
AIDS.

When the General Assembly holds its special
session on AIDS in June, all Member States will have
the chance to pledge their commitment to the fight.
That session is an opportunity for more than fine
words - it needs to produce tangible outcomes.

So the commitments of 2001 need to be real: real
money deposited in real bank accounts to cover the
real, more than $3 billion shortfall just to meet Africa's
most urgent needs for prevention and basic care; real
reductions in drug prices for poor countries; real
leadership to tackle the stigma and galvanize national
action against AIDS; real participation of people with
HIV in decision-making. Only when these
commitments become a reality can we hope to respond
adequately to the reality of the epidemic.
