Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Sir, I congratulate
you on assuming the office of the President of the
Security Council for the month of May. We also thank
Ambassador Eugene-Richard Gasana for his effective
presidency of the Council last month. We offer our
thanks and best wishes to both teams.

We thank Mr. Leonid Kozhara, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine and Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), for his comprehensive briefing and for
sharing with us the vision and programme of work of
his organization.

The OSCE, representing 57 States in Europe,
Central Asia and North America, has been a pillar
of strength for regional peace and security. Its best
practices in early warning, conflict prevention and
crisis management are being emulated by other
regional organizations. The three dimensions of the
OSCE's work - political-military, economic and
environmental, and human - provide the best tools for
a comprehensive response to security situations.

The United Nations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of its Charter, co-opts regional organizations for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the pacific settlement of disputes. In the past, the
United Nations and the OSCE have complemented each
other's efforts aimed at conflict prevention, confidence-
and security-building, mediation, crisis management
and post-conflict stabilization.

During the Cold War, the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the OSCE's predecessor, played
an important role by providing a forum for dialogue and
negotiation between East and West. Following the end
of the Cold War, the OSCE contributed to managing the
transition in Europe and dealing with post-Cold War
challenges. We appreciate the important role the OSCE
is currently playing in facilitating various processes
aimed at settling crises and conflicts in its region.
They include the Transdniestrian settlement process,
the Geneva international discussions on Georgia, and
the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chairs assisting Azerbaijan
and Armenia in finding a peaceful solution to the
Nagorno Karabakh conflict. We also welcome the
European Union-led dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The OSCE's role in support of that dialogue
is very important.

The OSCE's initiatives on disarmament,
non-proliferation and arms control are producing
results. We also greatly appreciate its work in
countering transnational threats such as human and
narcotics trafficking, terrorism and cyber-crime.

The United Nations and the OSCE have similar
priorities in the economic and environmental areas,
as well as with respect to sustainable energy for all.
What we need is more synergy and closer coordination
between the two organizations. We believe that the
OSCE'S successes in these fields are relevant to South
Asia and many other regions.

The human dimension is equally important. The
OSCE's focus on young people and children is geared
towards forward-looking solutions for more developed,
educated and tolerant societies. We particularly
appreciate its activities in Afghanistan in building the
capacity of the Afghan National Police, combating
drug trafficking and strengthening customs and border
management. Pakistan strongly believes that a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan will help its people rediscover
their destiny, consolidate their polity and rebuild their
economy. As the international security forces prepare
to withdraw by 2014, the OSCE's continued engagement
with Afghanistan will have a positive impact on the four
transitions under way in the security, reconciliation,
electoral and economic areas. We particularly welcome
the Chair's intention to explore further areas of
cooperation for capacity-building in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, we wish Ukraine a very successful
chairmanship ofthe OSCE. We take note ofits priorities,
and hope that under its stewardship the organization will
continue its important work in areas ranging from hard
security issues to sustainable economic development
and the promotion and protection of human rights.

