Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank the
Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing on the work
of her Office in relation to Libya.

More than two years into its transition process,
Libya has made real and substantial progress, but
serious political and security challenges remain.
Central to Libya's completing a successful transition
to democracy is the establishment of the rule of law.
We recognize that the challenging security situation
in Libya makes the work of all accountability actors
more difficult. It is vital that nascent legal institutions
be strengthened and that accountability for serious
crimes be pursued. The International Criminal Court
(ICC) is playing an important role in that endeavour.
The Council's referral of the situation in Libya to the
ICC has not only demonstrated a determination that
those responsible for the most serious crimes will be
held accountable; it has been an important catalyst for
the reform of Libya's judicial system.

We commend the Libyan Government for the
constructive manner in which it has continued to engage
with the ICC. In particular, we acknowledge the manner
in which Libya has invoked its rights by challenging the
ICC's jurisdiction regarding the cases against Mr. Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mr. Abdullah Al-Senussi, in
compliance with the Rome Statute. We also welcome
the close consultation that is taking place between
Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor on those matters.
Those actions reflect the principle of complementarity,
a central element of the Rome Statute, working in
practice. Indeed, as Ms. Bensouda has said, Libya,
through its active involvement in related proceedings
before the Court, is setting an example of how States
can invoke the principle of complementarity to protect
their sovereign rights to investigate and prosecute their
nationals.

We note the Pre-Trial Chamber decision that the
ICC case against Mr. Al-Senussi is inadmissible on the
basis that Libya itself is willing and able to exercise
jurisdiction over him. While that decision is the subject
of an appeal, it is important to recognize that the
Pre-Trial Chamber's decision reflects the significant
steps taken by Libya to re-establish the rule of law.
We note Ms. Bensouda's advice that her Office has
concluded that there is no legal basis for appeal of the
Pre-Trial Chamber decision.

Libya's adoption of the transitional justice law and
the establishment of the fact-finding and reconciliation
commission are important and welcome steps in
re-establishing the rule of law. We urge Libya to use
those and other mechanisms to ensure that those most
responsible for the commission of serious international
crimes are brought to justice, regardless of whether
they fought in defence of the Al-Qadhafi regime or
were among those who raised arms to establish a new
Libya. In that context, we welcome the conclusion of
the memorandum of understanding between the Office
of the Prosecutor and the Government of Libya on
burden-sharing in relation to future investigations and
prosecutions.

While we recognize significant progress in some
areas, we remain concerned at the distinct lack of
progress in addressing the situation of conflict-related
detainees. Reports that many such detainees continue
to be held by armed brigades without due process and
have been subject to torture and other ill treatment
are of grave concern. We urge Libya to ensure that
detainees are transferred to effective State control in
accordance with the recommendations of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
We also urge Libya to ensure that those responsible for
such mistreatment, or other crimes, such as enforced
disappearances, are held to account.

While we commend the Libyan Government's
record of cooperation with the Court, it is essential that
the Libyan Government also cooperate with the Court in
all matters, pursuant to its obligations under resolutions
1970 (2011) and 2095 (2013). In particular, we note
that Libya remains under an obligation to surrender
Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the ICC, and we urge Libya to do
so as soon as possible. We note with particular concern
the advice from Mr. Al-Qadhafi's legal counsel that his
client is being detained in isolation, denied visits from
family and friends and denied access to legal advisers.
That cannot continue.

We note the Prosecutor's advice that the focus ofher
ongoing investigations is on persons outside of Libya.
In that context, Australia calls on States, particularly
Libya's neighbours, to cooperate with the Court to
ensure that those most responsible for the most serious
international crimes committed in Libya are brought to
justice.

It is also essential that the Council continues to
offer its support not only for the efforts of Libya, but
also the ongoing investigations of the Prosecutor. The
active and ongoing support of the Council is essential
to ensure that the objectives of the Council's referrals to
the ICC, namely, that justice is delivered and peace and
security are maintained, are met.

