Mr. Mogae: I would like to thank the President of
the Security Council, the British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Boris Johnson, for his kind invitation to brief the
Council today. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General for his accurate and detailed description of
the current situation in South Sudan. I do not intend to
cover the same ground with what little time we have.
Suffice it to say that in the eight months since the
outbreak of violence in July, the security, economic and
humanitarian situations in South Sudan have steadily
deteriorated to unacceptable levels.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism now reports deliberate, planned
conflict between the main parties to the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)
in Government, and the SPLA in Opposition, which is
loyal to Mr. Riek Machar, as well as other emerging
armed groups, engage in the destruction of lives and
communities in total violation of the ceasefire. Across
the board, there is a heightened sense of alarm about
the fact that the situation is slipping out of control. It
is time for the international community to condemn in
the strongest possible terms the violence, the killings,
the human rights abuses and the destruction of homes.
We must now stand together to do something about it.

Whether by design or default, a war is being waged
across South Sudan, and I wish to spell out the three
defining questions that we all face right now. How do
we stop the fighting? How do we stop innocent people
from dying of starvation? And how do we ensure
that the interest and consent of all South Sudanese
communities are fully represented and considered?
Peace, relief and inclusivity - those three issues are
wholly interconnected. The humanitarian crisis, now
officially a famine, is the direct result of insecurity
and of the violence done by all parties to the ceasefire
agreement. The insecurity and armed violence are a
direct result of the perceived political exclusion from
the peace process and of the reality of that exclusion.
Only when all the peoples and communities of South
Sudan see that their interests and consent are being
addressed, therefore, can peace return to the country
and the people return to normal life.

There can never be a military solution in South
Sudan, nor can a military or political regime be imposed
on any side by any other. To find a genuine and durable
political solution, the South Sudanese leadership must
be willing to listen, accommodate and compromise. In
the interim, we must urgently look again at all possible
practical measures that we can take to alleviate the
desperate suffering that millions of people are facing
every day. Women especially have suffered the greatest
injustices and won the greatest battle of the conflict.
All parties to the peace agreement are failing in their
basic duty to protect the South Sudanese people.
The international community must acknowledge
that since the events of July 2016, a split in the SPLA
in Opposition has resulted in two clear opposition
factions: one loyal to Mr. Riek Machar, which is still
fighting and has been excluded from all agreements
and institutions at the present time, and the other loyal
to General Taban Deng Gai and which is cooperating
with the Government. I have had important discussions
with the President of South Sudan, primarily focused
on the national dialogue initiative, and the need for it
to be genuinely and sincerely inclusive, not simply a
discussion with those who agree with the Government.
I reiterate my View that the national dialogue must
be authentic, autonomous and impartially led for it to
be credible and deliver a reliable representation of all
views and concerns. A national dialogue conducted in
such a fashion would contribute to the peace process in
the spirit of the agreement.

I remain firmly convinced that the peace agreement
remains the only viable framework through which to
recover the peace process, drive inclusive engagement
and re-establish momentum. However hard it may be, I
urge all parties, guarantors and partners to continue to
support the peace agreement and the implementation
of its provisions. With regard to the implementation
of the agreement, I can report only modest progress.
The National Constitution Amendment Committee
started slowly, but is now on course to complete the
review of the Constitution before the end of this month.
The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism is monitoring and investigating
violations of the ceasefire, but is regularly denied
freedom of movement by all armed groups. The Joint
Military Ceasefire Commission, the Joint Integrated
Police and the Strategic Defence and Security Review
Board continue to develop their plans very slowly, but
to the exclusion of the pro-Machar Sudan People's
Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition.

I have called on the Transitional Government of
National Unity to demonstrate commitment to the
agreement institutions by providing the required
resources and facilities and allowing accelerated
delivery, and I encourage the regional and international
partners to support them.

Beyond the establishment of the technical committee
for the national consultative process on the establishment
of the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and
Healing, there has been no further progress on
establishing mechanisms and institutions under chapter

V of the peace agreement. I have yet to hear from the
African Union Commission on the establishment of
the hybrid court for South Sudan. These are matters
of great concern. Given the escalation of the conflict,
progress towards chapter V mechanisms is needed now
more than ever before, and I appeal to all parties to
move with haste to enable their swift establishment.

Finally, my recommendation is that we, the
international community, must demand peace and the
total cessation of violence around the country with one
voice. We must activate the immediate deployment of a
regional protection force and support the implementation
of chapter II transitional security arrangements. We
must demand the full and credible inclusion of all
parties and stakeholders in the peace process. We must
constantly encourage the Government to conduct a
genuinely inclusive and impartial dialogue. We must
endeavour to achieve an immediate improvement of the
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
and ensure a renewed effort to create the hybrid court
for South Sudan and thereby establish the mechanism
for the prosecution of those who perpetrate atrocities
and human rights abuses.

In conclusion, therefore, and in the face of an ever-
worsening situation, I believe that only a resolute and
unified approach by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the African Union, the United Nations
and the international community as a whole can restore
hope to the people of South Sudan.

