I am honoured to address the Security Council today on behalf of the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep Borrell Fontelles, in his capacity as Coordinator of the Joint Commission established under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), and will therefore focus my intervention today on the Joint Commission. I would also like to extend my gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium, serving as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for the excellent collaboration over the past months. In addition, I would like to convey my sincere gratitude for the work done by colleagues in the Secretariat, including in relation to the procurement channel and the preparation of the latest report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2020/531). Nuclear proliferation remains a global threat with potentially worldwide consequences. That is why we have the responsibility, as members of the international community, to address those challenges jointly for the benefit of world peace and future generations. Only last week, the international community celebrated the anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. At that time, 75 years ago, the disastrous damage caused by nuclear weapons was fresh in memory. It is in that light and with that memory in mind that we need to view the JCPOA as a key component of the global non-proliferation architecture that helps reduce regional and global security risks. The JCPOA has removed the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran from the regional security equation. Most important, it has done so in a verifiable way, as the agreement provides for an unprecedented amount of access and monitoring by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) under Iran's comprehensive Safeguards Agreement and the Additional Protocol thereto. Thanks to the Additional Protocol, the IAEA has access to both declared and undeclared sites in Iran, and to key facilities where the IAEA has installed 24/7 online monitoring systems. According to the IAEA's annual safeguards implementation reports, Iran's regular inspections have doubled as compared to the period before the JCPOA. In addition, since 2016, Iran has consistently allowed the highest number of complementary access under the Additional Protocol. It is important to remember that the Additional Protocol is implemented by Iran as part of its JCPOA commitments. Therefore, losing the JCPOA would also mean losing the Additional Protocol, the access rights granted to the IAEA and, accordingly, the additional transparency. Unfortunately, despite all its achievements, the JCPOA has been increasingly challenged. As Coordinator of the Joint Commission, we have spared no efforts to engage with all remaining participants and other partners to find solutions within the framework of the JCPOA and to address current difficulties, including matters referred to the Joint Commission for resolution. Now more than ever, a united international effort is needed to preserve the agreement, which was endorsed by the international community through the adoption of the resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to reiterate our deep appreciation for the IAEA, which plays a crucial role in monitoring and verifying the entirety of Iran's nuclear programme, including Iran's commitments under the JCPOA. We fully support the impartial and technical work carried out by the IAEA, as well as efforts to facilitate the IAEA* carrying out its mandate. I recognize that Iran continued to fully comply with the nuclear-related provisions for three and a half years, including for 14 months after the United States withdrew from the JCPOA, and re-imposed unilateral sanctions, actions which the European Union and its member States, as well as the other remaining participants of the JCPOA, continue to deeply regret. However, it is deeply worrisome that Iran has decreased its nuclear-related JCPOA commitments. We remain particularly concerned about Iran's continued accumulation of low-enriched uranium in excess of the JCPOA stockpile and enrichment level thresholds, its continued expansion of research and development with advanced centrifuges and the enrichment activities in Fordow. Those activities are inconsistent with the nuclear-related provisions of the JCPOA. We urge Iran to reverse them and return to the full implementation of its commitments without delay. At the last Joint Commission meeting, on 26 February, the remaining participants in the JCPOA confirmed their determination to pursue all efforts to preserve the agreement. Full and effective implementation by all sides is key. These efforts have continued over the past months, and we remain determined to continue working with the international community to preserve the JCPOA, an important multilateral achievement endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015). I would like to recall that the JCPOA is a nuclear non-proliferation agreement. The implementation by Iran of its nuclear-related commitments is one essential part of the agreement, which sets strict limitations regarding Iran's access to both plutonium and high-enriched uranium and establishes a comprehensive monitoring and verification mechanism. The other essential element is the comprehensive lifting of sanctions, promoting and facilitating the normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran. The European Union, for its part, lifted sanctions in line with its JCPOA obligations on the day of implementation. Today it remains fully committed to working on the preservation of the agreement, including towards the objective of normalizing economic and trade relations with Iran. In that spirit, extensive technical support has been provided to set up and operationalize the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges. I would like to address the issue of the possible snapback of sanctions in the Council, about which there has been recent speculation. As the High Representative already said, in May 2018 the United States announced that it was ending its participation in the JCPOA. This announcement was confirmed in a presidential memorandum. Since then, the United States has not participated in any meetings or activities within the framework of the agreement. I will now turn to the procurement channel, which was established under annex IV of the JCPOA. The procurement channel remains a unique non-proliferation, transparency and confidence-building instrument. It is a key mechanism to prevent the misuse of nuclear or dual-use items and to ensure that exports of such items are consistent with the JCPOA. We recognize the challenges brought about by the United States withdrawal from the JCPOA and the reimposition of sanctions. The procurement channel, however, remains a Security Council mechanism, and the decision on a proposal for transfer is endorsed by all its 15 members. In the ninth report of the Joint Commission to the Security Council on the status of the Procurement Working Group's decisions and on any implementation issues, submitted to the Facilitator on 5 June and subsequently circulated as document S/2020/508, the remaining participants stated their commitment to continuing to review proposals in an impartial and independent manner. * In that context, it is a positive signal that the channel continues to receive proposals. We expect all Security Council members to continue to support the preservation of the channel in line with resolution 2231 (2015). We also deeply regret the United States decision to end the three waivers covering key JCPOA nuclear projects in Iran, including the Arak modernization project. These projects, endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015), serve the non-proliferation interests of all and provide the international community with assurances of the exclusively peaceful and safe nature of Iranian nuclear activities. Today, as I said, I am focusing my intervention on the JCPOA. Nevertheless, I am very mindful of a series of events outside the nuclear domain that are increasingly worrisome. Finally, I should like to recall that the JCPOA will have its fifth anniversary in two weeks. The agreement remains a great achievement of multilateral diplomacy. The full implementation of the JCPOA by all sides is crucial. It remains the only tool to provide the international community with the necessary assurances regarding Iran's nuclear programme. It is therefore essential that we do all we can to preserve it. We should not allow it to be derailed or degraded or to become irreparable. Nor should we assume that an opportunity will arise again in the future for the international community to address Iran's nuclear programme in such a comprehensive manner.*
