Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the President of the
Security Council for organizing this important event.
We would also like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, and Ambassador Liberata Mulamula for
their detailed briefings on the subject under
consideration.

The Russian Federation has come to this meeting
with certain encouraging facts in mind. National
elections were held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for the first time in 40 years, as a result of
which a conclusive victory was won by the incumbent,
President Kabila. Despite the ongoing instability,
especially in the eastern part, life in the country is
returning to normal. Burundi has now entered the
peacebuilding phase. Following the ceasefire
agreements signed between the Government of Uganda
and the insurgent group the Lord's Resistance Army,
there seems now to be a possibility of resolving the
problem of northern Uganda.

The drafting and adoption of confidence-building
measures will assist the efforts of intergovernmental
and multilateral security mechanisms, such as the
Tripartite Plus One Commission. The United Nations
and the Security Council are playing an active role in
the peacebuilding process, with Council missions
visiting the region annually. It is gratifying that their
work and recommendations are always considered
crucial by the leaders of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda.

We are fully aware of the continuing risks and
difficulties: the danger of a resumption of inter-ethnic
clashes, difficulties in the process of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, illegal flows of small
arms and light weapons, mercenaries, the use of child
soldiers, uncontrolled borders, violence against
civilians, the dire humanitarian situation and so on.
However, at the moment there is in the region a critical
mass of positive factors that is making it possible for
the States of the region to move to a new level of
relations.

A productive step towards the full normalization
of the situation in the Great Lakes region was last
week's holding at Nairobi of the Second Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region under the aegis
of the United Nations and the African Union. The main
outcome of that meeting was the signing of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development, which provides
new prospects for post-conflict reconstruction and
development. We are certain that the work of the
Conference will help to resolve many interconnected
regional problems.

However, I would like once again to stress that
the effectiveness of the Conference will depend
primarily upon the consistency of the actions of the
main actors in the implementation of the agreements
they have concluded. In that regard, we believe that the
establishment of a follow-up mechanism at the Summit
constitutes a promising step for the future. That will
make it possible to consistently implement the entire
set of decisions taken at the Summit.
I should like to address another important topic.
For many decades, the natural and human resources of
this very rich region were exploited in an illegal and

barbaric manner, with the money produced from that
exploitation helping to fuel ongoing conflicts in the
region. It is now high time to radically change the
situation and utilize the remaining potential offered by
the raw materials of the countries of the Great Lakes
region in the interests of their peoples and their States.

I would like to take this opportunity to express
gratitude to the United Republic of Tanzania, South
Africa, the regional Preparatory Committee, the
National Coordinators, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region,
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, his staff and his Office for their
efforts which made it possible, in a successful and
productive way, to hold the second stage of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.

We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Republic of Tanzania for having prepared the official
Presidential Statement of the Council, and we fully
support it.

