Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): I would like to start by
expressing our satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, the Foreign
Minister of Canada, a country which is a good friend and
partner of Ukraine, presiding at a meeting of the Security
Council. I would also like to express our appreciation to
you and to the Government of Canada for your initiative
to hold this important debate on the general issues of
sanctions. Let me assure you of the full intention of my
delegation to support you in bringing this discussion to a
meaningful result.
The question of how to improve the work of the
Council in the area of sanctions is not a theoretical one.
The increased number of sanctions regimes and, as a
result, the growing diversity of their forms and purposes
make us take a critical look at the experience gained.
Recent studies in this area show that the majority of the
sanctions regimes imposed by the Security Council during
the 19905 have had predominantly moderate to low, or
even zero, political effectiveness. The time has come to
carry out an analytical review of the existing policy and
practices in the field of sanctions, to address specific
issues of sanctions management and their effectiveness
and to formulate general approaches to future
decision-making on sanctions.

Ukraine shares the View that sanctions should not be
a substitute for the established and recognized measures
used for settling international disputes and resolving
conflict situations. We believe that imposition of sanctions
should follow, not precede, other peaceful means of
settling disputes as provided under international law and
the United Nations Charter. Sanctions, however, will and
must remain a necessary and an important policy
instrument in the hands of the Security Council. As stated
in annex II to the well-known General Assembly
resolution 51/242 "Supplement to an Agenda for Peace",

 

"An effectively implemented regime of collective
Security Council sanctions can operate as a useful
international policy tool in the graduated response to
threats to international peace and security."

At the same time, it is important to recognize that sanctions
represent extreme measures. In some cases, they can
potentially have effects equal to or even more severe than
those of war.

These are important considerations that will guide the
delegation of Ukraine in further deliberations of the
Security Council on this issue. We hope that its outcome
will further contribute to an effective and comprehensive
approach to sanctions imposed by the Council. We need it
if we want to encourage
full cooperation and mutual assistance in the
implementation and enforcement of sanctions regimes and
other measures imposed under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter. We need such an approach if we really
want to minimize unintended effects of Council sanctions
on both target and non-target States. And we need it, after
all, to mobilize wider support by the whole international
community, thus strengthening the powers and the authority
of the Security Council and upholding its overriding
responsibilities under the Charter.
More than a year ago the Council adopted the note of
the President of 29 January 1999 containing a number of
practical recommendations to improve the work of
sanctions committees. Recently the Secretariat submitted to
us information regarding the implementation of these
recommendations. It clearly shows that not all of those
recommendations, as moderate as they are, have been
properly implemented, and there remains much to be done
in this direction.

We note that many questions related to sanctions
policy have been addressed in a number of forums,
including at the non-governmental level. Certain important
aspects of sanctions have been dealt with by the General
Assembly. A substantial amount of work, including various
symposia, seminars and research, has been done outside the
United Nations system. One of the most recent examples is
the First Expert Seminar on Smart Sanctions organized by
the Bonn International Centre for Conversion. This morning
many of us had an excellent opportunity to participate, at
the initiative of the Canadian presidency, in a very
interesting seminar on sanctions organized by the
International Peace Academy. All such meetings undertake
careful study of the most acute questions related to
sanctions planning, management, implementation, et cetera,
and produce very useful analytical reports. Nevertheless,
this work should also be done in the framework of the
Security Council. The focus of these activities should be
shifted to the Council to debate and outline general policy
in the field of sanctions.

This brings me to another point I would like to
make. We need significant technical and administrative
improvements within the United Nations system, as well
as among Member States, to enhance sanctions
management and effectiveness. We believe that this work
should start with the Security Council itself. We also
consider that unless a constant forum within the Council
to address these issues is established, our efforts will
remain fragmental and inconsistent.

This was the very idea behind our recent proposal to
create a standing Security Council sanctions committee
entrusted with the task of outlining the general policy in
this field. We believe that such a body would become a
most appropriate arrangement for the Council to deal with
sanctions - if not for the immediate, but for a more
distant perspective. While recognizing the extent of the
practical implications of the implementation of this
proposal, we hope that it will remain on the table as one
of the open options.

In our view, the work of all Security Council
sanctions committees should be assisted by a more
substantive expertise on the part of the Secretariat. It
should go far beyond the traditional functions of servicing
of committee meetings and other procedural aspects. The
problem of sanctions is generally recognized as a
multidisciplinary issue. It is, first and foremost, an
economic issue; it is a political issue, it is a military
issue, and it is a humanitarian issue. Consequently, the
Secretariat should be expected to provide expertise in all
those areas, coupled with a qualified synthesis of all of
them. The Secretariat should enhance its capacity to
monitor sanctions and carry out analytical functions. This
can be done in a number of ways, first of all through
strengthening coordination between different parts of the
Secretariat, without changing its structure or
composition - for example, holding regular
consultations, setting up task forces and working groups,
and other ad hoc arrangements; through re-deployment,
temporary or permanent, of staff from economic,
humanitarian and disarmament units of the Secretariat to
the Security Council secretariat; or through creating new
posts or units within the Secretariat for these purposes.

 

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate our full support for
the decision to establish a working group to address generic
sanctions issues. Its mandate, which has been clearly set out
in the presidential note adopted under the Canadian
leadership, identifies a number of priority areas on which
the Council will focus in the following months. We hope
that sooner rather than later the work of this group will
bring practical results. We look forward to participating in
this very important endeavor. In our view, it should result
in specific conclusions and recommendations in order to
clarify the vision of sanctions.

