Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin byjoining
other delegations in congratulating the Republic of
Korea on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, and by thanking your delegation,
Mr. President, for scheduling this important open
debate. Allow me also to express our sincere thanks
to the Secretary-General, as well as to the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, for their briefings this
morning.

Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The concept of the protection of civilians is founded
on the universally accepted rules of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law, set out in
a range of international legal instruments, in particular
the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their 1977 Additional
Protocols, which contain specific rules for the
protection of civilians. In situations that are not covered
by these treaties, in particular internal disturbances,
civilians are protected by the fundamental principles of
humanitarian law, by most religious values and ethics,
and by human rights law. Ironically, a large number of
civilians nevertheless continue to be exposed to the
atrocities of conflict.

My delegation condemns all violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law. In
many situations, women and children in particular
continue to be subject to various forms of violence. We
are deeply concerned by the availability and use of arms
and explosive weapons in populated areas as a violation
of international law, by increasing threats against the
security of health care facilities and the delivery of
health care services, and by the failure to comply with
international humanitarian law. Efforts should be made
to reduce the illegal arms trade, which causes casualties.
We stress the need to combat impunity, safeguard
access for humanitarian assistance, and protect the
safety of humanitarian aid workers. For example,
the total disregard and rejection of humanitarian and
international laws and values, especially as practiced
by occupation forces in the occupied territories of
Palestine for years, are a disgrace to humanity and to
the people of Israel.

It is encouraging that the Council's informal Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians has continued
to meet regularly. In the period since the 2012 open
debate (see S/PV.6790), it has considered the mandates
of seven United Nations missions: the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan, the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and the African-led
International Support Mission in Mali.

Bangladesh reaffirms its commitment to the
protection of civilians. In order to ensure the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, my delegation would like
to highlight few issues.

First, protection relates to prevention and the
building of a mindset focused on the culture of peace.
The culture of peace is designed to inculcate a mindset
of tolerance, diversity, friendship, love and respect for
others, as all violence emanates from a mindset ofhatred
and intolerance. The preventive capacity of the United
Nations must be enhanced and the Member States need
to take steps to inculcate the values of peace, tolerance
and harmony that contribute to long-term prevention.

Second, as one of the largest troop-contributing
countries, Bangladesh believes that there needs to
be a closer dialogue between the Council and troop-
contributing countries, which can provide valuable
information about the situation on the ground. The
presence of uniformed female personnel may also play
a pivotal role in a State's ability to protect its citizens.
I take this opportunity to refer to the efforts of the all-
female Bangladeshi formed police units working in
peacekeeping missions in Haiti and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Third, protection mandates and compliance by
United Nations peacekeepers should be strengthened.

Fourth, international efforts, including the use of
force, should be the last resort, while respecting the
relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
If peaceful means and mediation are exhausted, force
could be used with the proper authorization by the
Security Council or, in exceptional circumstances, by
the General Assembly, in line with resolution 377 (V).

Fifth, considering that all civilians affected by
armed conflict deserve help, enhanced humanitarian
access on the part of the States and parties concerned,
in compliance with international humanitarian and
human rights law, should be ensured.

Sixth, accountability for violations of the law
should be ensured.

Seventh, it may be recalled that, in assigning such
mandates, adequate provision should be made for the
security and safety of the peacekeepers.

In conclusion, my delegation urges all parties
to conflict to comply with the letter and spirit of
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law so as to ensure protection of the lives and property
of civilians and unimpeded access to humanitarian aid.
We call on the parties to conflicts to strengthen the
protection of civilians through heightened awareness at
all levels, particularly through training for and orders
and instructions issued to armed forces.

