Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Pascoe for his substantive
briefing. The situation in the Middle East remains
unstable and very fragile, although with some positive
aspects, above all the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian
proximity talks mediated by Senator Mitchell. An
opportunity remains for the resumption of direct talks
between the sides, and we cannot let it slip away. In
this connection, reports from Israel about plans for new
construction in East Jerusalem and on recent
demolitions of a number of Arab homes are a source of
great concern.

Moscow continues to consider unacceptable any
unilateral action that could prejudice the outcome of an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement. We call on the Israeli
side to show restraint in accordance with the united
position of the international community on these
issues, given the particular sensitivity of the problem
of Jerusalem, whose fate should be decided through
negotiations on the final status of the Palestinian
territories. It is evident that, if they are to move from
proximity talks to a substantive exchange of views on
the key issues on the bilateral agenda, the sides must
refrain from decisions and actions that could
undermine efforts to build an atmosphere of trust
between them.

The Middle East Quartet remains the primary
instrument supporting the peace process, and the recent
trip to the region by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov, should be seen
in that context. The Special Representatives of the
Quartet continue their intense daily work, including on
the ground, to achieve the objectives set by Quartet
leaders at their most recent meeting in Moscow with a
View to moving towards a comprehensive Middle East
settlement.

We note some movement in the situation
involving Gaza. Easing the embargo is a step in the
right direction which we are convinced should be
followed by further measures, such as restoring the
conditions that existed at the conclusion of the 2005
Agreement on Movement and Access, when
representatives of the European Union and the lawful
Palestinian authorities were stationed at Gaza border
crossings. The ultimate goal of the international
community should, of course, be the complete lifting of

the blockade, while ensuring Israel's security interests.

We await additional information from the United
Nations and Israel on the status of the investigation of
the circumstances relating to the incident of the
freedom flotilla to Gaza.

Unfortunately, one serious remaining issue is that
of intra-Palestinian unity. We are conducting principled
activity at all levels to support efforts to overcome
differences within the Palestinian ranks. We appeal to
and are seeking to convince Hamas to align itself with
the platform of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and the Arab Peace Initiative, in favour of which the
Quartet has repeatedly spoken out. There has been
some movement in Hamas' position in this direction,
and we will pursue our relevant work with that
organization.

In conclusion, I again reaffirm Russia's readiness,
within international forums and bilateral frameworks,
to continue its efforts to contribute to a comprehensive
and just settlement in the Middle East, a crucial
element of which would be to resolve the Palestine
question on a two-State basis that provides for the
existence of an independent and viable Palestinian
State living side by side with Israel in peace and
security. There is no other option.

