Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): I thank you, Sir, for
the opportunity to address this Security Council
meeting on Timor-Leste. For more than decade, the
Security Council created various missions, from the
United Nations Mission in East Timor in 1999 to the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) today. The Council gave each United
Nations mission a different focus, a different
composition and different objectives according to the
realities of the time.
5
The report of Secretary-General (S/2010/85)
before us confirms that stability and a peaceful
political environment in Timor-Leste are realities. This
is a demonstration that the Council's decisions have
been right. In spite of the 2006 crises, in general we
can say that the United Nations intervention in Timor-
Leste has been very successful.

I should like to take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, the Security Council, the Secretary-
General and the international community at large for
the continuing commitment to the success of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon visited Timor-
Leste in 2007 and had the compassion to visit the
refugee camps in Dili. Today, those camps are closed
and the internally displaced persons have returned to
their homes and families. By working together with the
United Nations and the international community, we
were able to solve one of the most difficult and most
complex problems in our county. We should like to
take this opportunity also to thank the Secretary-
General for his leadership, and his Special
Representatives and Deputy Special Representatives
for their contributions to the success we have achieved.

As a nation and people, we have been blessed by
the kindness of the international community. As citizens
of the world, we value the spirit of humanitarian
solidarity. For that reason, the Government of Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao has on various occasions
extended its financial support to the peoples of the
region that have suffered natural disasters. After the
earthquake disaster in Haiti, the Council of Ministers
decided to provide to the people and Government of
that country financial aid of $500,000. We could not
remain silent in the face of the suffering of such
magnitude of fellow human beings wherever they are.

Despite the current world economic and financial
crises, our economic growth in terms of non-oil gross
domestic product (GDP) was 12.8 per cent in 2008 and,
by our preliminary estimate, around 12 per cent in
2009. In the meantime, annual average inflation is less
than 2 per cent.

The agriculture sector substantially increased its
productivity by introducing high-yield and hybrid crop
varieties and by improving irrigation systems. The
Ministry of Finance improved the system of public
finance management and budget execution, while at the
same time remaining steadfast on the path of fiscal

prudence and discipline. We are committed to
maintaining growth in non-oil GDP for years to come
and to investing in rural areas, human resources and
basic infrastructures in order to reduce poverty and
unemployment.

Reducing unemployment is not an easy task; we
need foreign, national and public investment. To
minimize the high level of unemployment, we have
made an agreement with the Republic of Korea to
export our labour force. Hundreds of Timorese are
already working in that country, and we hope that other
countries may follow the example of Korea.

Prime Minister Xanana Gusmao is finalizing the
strategic plan for Timor-Leste. The plan will play a
major role in the development of our country and in
better preparing our people and nation to face the
challenges of the present and the future. The budget for
2010 is approximately $637 million. The national
priorities for this year are roads, water supply, food
security, human resources training, access to justice,
social services and administrative decentralization,
good governance and public security.

The Government of Timor-Leste aims to make
the management of public finances among the most
accountable and the most transparent in the world. We
will try. A few days ago, executives from a Canadian
management software company, Free Balance, visited
Timor-Leste; they are providing accounting services to
many countries. An agreement was reached by which
they will provide software solutions for public financial
and human resources management. These new solutions
will produce at least two portals for the public via a
web-based interface. One is called a transparency
portal, where the public can access real-time
information on how State funds are being executed,
including such details as amounts allocated, the timing
and location of projects, and under which programme
the project is being implemented. The other is a
procurement portal that gives access to information on
the procurement plans of the Government, providing
the business community with equitable participation
and adequate preparation time to complete applications
and submit them to the process. Once the procurement
process starts, it can be monitored and provide
information to the public on how the procurement
process was implemented, which procurement method
was utilized, the process of evaluation, the names of
companies and bidders, and the allocation to the
successful bidder.

10-2486]
The citizens and organizations of my country will
be able to follow closely the budget execution and the
procurement process in real time. We are working
towards compliance with 18 requirements under the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. Our aim
is to protect and prudently manage the petroleum
sector to benefit the people of Timor-Leste and to
ensure that those resources and revenues are properly
accounted for and that global standards for good
governance, transparency and accountability are met
and implemented. Petroleum funds will continue to be
managed pursuant to current laws, and any changes
will be debated in our national Parliament.

As a recipient country of aid, we have
volunteered, together with six other fragile States, to
become pilot countries to be monitored with respect to
the Principles for Good International Engagement in
Fragile States and Situations. The High-Level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness held in Accra in 2008 endorsed an
Agenda for Action to reform the delivery of aid and
improve the effectiveness of development assistance.
The Accra accords were based on the principles of
2005 Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.

On 26 February, a global report will be launched
in Washington, DC, where the Minister of Finance of
Timor-Leste, Emilia Pires, will be one of the panellists.
On 8 April, we will host in Dili the International
Dialogue on Peacebuilding and State-Building, to be
co-chaired by the United Kingdom and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We hope that by sharing
experiences and best practices among post-conflict
countries, we may all be better prepared to navigate
towards the future with more confidence.

The Council of Coordination for the justice sector,
composed of the courts, general prosecutors and the
Ministry of Justice, met on 12 February and agreed on
the Justice Sector Strategic Plan. The recommendations
of the independent comprehensive needs assessment
were incorporated into the Strategic Plan. Major areas
include institutional development, infrastructure and
information technology reform, legal framework,
human resources development, access to justice, and
important measures to strength the rule of law such as
the implementation of the Audit Court, improvement of
the capacity for criminal investigation, creation of the
forensic services, and implementation of a case
management system in all core justice institutions.

On 19 February, a bilingual version of the Penal
Code was published in Portuguese and Tetum.
Domestic violence became a public crime. A draft law
on the protection of women and children subjected to
domestic violence was submitted to the National
Parliament and is now under consideration. A land law,
that will also protect the property of women, is under
discussion.

The National Commission for the Rights of the
Child has now been fully implemented. It will have a
positive impact as an oversight and consultative body
to the Government in matters related to the protection
and dissemination of the rights of children. A
traditional or customary justice law is currently been
drafted. It will regulate cases that can be solved by
customary justice and also protect human rights,
especially those of women and children.

The Government has done everything possible to
create better conditions for the justice sector. This year,
a new training course for future judges, prosecutors
and public defenders will begin with the help of
Portugal. The justice sector is in its infancy. Many
achievements have been made, but many challenges
remain on the road ahead. Justice and reconciliation are
part of our system of values. We are strongly against
impunity, and we believe in the rule of law and human
rights. The Government welcomes the support of
UNMIT and the international community in general for
the justice sector.

Yesterday, the Chairman of the Anti-Corruption
Commission was sworn in at our National Parliament.
The ceremony represented a milestone in the fight
against corruption and nepotism. Mr. Aderito de Jesus
has all the professional and personal qualities to be
chosen by an absolute majority of the members of
Parliament to lead that crucial struggle. He will have
all the support that he needs from the Government. The
people of Timor-Leste expect a lot of him, and I wish
him great success.

The stability and peaceful political environment
in Timor-Leste are the result of the collective effort of
Timor-Leste, the United Nations and the international
community. Many citizens of Member countries have
served in Timor-Leste. Today, there are still many
civilian and police officers from within the United
Nations system. There are others from neighbouring
countries, such as New Zealanders and Australians,
who have contributed to peace, came to Timor-Leste at

the invitation of our country and continue to serve in
the International Stabilisation Force. We hope that, by
2012, they will return to their families after a
successful mission.

Relations with the countries in our region are
excellent. Today, Timor-Leste is an observer member
of the Pacific Islands Forum, and there is a strong
desire in our country that, in a few years from now,
Timor-Leste will become a full member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. We have
worked with Indonesia with courage and forward
thinking on common issues of the past, such as human
rights violations, through the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. As a democratic country that is pro-human
rights, we have promised ourselves and our people that
we will not condone impunity or human rights
violations in our own country.

Finally, we concur with the assessment made in
the report that there is a consensus in Timor-Leste that
UNMIT should remain in Timor-Leste up to 2012. We
thank all present for their support.

