Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased, Mr. President, to see you presiding over the
Council on this very special occasion. My delegation
associated itself with the statement delivered by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union. Allow me to
add a view brief comments in a national capacity.

First of all, the question of Iraq raises the need to
reach a political, diplomatic and comprehensive
solution based on respect for international legality
expressed in all of the resolutions of the United
Nations from 1991 until the present time, including
resolution 1284, with which Iraq must comply and
which is the only way to secure the lifting of sanctions
and of normalizing its role in the international
community. It is also necessary to guarantee the
territorial integrity and the political independence of all
of the countries in the region, including Iraq.

Secondly, consensus within the Security Council
is crucial in order to achieve these objectives.

Thirdly, we support an active role for the
Secretary-General, with the impartiality for which he is
known, to continue the process of dialogue with Iraq
begun in February of this year, for which it is important
to create the appropriate conditions.

Fourthly, it is also necessary to effectively tackle
the humanitarian catastrophe that is being experienced
by the Iraqi people. To do so, we must normalize the
civilian economy of Iraq as much as possible.

In this context, the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1352 (2001) by the Security Council
deserves our whole-hearted support, as do the efforts
that are being made at the present time in order to
implement, with the same unanimity, the principles
behind resolution 1352 (2001) in order to enable us to
practically reactivate the Iraqi civilian economy in all
of its aspects, with minimal number of necessary
restrictions, to guarantee compliance with the main
objectives of controlling military exports.

Fifthly, we should not lose sight of the regional
situation as a whole and, in particular, the unique and
difficult circumstances of the countries that border on
Iraq.

Lastly, the Goods Review List, in our opinion,
should be as short, concise and clear as possible in
order to prevent the current situation of "holds", which
makes it difficult to use the benefits of these changes
for the Iraqi people, who have suffered unjustly for a
decade.

