Ms. Juul (Norway): Protection of civilians is a
primary objective of the United Nations, including the
Security Council. The Council has stressed - most
recently in resolution 1674 (2006) - that the
deliberate targeting of civilians and other protected
persons may even constitute a threat to international
peace and security.

There are many factors leading to the increased
vulnerability of civilians during armed conflicts. A
major threat to civilians, both during and after armed
conflicts, is the use of cluster munitions. A number of
countries in different parts of the world are affected by
the use of cluster munitions. The humanitarian
consequences are enormous and the setback to
development is massive. We must prevent cluster
munitions from becoming a new humanitarian disaster
the way landmines did before we managed to put the
Landmine Convention in place. We must act now to
establish an international ban on cluster munitions.
Norway supports the call made by Secretary-General
Annan and also reiterated here today by United Nations
Under-Secretary-General Egeland - to turn the use of
such cluster munitions into history.

Forced displacement is another major obstacle to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Internally
displaced persons (IDPs) often find themselves trapped
by the fact that the Governments primarily responsible
for their protection are the very same ones that have
created conditions leading to the displacement. Despite
their vulnerability and urgent needs for protection,
IDPs often fall between the mandates of various
humanitarian bodies.

The Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement
were developed to meet the specific challenges of
IDPs. We want to underline the normative as well as
the operational importance of the Guidelines, and we
are encouraged by the increasing use of the Guidelines
as a standard, by States, United Nations agencies and
regional and non-governmental organizations.

Situations of armed conflict pose particular risks
for women and girls. Violence against women,
including rape and other forms of sexual violence,
often becomes a weapon of war. Unfortunately, there is
often reluctance to deal with gender-based and sexual
violence. We must ensure an end to impunity for those
grave criminal acts and provide adequate protection for
women and girls.

Regarding humanitarian assistance, recent
evaluations indicate that the humanitarian community
still fails to integrate a gender perspective in a
systematic manner in their programming and
implementation practices. The result is that the rights
of women and girls are not sufficiently protected.
Norway supports the initiative by the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee (IASC) to develop a five-point
action plan to rectify this dysfunctionality on the part
of the humanitarian community.

A very specific concern as regards gender
discrimination is sexual exploitation and abuse by
United Nations and associated personnel involved in
international operations. Norway strongly regrets the
fact that this abhorrent practice continues to require
our attention. We remain strongly committed to
working actively to prevent such behaviour by all
categories of personnel. In that connection, Norwegian
military authorities enforce a zero-tolerance policy
regarding the purchase of sexual services, which
applies to all military personnel serving abroad. The
ultimate aim of our efforts should be to instil zero-
tolerance on an international level based on the

06-6406]
standards in the Secretary General's bulletin on sexual
exploitation and abuse (ST/SGB/2003/13).

Armed conflicts are generally characterized by
grave and systematic human rights abuses, impunity
and absence of accountability. Whether we are able to
end impunity will strongly influence how we are able
to prevent future conflicts. Transitional justice that
ensures accountability, serves justice and achieves
reconciliation is a prerequisite in this regard.

Norway wants to pay tribute to the courageous
human rights defenders, be they journalists, lawyers,
staff of human rights non-governmental organizations
or others, who every day risk their lives and security
for the lives and freedom of others. Their cause should
be ours. We need their eyes, ears and hearts even more
during armed conflicts and in volatile phases of
transition.

Finally, we would like to express our thanks to
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his active
engagement in the issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflict, including today's briefing to the
Council.

