Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General and
the Vice-President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross for their contributions to this important
public debate that the Uruguayan presidency had the
excellent idea of organizing. I would also like to thank
Ms. Eveline Rooijmans of Oxfam for her briefing,
which has informed our debate.

Luxembourg associates itself fully with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union,
as well as that by the representative of Switzerland
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the Protection of
Civilians in Armed Conflict.

Allow me now to highlight a few points in my
national capacity.

To say that international humanitarian law is not
fully respected in the majority of armed conflicts that
we see around the world is an understatement. The
regularity with which it is being trampled on is a matter
of grave concern. The disdain for the protection of
civilian populations - despite the fact that this is at
the very heart of international humanitarian law - is
an affront to our conscience. But civilians are not only
deprived of their right to be protected. It is much worse
than that: in the conflicts that we see around the world,
civilians are often deliberately targeted in order to
spread terror and force entire populations to leave their
homes.

For nearly five years, the conflict in Syria has
demonstrated in all its cruelty the kind of violations to
which civilian populations can be subject to. On the one
hand, they are trapped between Government forces,
who do not hesitate to indiscriminately bomb densely
populated areas, schools and hospitals, to use barrel
bombs and to try to vanquish besieged cities through
famine, as the images of Madaya bear witness to so
very painfully and, on the other hand, by extremist
bloodthirsty groups like Daesh, which have sprung
up in the course of the conflict and which attach no
value to human life. About two years ago, the Security
Council demanded in resolution 2139 (2014) that all
sieges be immediately lifted; it demanded rapid, secure
and free access to all humanitarian agencies; it recalled
that to use starvation against civilians as a method of
war is prohibited by international humanitarian law.
Alas, almost 400,000 Syrians still live in besieged
areas, over 4.5 million people live in areas difficult to
access and 13.5 million people in Syria are in need of
humanitarian assistance. This should not continue; this
cannot continue.

We all agree that the best way to protect civilians
is to do everything possible to prevent a conflict from
erupting. It is therefore essential that the Security
Council should make use of all the tools at its disposal
in the area of prevention. Timely information should
be provided to the Council by the Secretary-General,
by the Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and the Responsibility to Protect, by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and her
colleague, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, in line with
Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Human Rights Up Front initiative. All that is extremely
important.

Another key element should be the constant
streamlining of peace operations. We hope that
the review initiated by the Secretary-General will
contribute to strengthening the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping missions, whose role in
protecting civilians is essential. At the same time, a
zero-tolerance policy should be implemented. Troop-
contributing countries have an important role to play
in ensuring that their personnel understand their
responsibility in terms of protecting civilians and that
they are properly trained for that task. In that context,
we commend the Kigali Principles on the Protection of
Civilians, established in May 2015.

Finally, as we have said more than once in the
Chamber, we must bring to justice those who have
committed the worst types of crimes against civilians.
The fight against impunity must be at the very heart
of our efforts in order to redress past wrongs and to
prevent future atrocities.

The first World Humanitarian Summit, to be held in
May in Istanbul, will be an opportunity to reaffirm our
commitment to international humanitarian law and to
contribute to strengthening the protection of civilians.
Let us take full advantage of that opportunity.

