Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
promise that I shall keep within the five-minute time
limit allotted to each speaker, even if that should mean
stopping in the middle of my statement.

I wish to raise a number of issues in my comments
on the progress report of the Secretary-General on the
Security Council mission to West Africa.

First, increasing the capacities of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) is a
cornerstone of the regional approach to peace and
security in that region. There is no doubt that
ECOWAS has proven in recent years to be a model for
African capacities in consolidating and maintaining
peace in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia, despite its limited logistical and material
resources.

We fully agree with the assessment contained in
the Secretary-General's report that we must find a
formula for overcoming the obstacles to preventing and
settling armed conflict and maintaining peace. In that
regard, we look forward to the recommendations to be
submitted by the joint United Nations Development
Programme/United Nations Office for West Africa/
European Commission mission on the structural and
technical needs and financial requirements of peace-
building and peacekeeping in West Africa.

I agree with the Secretary-General's report's
assessment of the key role of the circulation of small
arms and light weapons in fuelling conflict in West
Africa. We hope in that respect that we will find a
framework for cooperation and coordination between
all the United Nations regional partners and arms
producers and exporters so that agreement can be
reached on effective steps to stem the spread of such
weapons, in accordance with the Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, and
on the moratorium adopted by ECOWAS in 1998.

The current trend of coordinating the activities of
the United Nations peacekeeping Missions in Sierra
Leone, Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire and of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau deserves our encouragement.

The regional approach to consolidating peace and
security in West Africa requires global action that
transcends the borders of any one State, above all with
respect to the circulation of small arms and light
weapons; the return of displaced persons and refugees;
the phenomenon of mercenaries; and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes for
former combatants. In that regard, the drawdown of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone is critical. It
must be gradual and pegged to a careful evaluation and
follow-up of the progress achieved in Liberia, given
the interlinkage of the situations in the two countries.

Furthermore, in addressing issues of peace and
security, we should emphasize the multidimensional
and indivisible nature of peace. The security approach
is only one of its important elements and we must
therefore give due priority to the human, economic and
social aspects of peace. Regional and international
peacekeeping efforts in any given region of Africa
should be supported by corresponding efforts to
consolidate peace, in cooperation with the United
Nations, the donor community and the international
financial community, especially in the areas of
reconstruction, rehabilitation and financial and
technical support for economic and social development
programmes. We cherish the hope that the forthcoming
conference for the rebuilding of Liberia will serve as a
model for the international community's peace-
building activities.

