Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Thank you, Madam
President, for convening this meeting on the situation
in Ukraine. It shows the seriousness of the situation
and the commitment of the Security Council in the
quest for a diplomatic solution to the crisis. I also thank
Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for their respective
briefings on the political, security and human rights
situation in Ukraine.

Rwanda is still concerned about the prevailing
rhetoric in Ukraine and the region and the continued
demonstrations and violence in the cities of eastern
Ukraine. Something needs to be done, and that begins
with a commitment from all parties, with a sense of
urgency, to resume dialogue, in order to avoid further
escalation of the situation.

We continue to commend the role of the United
Nations in that regard. We look forward to the visit of
the Secretary-General to the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, scheduled for tomorrow, 20 March, and we
hope that his visit will help all the parties involved and
regional organizations to find a political and diplomatic
solution that will benefit Ukrainians and all the peoples
of the region. We welcome the deployment of a United
Nations human rights monitoring team in Ukraine, and
we count on all stakeholders to extend full cooperation
to the team. We indeed believe that only an independent
body will be able to objectively establish the facts on
alleged human rights violations.

Rwanda has been calling for constructive efforts to
de-escalate the situation, and we continue to advocate for
a political and diplomatic solution to the conflict, with
the engagement ofthe United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the European
Union and the Russian Federation at the international
level, and for inclusive talks at the national level among
all Ukrainian parties that ensure equal participation
by all communities in the country while protecting
minorities. In the meantime, we call on all Ukrainian
parties to respect the rule of law and exercise maximum
restraint. We urge the regional and international actors
to avoid any diplomatic, economic, political or even
military move that would further escalate the situation.

In conclusion, let me stress that the Security
Council, which is the world's only body in charge of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must work towards restoring its own unity, in order to
be able to defend the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of a United Nations State Member
while addressing the interests of all the countries ofthe
region.

