Mr. Jallow (Gambia): I would first of all like to join
my colleagues who have already spoken in congratulating
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also wish to thank you and all the
members of this body for kindly facilitating my
delegation's participation in the consideration of this
important agenda item, on the situation in Liberia, at this
open meeting. Under your wise guidance and competent
leadership, I have no doubt that our deliberations will yield
fruitful results.

I would also like to express my delegation's
appreciation for the Council's previous expression of
support for the people of Liberia and its recognition of the
useful role the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has been playing in finding a just,
peaceful and lasting solution to the Liberian conflict. The
Council's support is a great source of encouragement to
Liberians in particular, and all Africans in general, in their
resolute effort to resolve the problem in Liberia and its
attendant human sufferings and material damage.

I would also like to extend my delegation's sincere
thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
now-familiar request to the international community for
humanitarian assistance to Liberia. This gesture and other
commitments of the United Nations to Liberia and its
rehabilitation process strike a deep chord of gratitude in our
hearts, and we wholeheartedly wish to express our thanks
to all those who have been contributing financially and
materially to this noble and humane objective.

In the same vein, I would like to convey my
delegation's sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the excellent report now before the Security Council.

It is gratifying to note that the situation in Liberia is
beginning to improve once more, following the recent
regrettable setbacks in the peace process. The incident at
Tubmanburg dealt a serious blow to the peace process.
These incidents or setbacks notwithstanding, the Abuja
Agreement is generally holding, with every effort being
made for its continued implementation. This is an
encouraging sign for the international community, and
therefore calls for renewed and redoubled support and
assistance. In particular, there is a great need to
strengthen and continue the peace process in Liberia by
maintaining the presence of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) and by providing greater
financial and material resources to ensure a sustained
programme of national recovery and reconstruction.

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General,
which my delegation fully supports, we note that the
Secretary-General addresses a number of serious issues
relating to the peace process and to the need to keep it
constantly on track. The general picture that emerges
from this report shows that all is not lost. The various
organs necessary for implementing the Abuja Agreement
are in place and functioning. Socio-economic activities are
going on, and it is noted that many United Nations
agencies and non-govemmental organizations are
continuing their professional and humanitarian activities
in Liberia.

My delegation also notes the ongoing efforts to stem
the spreading tide of military clashes and other violations
of the Abuja Agreement, and violations of the human
rights of civilians. In this connection, my delegation calls
on the recalcitrant local warlords to pledge once more
their commitment to the peace process and strict
adherence to its various provisions ensuring progress
towards general elections in August this year.

Attainment of the goals of the Abuja Agreement
requires that we support the recommendations made by
the Secretary-General. The Gambia supports the
Secretary-General's recommendations, contained in
paragraph 45 of his report (S/1996/47), to extend the
mandate of UNOMIL for a period of four months, until
31 May 1996, and to complete the full deployment of the
Mission. My delegation would also like to echo the
Secretary-General' s appeal to the international community
to reconsider and increase its current level of support to
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), and to
ensure that the necessary logistical assistance is provided
to enable it to carry out its demanding responsibilities in
Liberia.

 

It is fitting at this stage to pay tribute to ECOMOG for
its heroic work in Liberia and to extend our deepest
condolences to the families of all its members who have
been killed in the line of duty. This is a noble sacrifice that
is not lost on us, and to which we pay due tribute. We also
express our thanks and our heartfelt sympathy to all United
Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations that
have suffered various setbacks, some of them tragic, in the
execution of their onerous duties in Liberia. We sympathize
with the families of those civilians who have been killed.

Lastly, my delegation wishes to express solidarity with
the people of Liberia and to assure them of the Gambia's
continued support and assistance.

