Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the President for her capable leadership
and presidency of the Council this month. I would
also like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.

I am pleased to be addressing the Council today on
behalf of my own country, Jordan, and of the Group of
Arab States, since Jordan is currently presiding over
the twenty-eighth session of the Arab Summit.

Today's open debate is taking place in the wake of
the holding at the end of last month in Amman of the
Arab Summit, which released a message of peace that
stresses that Arabs want only peace and a settlement
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict as outlined in the
Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by the Arab groups
at the Beirut Summit of 2002 and supported by the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation. It remains the
best and most comprehensive plan for achieving a
historic reconciliation between the two countries based
on Israel's withdrawal from all the occupied Arab and
Palestinian territories to the lines of 4 June 1967. It
addresses all the final-status issues and can help to
ensure stability in the Arab world. The message of the
Summit is another piece of proof that Arabs believe in
comprehensive and lasting peace as a strategic solution.
It should be met with a genuine expression of a desire
for peace on the part of Israel, the occupying Power.

We would like to emphasize our support for the
outcomes of the Middle East Peace Conference, held
in Paris on 15 January, which renewed the international
community's commitment to a two-State solution as
the only way to achieve a lasting peace. We underline
our total rejection of unilateral Israeli measures aimed
at altering the reality on the ground and ending the
possibility of a two-State solution. We call on Israel
to implement the various legitimate international
instruments, of which the most recent is resolution 2334
(2016), which calls for halting all settlement activities
and ensuring peace between Palestinians and Israelis.

The international community must realize that
the region will never know peace and stability until
the Israeli occupation is ended and the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people - to establish an
independent, sovereign and viable State on Palestinian
national soil within the borders of4 June 1967 and with
East Jerusalem as its capital - are met. The Palestinian
cause is key to stability in the region and beyond, and
ending the injustices that have been inflicted on our
brotherly people of Palestine continues to be a global
moral obligation. We emphasize our rejection of all of
Israel's violations and the steps it has taken to change
the historical and legal situation in East Jerusalem,
as well as in Christian and Muslim holy places in
occupied Jerusalem.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is the Custodian
and sponsor of Muslim and Christian holy places
in East Jerusalem, and we will therefore continue to
shoulder our historical and religious responsibility for
them, especially the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. From this Chamber, we call for the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions
on Jerusalem, especially resolutions 252 (1968), 267
(1969), 465 (1980) and 478 (1980), which deem null
and void all Israeli steps taken to change the status
and identity of East Jerusalem. We urge the States of
the world not to move their embassies to Jerusalem
or acknowledge it as the capital of Israel, because
imposing a new geopolitical reality on Jerusalem would
have enormous repercussions for the effort to achieve
peace and put the region at risk of an explosion that
would have unpredictable consequences.

The current situation in Syria cannot take any
more postponements and crisis management. It is
high time that we took wise decisions and established
implementable common frameworks that in turn reflect
the will of the States and peoples of the region to reach
lasting and comprehensive solutions to the crisis. We
therefore emphasize once again the principled position
we have held since the start of the Syrian crisis,
which is that only a political settlement that meets the
Syrian people's aspirations and protects the country's
sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity can ensure a
prosperous and stable future for Syria.

We should continue to move forward with the
Geneva negotiations, based on the Geneva communique
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in order to start making
the four baskets of the transitional political process
a reality on the ground. We would like to emphasize
the importance of the Astana talks in ensuring a
comprehensive ceasefire in Syria. We also want to urge
the international community to share the burden being
carried by the States that are hosting Syrian refugees,
especially Syria's neighbours, by increasing financial
support to them so that they can continue to provide
the services that refugees need, such as training them
and teaching them skills so that they can contribute
effectively to Syria's reconstruction when the conflict
is over.

We stress our full support to the brotherly country
of Iraq in its efforts to eradicate terrorist gangs and
liberate Mosul from the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. We hope that the international community
continues to support Iraq in its efforts to enable stability
to take hold in its liberated areas and achieve national
reconciliation through an inclusive political process that
leaves no one behind. We also support the efforts of the
Arab coalition in support of legitimacy in Yemen to end
the crisis in that country, based on the Gulf Initiative
and its implementation mechanisms, the outcomes of
the national dialogue conference and resolution 2216
(2015). It is essential that security and political stability
be achieved in Libya and its legitimate institutions given
support. And we emphasize our support to Somalia in
its efforts to rebuild and combat terrorism.

We are deeply concerned about the growing
phenomenon of Islamophobia and the attempts to link
tolerant Islam to terrorism. We warn that such attempts
only serve the terrorist organizations and their lies,
which have nothing to do with Islam and its tolerance.
Terrorism is a scourge that must be uprooted through
an inclusive approach in order to protect our people,
defend our security and ensure respect for life.

We want to emphasize that we are making efforts
to build good-neighbourly and cooperative relations
with the States neighbouring the Arab world. However,
we reject any attempt to intervene in our internal
affairs and condemn any attempt to destabilize our
region, feed sectarian strife and fuel conflicts. Those
practices violate good-neighbourliness, the rules of
international relations, the provisions of international
law, and the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. True progress in solving the crisis
and ensuring security in the region hinges strongly on
sustainable development, and serious reforms must
be undertaken to promote education, human rights,
citizenship, equality and women's empowerment.

If we succeed in those efforts and ensure
cooperation among the various spheres, namely,
security, sustainable development and human rights,
that will definitely shield our society against racial
and discriminatory practices and meet the aspirations
of our people to live in a secure and stable region. We
continue to stress certain factors, above all, empowering
youth, ensuring their education, providing them with
skills and increasing their self-confidence so that they
become positive actors in their society and contribute to
solving conflicts and to protecting and building peace,
instead of being attracted by obscurantist and extremist
ideologies. We cannot deny that those ideologies target
our youth, who are the cornerstone of our present
and future.
In conclusion, I thank and commend our
international partners for their support in ensuring
peace and security in the Middle East. We stand ready
to continue to work in cooperation with those who seek
to find effective solutions to the crisis and to build on
our common ground through more coordinated and
collective efforts, which should meet our common
objectives and interests to achieve stability, security
and prosperity in the Middle East.

