The President: I welcome to the Security Council
once more our distinguished, dare I say beloved, Secretary-
General, Kofi Annan, who will be leaving in about two
hours for Moscow on a trip of great importance. We wish
him well and thank him for joining us at this point in the
process, and we applaud again his enormous efforts to
promote the cause of peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the important other issues he will take up
when he visits Moscow.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
to the heads of State of Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, Rwanda,
Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and to the Foreign
Ministers of Namibia, South Africa, Burundi, Canada
and the United States, the Vice-Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium, the Minister
Delegate for Cooperation and Francophonie of France,
the Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom, and the Minister of
Armed Forces of Mali, who participated in its meeting
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo on 24
January 2000. The Council also expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the
representative of the Chairman of the OAU, and the
OAU-nominated Facilitator of the Congolese national
dialogue. Their presence and their statements attest to
their renewed commitment to the Lusaka Ceasefire

...-J "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv
 

Agreement (S/ 1999/815) and to the search for a
durable peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. Their presence in New York
also reinforces the progress made at the Maputo
Summit of 16 January 2000 and the Harare meeting
of the Political Committee of 18 January 2000. The
Council expects that this progress will continue at
the next Political Committee Meeting and Summit of
the Signatories to the Agreement.

"The Security Council urges all the parties to
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to build on the
momentum of these meetings in order to create and
sustain the climate necessary for the full
implementation of the Agreement. It underlines the
importance of a revised implementation calendar for
the full and effective implementation of the tasks in
the Agreement.

"The Security Council reaffirms the territorial
integrity and national sovereignty of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including over its natural
resources, in accordance with the principles of the
Charters of the United Nations and the OAU. In this
regard, it reiterates its call for the immediate
cessation of hostilities and the orderly withdrawal of
all foreign forces from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in accordance
with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. The Council
reaffirms its support for the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement and also reaffirms its resolutions 1234
(1999) of 9 April 1999, 1258 (1999) of 6 August
1999, 1273 (1999) of 5 November 1999 and 1279
(1999) of 30 November 1999.

"The Security Council welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General of 17 January 2000
(S/2000/30). The Council expresses its determination
to support the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. Accordingly, it has now begun
consideration of a resolution authorizing the
expansion of the present mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) along the lines
recommended by the Secretary-General in that
report. It expresses its intention to act promptly on
this basis. It expresses its intention to consider at the
appropriate time preparations for an additional phase
of United Nations deployment and further action. It
welcomes the statements by the heads of State and
delegation in support of the proposals of the
Secretary-General. The Council welcomes the arrival
 

of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, expresses
its support for his efforts, and urges all parties to
provide him with the assistance and cooperation he
will require to carry out his functions.

"The Security Council supports the establishment
of a coordinated MONUC/Joint Military Commission
(JMC) structure with co-located headquarters and joint
support arrangements. The Council believes this is a
Vital step in enhancing the ability of the United
Nations to support the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
In this regard, the Council urges Member States and
donor organizations to continue to provide assistance
to the JMC.

"The Security Council underlines the absolute
necessity of security and access for United Nations
personnel deployed in support of the Lusaka process,
and stresses that such a climate of cooperation is an
essential prerequisite for the successful implementation
of the mandate of MONUC in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council calls on all
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to
provide assurances of safety, security and freedom of
movement of United Nations and associated personnel,
and in this regard attaches importance to the statement
by the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo on the security of MONUC and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council stresses the importance of
the national dialogue as called for in the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, and affirms that it must be an
open, inclusive and democratic process conducted
independently by the Congolese people under the
established facilitation. It further affirms that the
national dialogue is the best means for all Congolese
parties to address the political future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
designation of the former President of Botswana, Sir
Ketumile Masire, as the Facilitator of the national
dialogue as provided for by the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement, and calls on Member States to provide
full financial and other support to his efforts and the
process as a whole. The Council welcomes the
declared readiness of the President of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to begin the national dialogue,
and to guarantee the security of all participants.

...-J "Mu-MMJ A-tuvv

 
"The Security Council stresses the need for the
continued operation of United Nations and other
agencies' humanitarian relief operations and human
rights promotion and monitoring under acceptable
conditions of security, freedom of movement, and
access to affected areas. The Council expresses its
serious concern over the humanitarian situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the
shortfall in responses to the United Nations
consolidated humanitarian appeal. It therefore urges
Member States and donor organizations to make
available the necessary funds to carry out urgent
humanitarian operations in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
that the presence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo of non-signatory armed groups that have yet
to be demobilized constitutes a threat to the Lusaka
process. The Council recognizes that disarmament,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration
(DDRR) are among the fundamental objectives of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.

"The Council underlines that a credible plan for
DDRR must be based on an agreed and
comprehensive set of principles.

"The Security Council expresses deep concern
over the illicit flow of arms into the region, and
calls upon all concerned to halt such flows.

"The Security Council values the continuing
leadership of the peace process by the President of
Zambia and the Vital contribution of the Southern
African Development Community through its
Chairman, the President of Mozambique. It also
expresses its appreciation to the current Chairman of
the OAU, the President of Algeria, and to the
Secretary-General of the OAU for the organization's
Vital role in the Lusaka process. It urges them to
continue their essential efforts in close cooperation
with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/2.

The next open meeting of the Security Council on
Africa will be on Monday, 31 January. President Chiluba
is going to remain in New York to make a final statement
 

 

 

of a comprehensive nature, going beyond the issues of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We invite other

speakers to take part. I thank all those who have
participated. and we look forward to turning the gavel
over to our friends from Argentina next Tuesday.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.
