Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (Spoke in French): I
thank the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the presentation
of her twentieth report on the situation in Darfur and
the judicial proceedings in progress.

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
the referral to the International Criminal Court by
the Security Council. That, however, is no cause for
celebration. Indeed, the arrest warrants issued by the
ICC against five individuals accused of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and, for one of them, genocide,
have still not been executed. It is incumbent upon the
Government of the Sudan in the first instance to comply
with resolution 1593 (2005) and fully implement the
arrest warrants. It continues to refuse to do so and it
has failed to take action to fight effectively against
impunity at the national level. That is unacceptable.

It is also with great concern that we note the
cases of non-cooperation with the Court and the fact
that the President of the Sudan, Omer Al-Bashir,
continues to make trips to the region. We hope that the
Security Council will be able to respond to the formal
communications that the Court addressed to it to report
these cases of non-cooperation. The Security Council
must ensure the effective monitoring of cases that it has
referred to the ICC. It is a question of credibility and
effectiveness.

The security and humanitarian situation in Darfur
has significantly deteriorated in 2014. The settlement
of the crisis requires a political solution. The national
dialogue announced by the Sudanese President offers
an opportunity, provided that conditions conducive
to an inclusive dialogue are created. However, that is
hardly the case now.

Ms. Bensouda's report gives an insight into the
crimes perpetrated in Darfur - crimes that may fall
under the Rome Statute. For example, there are aerial
bombardments, attacks against civilians, humanitarian
actors and peacekeepers, as well as gender-based and
sexual violence against women and girls. We are very
concerned about the role of the Rapid Support Forces
who commit abuses with absolute impunity and in
whose ranks the presence of children has been noted.
We encourage the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC
to continue to closely monitor the situation in Darfur, to
gather information on the alleged crimes and to consider
the introduction of new investigations on the situation
in Darfur. We realize that this is not easy, given the lack
of cooperation of the Sudanese Government and the
inability of the ICC officials to travel to conflict zones.
We need to continue our discussions to find ways to
remedy this unacceptable situation.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian actors continue
to be denied access to conflict zones where people need
emergency assistance and where violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are being
committed. We deplore the fact that UNAMID has
still not got obtained free and unhindered access to the
village of Thabit, in North Darfur, which would have
allowed the Mission to verify the allegations of rape
committed against nearly 200 women and girls on 30 and
31 October. A thorough and impartial investigation into
those allegations to establish responsibility must be
undertaken.

Lastly, with regard to the alleged manipulation
of the information contained in UNAMID reports,
I recall that Luxembourg was among the Council
members that supported the ICC Prosecutor in June
when she proposed that the Secretary-General expedite
a comprehensive, independent and public inquiry to
shed light on those allegations. We note the conclusions
that the internal investigation team established by the
Secretary-General submitted to the Council. We hope
to have the comprehensive report as soon as possible.
Everything must be done to ensure that past mistakes
are not repeated. It is essential that the Security Council
and the ICC have the most complete and credible
information possible on the violence committed in
Darfur.

I will conclude by citing the conviction that
Luxembourg has consistently reaffirmed throughout its
mandate as an elected member of the Council. The time
is right to do so, while the Assembly of States Parties
to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
is taking place at United Nations Headquarters. It is
our conviction that the onus is on the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibilities to end impunity, including
by providing full support to the ICC. The fact that
the Security Council can refer situations to the ICC
makes it a key player in establishing responsibility. The
International Criminal Court needs the decisive support
of the Security Council to meet the needs of the many
victims of war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide. We must not forget that for those victims, the
International Criminal Court is often the only recourse
available to make their voices heard and to stand up for
their rights.

