Mr. Cohen (United States ofAmerica): I thank you,
Mr. President, and welcome you back to the Council.
It is excellent to have you with us today. I also thank
Under-Secretary-General Serpa Soares, Peter Maurer
and Professor Bellal for their briefings today. The
United States would like to recognize and commend
the vital role of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in promoting the protection of civilians.

Seven decades ago, with the horrors of the Second
World War still fresh, representatives from around the
world gathered in Geneva to try and change the way
wars were waged. Building on an existing framework
of law and war treaties, the resulting Geneva
Conventions enshrined formal legal rules to govern
the conduct of war. The Conventions have played a
significant role in shaping parties' behaviour on the
battlefield and improving protections for combatants
and civilians alike.

Today's briefing is an important opportunity to
reflect on the successes of the Geneva Conventions,
and to deepen and strengthen international compliance
with and enforcement of those obligations. Much has
changed in the past 70 years. New technologies have
emerged that allow for greater precision in many cases,
but also more deadly force. The rise of terrorist groups
like Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
has created new challenges as States work to defeat
enemies who abide by no rules whatsoever. Today,
the Geneva Conventions remain some of the very few
universally ratified international treaties. They are a
powerful articulation of international humanitarian law
and have become synonymous with ethical behaviour
In war.

As States Members of the United Nations, we have
several tools at our disposal to address violations of
international humanitarian law. In certain instances of
grave and systematic violations, war crimes tribunals
have been important tools to hold offenders accountable.
The United States is proud to have supported the
establishment of the tribunals for Cambodia, Rwanda,
Sierra Leone and the former Yugoslavia, as well as their
subsequent work to punish some of the worst offenders
of international humanitarian law.

In other cases, however, obstacles to accountability
remain. For the relevance of these Conventions to
endure into the future, compliance and accountability
are key. While Member States and parties to armed
conflict are ultimately responsible for adhering to their
international humanitarian law obligations, each of us
has an important role to play in calling out violations
and holding those responsible to account.

We continue to push for greater compliance with
the Geneva Conventions by other actors, and we are also
firmly committed to respecting our own obligations.
To this end, we support efforts to disseminate accurate
information about international humanitarian law
among all parties to conflicts. For example, the
training of United States military personnel includes
thorough coverage of international humanitarian law in
principle and practice. We also incorporate adherence
to international humanitarian law into United States
training for international military partners. This
includes peacekeeping predeployment training that we
offer for troop- and police-contributors supporting the
United Nations and regional peace operations.

We have made the protection of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, as well as humanitarian
personnel, locations and missions, a high priority in
conflict areas, and we know that effective protection
requires full adherence to international humanitarian
law by all parties to conflict.

The United States will continue our efforts to
respect and ensure respect for the Geneva Conventions.
We call on all Member States and the actors they
support to comply fully with their obligations and to
hold violators accountable.

