Mr. Giorgio (Eritrea): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Madam, on the United States
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April. I would like to thank the Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, His Excellency
Ambassador Kairat Umarov, for his briefing and for his
efforts to enhance constructive and genuine dialogue.
I would like to assure the Chair of my delegation's full
cooperation in the discharge of his responsibilities.

As a matter of coincidence, this open briefing of
the Security Council is taking place on the very date the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission gave its final
and binding ruling 15 years ago, on 13 April 2002. To
the regret of many who worked hard to realize peace,
Ethiopia to this date continues to occupy sovereign
Eritrean territory, including the town of Badme, in
violation of its treaty obligation and international law.
The hope of achieving peace and security for the people
of the region has been dashed, and the opportunity to
build a common front for common challenges has been
postponed indefinitely.

It would indeed be remiss of its duty in the
maintenance of international peace and security for
the Security Council to ignore the failure and refusal
by one of the parties to implement a mutual agreement
that it had solemnly signed, particularly when we recall
that the agreement was guaranteed and witnessed by
the United Nations, the African Union, the European
Union, the United States and Algeria.

The Security Council is actively seized at the
present time of all regional issues - including
the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia, Yemen and so
on - where intra-State or inter-State conflicts have or
continue to rage. But it continues to studiously avoid
the Eritrea/Ethiopia conflict. The Security Council
cannot continue its 15 years of inaction in the face of
destabilizing acts of occupation and aggression that
threaten regional peace and stability. This is not only
morally and legally unacceptable, but it is increasingly
evident that the simmering tension is untenable and
fraught with perilous escalation.

The sanctions regime that has been imposed on
Eritrea has entered its eigthth year. Its negative impact
on Eritrea and the Horn of Africa region cannot in any
way be minimized. Clearly, the time has come - in
fact, it is long overdue - to lift the sanctions on Eritrea.

In this regard, I would like to take this opportunity to
highlight few a facts:

First, the sanctions on Eritrea have never been
justified or motivated by a genuine desire to promote
regional peace and security. While their imposition
was unjustified, their continuation can be viewed only
as a desire to spread crises in a region that is already
suffering from conflicts. We need fewer conflicts,
not more.

Secondly, the two justifications for the imposition
of sanctions were Eritrea's alleged support to
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and its alleged refusal to resolve
its dispute with Djibouti. For four years, the Somalia-
Eritrea Monitoring Group has found no evidence of any
Eritrean wrongdoing in Somalia.

Thirdly, with respect to Djibouti, Eritrea remains
committed to the mediation of the State of Qatar, which
has resulted in the release of all Djiboutian prisoners
of war. The latest monitoring report made it clear that
all interlocutors only mention seven prisoners of war in
Eritrea. These are all accounted for - two escapees,
one who passed away and four who were released
through the efforts of Qatar. Eritrea has confirmed that
there are no more Djiboutian prisoners in its hands.
Moreover, Eritrea cannot be asked to second-guess the
whereabouts of persons missing in action, as claimed
by Djibouti. The burden of proof lies squarely on the
accuser, the Government of Djibouti. On its part,
Eritrea is committed to resolving any outstanding issue
with Djibouti under the mediation of Qatar.

Fourthly, failing to find substantive evidence to
continue the sanctions, some countries have resorted
to procedural pretexts by singularly and inordinately
focusing on the inability of the Monitoring Group to
visit Eritrea. It must be recalled here that the Monitoring
Group has actually visited Eritrea twice on previous
occasions. The Monitoring Group also maintains,
without any hindrance, extensive meetings and contacts
with relevant Eritrean officials. As Council members
are aware, the Monitoring Group has itself ascertained
the absence of any indication of Eritrea's support to
Al-Shabaab. In the circumstances, Eritrea does not see
any added value in a visit by the Monitoring Group to
the country. Eritrea's primary preoccupation is in fact
the public stance of certain countries that have openly
stated that they would not support the lifting of the
sanctions even if the Group were to visit Eritrea.

Eritrea wishes once again to reaffirm its commitment
to sustainable peace and cooperation in the region.
Eritrea will continue to make its positive contribution
to regional peace, stability and security in the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea area. In that connection, Eritrea
reiterates call on the Security Council to contribute
to regional peace, cooperation and amity by lifting
the unjustified sanctions and by ensuring Ethiopia's
withdrawal from sovereign Eritrean territory.

The meeting rose at 12.30 pm.
