Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

At the outset, I would like to convey the
Movement's appreciation to you, Mr. President, and
the Government of Nigeria for convening this open
debate on security sector reform (SSR). I also avail
myself of this opportunity to express my appreciation
to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-General
of the United Nations, for his report on the issue,
entitled "Securing States and societies: strengthening
the United Nations comprehensive support to security
sector reform" (S/20l3/480).

Since 2007, when the Security Council convened
its first open debate on the issue (see S/PV.5632),
many NAM. member States considered such debates
an opportunity for Council members and the wider
membership to articulate their views on the role the
United Nations should play in SSR. This is a critical
issue for all countries emerging from conflict,
particularly in Africa.

NAM. believes that today's debate is an integral
and essential part of a broader discussion about the
interlinkage among the concepts of peace, security
and development as mutually reinforcing factors,
as well about the complementarities among conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We hope
that our discussions here will provide guidance to the
United Nations on how to build institutional capacities
in States emerging from conflict as well as those in
transition.

The United Nations enjoys a comparative
multilateral advantage over other organizations. Due
to its universal legitimacy, it is uniquely positioned to
play a leading role in policy information and security
sector capacity-building and reform.

Taking into account the primary responsibility
and the sovereign right of any country concerned in
determining its national priorities in that regard, we
agree with the Secretary-General's report and the Notes
of the inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force
that national ownership "should form the cornerstone
of the United Nations approach to SSR". National
ownership and SSR tools adapted to each particular
country context must be key guiding principles
regarding the role of the United Nations in supporting
security sector capacity-building and reform.

The presidential statement adopted on 21 February
2007 (S/PRST/2007/3) also stresses the critical
importance of SSR in post-conflict environments and
underlines the sovereignty and primary responsibility
of the country concerned to determine the national
approach and priorities of SSR.

In August 2012, the Heads of State or Government
of the Non-Aligned Movement noted, in the final
document of their sixteenth Summit, held in Tehran,
the importance of SSR, among other important
components of United Nations peacekeeping in post-
conflict situations. They stressed that SSR should be
integrated in the broad framework of United Nations
rule-of-law activities, thus ensuring that SSR activities
and structures do not duplicate the work carried out in
the rule of law area. They reaffirmed that

"the development of a United Nations approach to
SSR must take place within the General Assembly,
and in accordance with the principle of national
ownership, and stressed that the formulation of
strategies to SSR, including its scope and mandate,
should be carried out through the intergovernmental
process and must be context specific".

They also emphasized that

"SSR should be undertaken at the request of the
country concerned, and underlined the primary
responsibility and the sovereign right of the country
concerned in determining its national priorities in
this regard."

As for the development of a United Nations
approach to SSR, the Non-Aligned Movement believes
that such development must take place in the General
Assembly to ensure that the formulation of SSR
strategies, including scope and mandate, is carried out
through the widest possible intergovernmental process.
We need thorough discussions in the General Assembly
and in the Economic and Social Council to allow for the
full participation of the United Nations membership at
large in such an important and sensitive issue.

The Peacebuilding Commission is also in a good
position to coordinate the activities of the different
organs of the United Nations system in that regard,
particularly in light of the experience that the
Commission has gained through its engagement. It
is of equal importance that the recipient country be
fully in charge of formulating the strategy, identifying
gaps, needs and areas of priority and coordinating
international support.

