Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my thanks for the presentation of the
Secretary-General's report on Timor-Leste
(S/2004/888) by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, and we
thank him for his work and the work of his team.

We should like to highlight the progress achieved
in key areas - particularly the achievements of the
Timorese Government - during this consolidation
phase. We are pleased that the Government has
officially assumed the responsibility for the country's
internal and external security, that it has adopted
various basic laws and that it has made progress in the
electoral field.

Notwithstanding that optimistic scenario, we
share the assessment of the Secretary-General that
Timor-Leste is not yet self-sufficient enough for the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) to complete its work. In that connection,
we firmly believe that we cannot jeopardize everything
that has been accomplished and that a final six-month
extension is an appropriate proposal. In that regard, we
support the draft resolution prepared by the delegation
of Brazil, which has been virtually agreed upon.

The information provided by the technical
assessment mission that visited Timor-Leste in October
is valuable. One can see that the structure and the
development of the public administration still have
obvious needs that must be met. Timor-Leste needs
officials who are well prepared and who are examples
of honesty and probity. We share the concern about the
lengthy delays in the administration of justice and the
shortcomings in the area of human rights; thus we
agree on the need to promote capacities in that sphere.
Therefore, the contribution that UNMISET can
continue to make to the establishment of the judicial
system is essential during this next phase.

Another element central to the achievement of
real stability in Timor-Leste is economic development
that will enable the country to overcome poverty,
generate jobs and improve the people's social well-
being. In that connection, we welcome the progress
made in exploiting the country's mineral resources.
Likewise, we highlight the ongoing assistance
programmes being carried out, not only by the United
Nations, but also by the Bretton Woods institutions and
various donor countries.

We also welcome Timor-Leste's excellent
relations with its neighbours in the area. In particular,
we highlight the excellent cooperation between Timor-
Leste and Indonesia. We hope that they will soon arrive
at an agreement on delineation of the border and that
they will continue to make progress in various areas
and in their bilateral relations. In addition, it is
essential that those responsible for the grave crimes
committed in 1999 pay for their actions.

In the area of human rights, we welcome the
assistance provided by UNMISET through the Serious
Crimes Unit in seeking to solve the crimes committed
in 1999, and we highlight its efforts to complete its
investigations this month. We therefore support the
strategy to settle by May 2005 all arrest warrants
against persons who have been indicted, but whose
cases have not yet been brought before the Court. As
the Secretary-General's report points out, we must take
into consideration the probability that that task will not
be concluded by the date envisaged and therefore that
additional measures may need to be undertaken in the
future. For that reason, we will consider with interest
any proposals that the Secretary-General might make
in that important area.

With regard to the programme's other elements,
we particularly value the work being carried out by the
national police throughout the country. We also
highlight the work being done by UNMISET's police
component to train, instruct and supervise Timor-
Leste's national police. Lastly, with respect to
maintaining security, we are pleased that the situation
in the country has been quite calm, although we cannot
ignore certain sources of instability, which are related
to contraband, illegal trade and illegal border
crossings. That was addressed in resolution 1543
(2004).

Finally, we recognize the valuable work being
done by other actors - particularly regional actors -
and by donors in the international community, who
continue to demonstrate a strong commitment to
Timor-Leste. Chile - which has been cooperating with
Timor-Leste from the outset and has even provided
troops, helicopters and other equipment in the past -
remains committed to Timor-Leste and wants this
young country ultimately to be an international
example of success and hope.

