Mr. Serrano: Let me start, Madam President, by
thanking you for inviting the European Union (EU) to
participate in this debate on a topic that remains high
on its agenda.

The candidate countries of Turkey, Croatia and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Ukraine and Georgia,
align themselves with this declaration.

I also wish to thank the Chairs of the Committees
established under resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004) for their timely and informative
briefings and to commend them for their excellent
work, as well as for the work carried out by the
respective expert groups.

In the interest of time, allow me to summarize the
main points of the EU statement, the written version of
which is being circulated.

The failed terrorist attack in New York two weeks
ago is only the latest reminder of the fact that
international terrorism continues to be one of the most
serious threats of our time.
The European Union is fully committed to
implementing and improving the multilateral counter-
terrorism framework. However, the effectiveness of our
measures depends on their credibility and perceived
legitimacy, and procedures need to be fair and clear. The
adoption of resolution 1904 (2009) was a significant
step forward in that regard. Providing publicly available
narrative summaries of reasons for listing is one
important element of due process. The Committee
is doing an excellent job in its qualitative review of the
list - to be completed by the end of June - which will
provide as accurate a consolidated version as possible.

The establishment of the office of an eminent,
independent and impartial ombudsperson for de-listing
requests is also a very important development. We
hope that a candidate who fulfils the criteria set out in
resolution 1904 (2009) may soon be appointed.

For its part, the European Union has also recently
revised its procedures to make them fairer and clearer
and to ensure respect for the fundamental rights of
persons affected by targeted measures, in response to
pertinent rulings by the European Court of Justice.
That will continue to require reinforced collaboration
between the European Union and the United Nations,
primarily with the 1267 Committee. The European
Union remains committed to further enhancing the
transparency and fairness of United Nations
procedures. We trust that further changes will be
considered where necessary.

In relation to the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001), excellent work has been carried out by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) to monitor compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). Another
welcome development is the enhanced cooperation
between the CTC and the relevant bodies in the United
Nations system and other international organizations -
for example the Council of Europe - especially on the
promotion and protection of human rights in the context
of the fight against terrorism.

CTED must be commended for facilitating the
provision of technical assistance and on its intention to
undertake a permanent dialogue between donor States
and recipients to achieve greater efficiency. The recent
discussions in the CTC in areas such as mutual legal
assistance and effective judicial cooperation have been
very productive and should be fully reflected when
CTED's mandate is renewed later this year.
The European Union fully supports the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its efforts to create monitoring mechanisms
to ensure the universal implementation of the
resolution. Resolution 1540 (2004) gives a strong legal
basis to the EU's diplomatic and financial efforts to
tackle proliferation by explicitly addressing illicit
trafficking and procurement networks and, in
particular, the involvement of non-State actors,
including terrorists, in the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction technology. The European Union
strategy against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction of 2003 was complemented in 2008 by the
EU New Lines for Action, which focuses on very
concrete action-oriented projects to be undertaken by
the end of 2010.

The European Union has been active in ensuring
the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) both
internally - for instance, through regular updates of
its regulation on export controls on dual-use goods -
and externally by assisting others' efforts in
implementing resolution 1540 (2004). Beyond export
controls, the European Union will spend around
€300 million on chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear cooperation with third countries in the period
2007 to 2013. Our objective is to develop a strong
regional approach, in line with requirements of
resolution 1540 (2004), through the creation of
regional centres of excellence in those areas in
partnership with key regions such as the Middle East,
South East Asia and parts ofAfrica.

Continued cooperation between the Committee
and Member States, as well as among Member States
themselves, will be necessary in order to overcome the
remaining difficulties in the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). In that context, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 1810 (2008) and the
comprehensive review process that took place last year.
We fully support the clearing-house role of the 1540
Committee in matching assistance requests and offers.

Let me conclude by commending once again the
crucial and complex work of these three specialized
Committees to prevent and combat terrorism in all its
forms. The European Union hopes that the three
Committees will continue their important endeavours
to effectively tackle terrorist threats.

