Mr. MacKay (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for the preparation of his
progress report (S/2004/888) and Mr. Hasegawa for his
briefing and presentation earlier in the meeting.

Once again, we commend the progress that has
been made in Timor-Leste through the work of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), the Government of Timor-Leste and the
commitment of international donors who continue to
support those efforts. In particular, we congratulate the
Government of Timor-Leste for its continuing
determination in addressing the significant challenges
it faces as a small emerging nation, with limited
resources and capacity.

Looking at the key achievements over the past
few months, we are pleased to note the progress made
in developing key State institutions and security
agencies, including the adoption of important
legislation. We are also pleased to note that good
progress has been made in respect to delineating the
land border between Timor-Leste and Indonesia, and
we look forward to final agreement being reached on
that issue in the near future. Similarly, we look forward
to further positive negotiations between Timor-Leste
and Australia regarding the maritime boundary.

Looking forward, we fully support the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the current objectives,
configuration and mandate of UNMISET should be
continued as currently structured until May 2005. We
see the coming months as a consolidation and
transition phase. As identified in the Secretary-
General's report, it will be necessary for UNMISET to
ensure that the remaining time is well used, in order to
ensure a smooth handover of remaining functions to
the Government of Timor-Leste and, where
appropriate, to ensure that the necessary assistance is
available from bilateral and multilateral partners.

As part of this transition strategy, we hope that
the Security Council, together with United Nations
agencies and donors, will give particular thought to the
shape of support that will be required when UNMISET
necessarily comes to an end. It is of paramount
importance that we have in place a robust strategy to
ensure a successful transition from conflict resolution
and peacekeeping to consolidation and nation-building.
Like others, we are pleased to note that, following the
last meeting of the Security Council, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General constituted
several working groups bringing together all parties,
including the Government of Timor-Leste, UNMISET,
United Nations agencies, the Bretton Woods
institutions, non-governmental organizations and donor
partners to examine the steps necessary to manage the
transition. We look forward to continued cooperation
and strategizing along those lines.

I would also like to highlight that a transition
strategy will be very important in the justice sector.
New Zealand remains a strong supporter of the work of
the Serious Crimes Unit and of the Special Panels,
which are essential components of an internationally
supported process to see justice served for crimes
committed in East Timor in 1999. Those responsible
for crimes committed in 1999 must be brought to
justice in a manner that is consistent with the standards
of international law. The international community
cannot tolerate an environment of impunity. New
Zealand therefore welcomes all efforts to continue to
address that issue, and we look forward to the
Secretary-General's thoughts on the most effective
arrangement to address the challenges involved.

In conclusion, Timor-Leste has made great
strides. As I said at the beginning of my statement, we
congratulate the country's Government for its
determined efforts as a young nation. As we move into
a new phase of consolidation and transition, continued
support from the international community - and
particularly from the United Nations - will be vital
for Timor-Leste's future.

