Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this open debate of the
Security Council on small arms and for allowing us to
speak so early in the afternoon.

India is particularly aware of the complexity and
the lethality of the problems associated with the
accumulation, dispersal and transfer of illicit small
arms and light weapons. As we have stated in the past,
the trade in small arms is licit only if their export and
import take place through official, legal channels.
Arms exported by a Government that violates none of
its own laws are nevertheless illicit if they are sent to
non-State actors in another country, bypassing or
subverting laws there.

During the past decade, illicit weapons have been
the weapons of choice in an overwhelming number of
major conflicts. Annually, small arms claim between
300,000 and 500,000 lives, of which the overwhelming
percentage are civilian lives - many of those the lives
of women and children. In India, we are particularly
conscious of the lethality of such weapons. Over the
past two decades, more than 35,000 innocent people
have fallen victim to the depredations of terrorists
using illicit weapons. The seizures of small arms and
explosives by the Government of India make it
abundantly clear to us that that illicit pool is of a
magnitude and of a sophistication that require urgent
and serious attention on the part of all law-abiding
societies.

In his report on the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons in all its aspects (A/57/160), the
Secretary-General has provided an overview of the
activities undertaken under the auspices of the United
Nations to implement General Assembly resolution
56/24 V, adopted by the Assembly on 24 December
2001. That report, which covers the period from June
2001 to June 2002, includes actions taken to implement
the Programme of Action adopted at the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, held in New
York in July 2001.

India is privileged to be playing a leading role as
Chairman of the Group of Governmental Experts
established by the Secretary-General to examine the
feasibility of developing an international instrument to
enable States to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
The Group of Governmental Experts has held the first
of its three mandated sessions, and it has been able to
identify a number of elements of common
understanding, on which work will continue at its
forthcoming sessions. The Group will submit its
findings to the Secretary-General during the fifty-
eighth session of the General Assembly.

India welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2002/1053, which
reflects recent initiatives taken by the Security Council.
We were also pleased to hear the statement by Under-
Secretary-General J ayantha Dhanapala. The Secretary-
General's report identifies areas where further action
by the Council is required in addressing the global
problem of illicit small arms and light weapons. It
emphasizes the key role of the Council in preventing,
combating and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of
such weapons. In his report, the Secretary-General has
listed a number of recommendations based on
suggestions made by Member States. We find many of
them to be very useful. Some of them are directly
addressed to the Council. We trust that the Council will
take appropriate further action with respect to the
recommendations that are directly within its
competence. We also hope that the Council will
consider ways of enhancing its cooperation with the
General Assembly on these issues.

We note other initiatives taken, including the joint
initiative by France and Switzerland to define a
political arrangement on cooperation with regard to the
traceability of illicit small arms and light weapons, as
well as to the voluntary furnishing of information by
States on implementation of the agreed Programme of
Action. India fully supports the first step of developing
a comprehensive tracing system and enhancing
cooperation among States towards that end. In this
connection, we see the need to strengthen the
effectiveness of the Interpol Weapons and Explosives
Tracking System. We similarly recognize the role
played by the Coordinating Action on Small Arms
mechanism in highlighting how illicit small arms and
light weapons have actually prolonged conflicts and,
indeed, prevented the re-establishment of peace in
various conflict areas around the world.

A collective and cooperative initiative by the
international community needs the participation not
only of Governments, but also of concerned non-
governmental organizations and agencies and of
elements of civil society at large, in order to provide
the most effective framework to fight the scourge of
illicit small arms and light weapons. The Secretary-
General has commended not only the consolidation of
existing partnerships between States and civil society
organs around concrete actions, but also the emergence
of new partnerships.

The area of the linkages among the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, the illicit exploitation of
natural and other resources and the trade in narcotic
drugs is an important one. Over the past decade, the
Council has established embargoes to cut off the supply
of arms to non-State actors.

Where these have been bypassed, the Council has
authorized investigations which uncovered the criminal
networks established across continents which are being
used to sell diamonds and supply arms, as well as for
the export of drugs in furtherance of terrorist interests.
We would urge the Council to continue to take
initiatives to monitor relevant areas with regard to
embargoes and to tackle the problem in all its aspects.
The cooperation and sharing, among Member States
and among various bodies under the Council, of
information on arms traffickers that have violated
embargoes established by the Council would be a step
in building up a coordinated approach. This also
demands the attention of the Council, the General
Assembly and other relevant bodies of the United
Nations. For its part, the international community too
must generously support economic programmes of
rehabilitation to encourage the surrender of illegal
arms.

Perhaps only around 1 per cent of the global
supply of small arms is illicitly held, but that amounts
to more than six million weapons. That is an alarming
figure, considering that they are held by criminals,
terrorists, armed insurgents, secessionists and other
non-State actors. While three fourths of the global
trade in small arms is legal, illicit trade in weapons and
ammunition accounts for about $1.5 billion a year.

Further, small arms are now ever more easy to
use, lighter and more lethal, and their users need little
or no training to use them to devastating effect to their
societies and economies. Governments that desire to
protect their societies from this problem must take the
necessary national measures to introduce and monitor
vigorous standards and conditions on private holdings
of such weapons. All responsible States must undertake
an obligation not to supply such weapons to non-State
actors. Manufacturers and exporters should be subject
to the strictest controls. There should be the strictest
insistence on authenticated end-user certificates to
ensure effective control over the export and transit of
such weapons. The international community, for its
part, must ensure that the trade in arms must, as in the
case of the rest of the international trade, flow only
through channels authorized by both the exporting and
the importing Governments.

It is ammunition and explosives that kill. Arms
are only the means of delivery. This must be factored
into any work done by the international community to
tackle, comprehensively, the issue of small arms and
light weapons.

We welcome the initiative of the Security Council
in convening this open debate on small arms and light
weapons and trust that the Council will take effective
and practical steps to take forward the endeavours of
the United Nations in support of the implementation of
the Programme of Action adopted at last year's United
Nations Conference on Small Arms and Light Weapons
that would check the availability and use of illicit small
arms in fuelling and sustaining conflict and terrorism.

