Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, I would like to thank
Ambassadors Jurica, Verbeke and Urbina for their
substantive briefings as Chairmen of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), respectively.
In highlighting the struggle with the threat of
international terrorism as one of the most important
tasks confronting the United Nations and its Security
Council, Russia is giving a positive assessment of the
results of the activity of those Committees during the
six-month period just passed and is taking note of the
substantive contribution that each of them, in
accordance with its mandate, is making to the efforts of
the Council to enhance the effectiveness of
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

We welcome the joint steps in favour of
interaction and coordination among the three
Committees and, above all, their expert groups, within
the framework of the ongoing dialogue with Member
States.

The Russian Federation has taken an active part
in drawing up and reaching agreement on resolution
1805 (2008), which not only extended the mandate of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate (CTED) to the end of 2010, but also made
specific adjustments to the organizational structure and
methods of work of that body.

We have already expressed our assessments
regarding the reform of the work of the CTED within
the framework of the broad discussion of this issue that
took place in March of this year. Without repeating
these issues, I should like to note the most important
thing: the CTC now has received additional significant
possibilities not only to monitor the implementation by
States of the fundamental anti-terrorist resolution 1373
(2001) but also to play a more active role in the
support required for their multifaceted efforts in coping
with the threat of terrorism.

We welcome the readiness of the CTC, acting
through the CTED, to devote priority attention to the
coordination of technical assistance and to expand
direct contact with potential donors and interested
States. We view that as an important factor in
strengthening the entire system of international anti-
terrorist cooperation and reaffirming the central
coordinating role of the United Nations in this sphere.

Under the leadership of the CTC, work has been
concluded for the preparation and adoption of a
preliminary assessment of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) with regard to all Member
States. Russia fully shares the resounding positive
assessments of the achievements of the CTC and, as
Chairman of one of the subcommittees of the CTC, is

ready to continue to make its contribution to the
dynamic process of producing those assessments. What
lies ahead is a complex period of renewal and
clarification of those documents in the light of the
reactions of States, and the political guidance role of
the CTC at this stage will only grow stronger. In this
context we attach great importance to the organization
by the CTED of trips of various types and with various
objectives to States and monitoring the results of their
work.

We also believe that, together with an assessment
of national potentials, the CTC very soon can also
adopt the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The need for such a document
is obvious to us. It could serve as a basis for a
continually updated general overview of the
achievements and shortcomings in the anti-terrorist
sphere. It would also enable the Security Council to
organize its work in this field in a more systematic
way, including within the framework of
implementation of the objective of the Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

I should like to confirm that the Russian
Federation considers that one of the most important
elements of the CTC mandate is to consider the work
with States on the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). In this connection we welcome the decision of
the CTC to hold a discussion on the question of
possible measures to render technical assistance to
States on the implementation of the provisions of the
resolution.

We continue to consider the 1267 Committee and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
as one of the effective and viable mechanisms of the
Security Council in the counter-terrorist field.

Unfortunately, we are obliged to note with regret
the continuing spread of extremist ideas and of the
influence of the Taliban both in the territory of
Afghanistan and beyond its borders. Terrorists do not
sit on their hands. This has been clearly demonstrated
in their recent brazen terrorist act during the military
parade in Kabul.

We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and the Monitoring Team to support the sanctions list
in its updated form, reflecting the real nature of today's
terrorist threat. We call upon States to submit to the
Committee requests for the inclusion on the list of
individuals and organizations linked to the Taliban and

Al-Qaida and also to provide any additional
information regarding such individuals previously
included on the list.

We consider the strengthening of cooperation of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team with
INTERPOL and other professional regional and
international organizations to be of considerable
importance. We consider it necessary to continue the
practice of country visits by the Chairman of the
Committee and members of the Monitoring Team and
other forms of direct dialogue by the Committee with
Member States. That makes it possible to certify the
commitment of States to the cause of the struggle
against terrorism and to see at first hand the best
practices and methods in such a struggle.

It is precisely full and conscientious
implementation by all States of their obligations in this
field that will determine the success of our common
efforts to counteract the real and changing threat to
international peace and security coming from the
Taliban and Al-Qaida. We favour closer coordination in
this area, above all with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate.

Regarding the activity of the 1540 Committee, we
first would like to welcome the unanimous adoption on
25 April of resolution 1810 (2008), which extended the
Committee's mandate for three years. As initiator and a
sponsor of resolution 1540 (2004) and also of
subsequent resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008),
the Russian Federation considers it one of the major
international instruments for preventing weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, including dual-use goods and technologies,
from falling into the hands of non-State players, first
and foremost terrorists.

We believe that despite the magnitude and
complexity of these tasks, through joint multilateral
efforts by the members of the international community,
with the United Nations in the leading role, the
Security Council will be able to close the remaining
proliferation gaps in national legislation and to
strengthen the basis for coordinated resistance to the
black markets in weapons of mass destruction.
During the period that has elapsed since the
previous briefing, which was marked by the adoption
of resolution 1810 (2008), the 1540 Committee has
with confidence entered a new stage of its activity,
linked to stepped-up efforts to assist States in the

implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) and to coordinate close international
cooperation for those ends.

At this stage it will be important to focus efforts
on the weak aspects of national monitoring systems,
identified as a result of the study of information on
measures undertaken by States, as submitted in the
national reports to the 1540 Committee. In this context
we believe it important not to forget about the need to
implement another key objective of the first stage of
the Committee's work, linked with the submission by
States of their first national reports on measures they
have undertaken in implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

We note with satisfaction data to the effect that
after last November the number of States that have
submitted their first national reports has now increased
to 150. Those States that have at least once sent the
Committee additional information now exceeds 100.
We believe this demonstrates that the Committee's
active position is yielding tangible results. It is
precisely for this reason that targeted work with States
that have not yet submitted their first national reports
must be continued.

It is important to continue work on reaching
agreement on the report of the Security Council
Committee on the results of the work for 2006 through
2008. We believe that the report must above all reflect
the work of the Committee itself in implementing its
objectives, whose priorities are clearly spelled out in
resolution 1540 (2004). We are ready to participate
constructively in further work on the draft, taking into
account the remarks we have already made in this
regard, in compliance with the clear time parameters
laid down in resolution 1810 (2008).

