Mrs. Cafias (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, I wish to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the work of the
Council and to offer your our fullest cooperation in the
execution of your duties, which, given your abilities, we
are sure will be successful.

We would also like to congratulate Ambassador
Gerardo Martinez Blanco and his entire delegation and to
thank them for their outstanding work during his
presidency in the month of July. We also wish to

 

welcome the new representative of the United Kingdom,
Ambassador Sir John Weston.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General for
his written and oral reports on developments in the situation
in Angola, which have been invaluable in our deliberations
on the subject.

We note with great pleasure the progress achieved in
the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. The meeting
between President dos Santos and UNITA's leader,
Mr. Savimbi, was definitely an important milestone that, in
addition to contributing to confidence-building,
demonstrated a significant change in the parties' attitudes
regarding their commitment to the peace process. We
commend the Government of Angola and UNITA for the
progress that has been achieved. We hope that this new
climate of confidence will strengthen and grow and that the
new timetable agreed upon for the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol will be respected and met.

In the resolution just adopted, the Security Council
acknowledges the efforts of the Angolan leaders and renews
the mandate of UNAVEM. III for six months, thus
demonstrating that the international community has regained
trust in the process and continues to stand ready to
contribute to its successful conclusion.

A great deal still remains to be done and various
problems remain to be solved. Operative paragraphs 4 and
7 of the resolution set forth the principal areas in which the
parties must redouble their efforts to move ahead without
further delays in the peace process.

The people of Angola must resume their normal pace
of life throughout the territory as soon as possible, engaging
in the planting of the fields, education, health and well-
being - and all of this must include the reinsertion of the
former combatants into civilian life. Here, we note that it is
essential to continue and increase the assistance and
cooperation of the international community, as well as
support for the mine-clearance programmes and
participation of human rights observers in the field.

We hope that the good conditions prevailing in Angola
will continue and solidify, in order to ensure full
deployment of all the infantry units of UNAVEM. III as
soon as possible.

The Republic of Argentina has decided to contribute
to this United Nations operation a naval squadron composed
of three high-speed patrol boats from the Argentine fleet.
This new contribution is in keeping with the importance
which my Government attaches to the peaceful evolution
of the Angolan situation and which it has already
demonstrated by its uninterrupted participation in
UNAVEM. I and II, with military observers and civilian
police.

The Argentine Government reiterates that the
Government of Angola and UNITA must respect and
guarantee, to a maximum degree and at all times, both
formally and materially, the security and protection of all
international personnel in Angola and the fulfilment of
their mandates.

Finally, we hope that the reviews of the situation in
Angola to be made every two months by the Security
Council on the basis of the reports of the Secretary-
General will confirm the present positive trend in this
process and the resolution of the still outstanding
problems. The people of Angola deserve no less.

