Today we mark a great achievement, the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). Twenty years ago, that resolution recognized that sustainable peace relied on inclusive peace. It provided a framework to address the disproportionate impact that fell on women and girls on the ground. And it advocated for their meaningful inclusion as agents of change. As a global force for good, the United Kingdom has been proud to lead the way on the women and peace and security agenda as penholder for resolution 1325 (2000). We work with Governments and non-governmental organizations around the world to share good practices and expertise, such as supporting those brave women who are resolving conflict, countering violent extremism and building peace at the grass-roots level. As proud champions of the women and peace and security agenda, we will not accept any rollback of the progress made on women's rights over the past 20 years. There are 10 Security Council resolutions dedicated to advancing this agenda. We must ensure that those resolutions are taken seriously and implemented fully. We are not prepared to un-pick the framework that has been so hard-fought. That is only right. We owe it not only to women but also to global peace. Women's rights are human rights, and it is not a matter up for discussion. As we look ahead to the next 20 years, we must reflect on the challenges before us. Because the truth is that, despite our best intentions, we face a widening implementation gap. But the United Kingdom is working hard to bridge the gap and welcomes others to join us in doing so. We fully support women's meaningful participation in peace processes. And that is why I am proud to announce that the United Kingdom is dedicating £1 million of funding to the Women Mediators across the Commonwealth network. Their vital work increases the recognition of the role of women mediators in peace processes, from local to global, ensuring they get the acknowledgment, respect and support they deserve. We also continue to support the Elsie Initiative for women in peace operations. The voices of women peacebuilders must be heard and amplified. But for many, speaking up and carrying out their vital work comes at great personal risk. No woman should have to risk her safety to heal her community. That is why I am proud that the United Kingdom has supported the International Civil Society Action Network in developing the protection framework for women peacebuilders. This vital piece of work provides guidance to States and multilateral organizations on how best to prevent and respond to reprisals. And I am pleased to announce that the United Kingdom will formally commit to supporting this framework and its recommendations. I urge others to do the same. It is not only the voices of women but ethnic, religious, sexual and disabled minorities who are silenced. The deadline for the Sustainable Development Goals is only 10 years away - we must hear diverse voices at all levels. We also face additional threat from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). It has laid bare many inequalities, but the most disproportionate impact is on women and girls. The impact will be felt for years to come and threaten hard-won progress on gender equality. That is why I am proud to announce that, along with Gender Action for Peace and Security and partners, the United Kingdom is committing £250,000 in funding to undertake research on the gendered impacts of COVID-19 in fragile and conflict-affected States. This vital research will help ensure that the needs of women and girls are considered in any future crisis response - because, ultimately, peace is not a finished product or a final result; it is a continuous effort. So I call on all our partners to continue to push for real progress on this vital agenda. It is time to turn intentions into actions - for the next 20 years and, indeed, for future decades to come.
