Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today's important
meeting. We highly appreciate Lithuania's contribution
to efforts to address the diverse challenges posed by
small arms and light weapons.

Small arms and light weapons are the predominantly
used weapons in a vast majority of armed conflicts
today. The flows of small arms into conflict zones have
fuelled violence, undermined peacebuilding efforts
and have had a catastrophic humanitarian impact on
civilians, especially women and children.

Building upon a number of initiatives, including
the United Nations Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, the international community
recently took a momentous step in efforts to address
this challenge by adopting and bringing into force
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT). This landmark treaty
establishes, for the first time, a comprehensive norm
to prevent arms transfers that lead to serious violations
of international human rights and humanitarian law.
We believe that the faithful implementation of the ATT
will help curb the irresponsible flow of small arms to
conflict zones and perpetrators of war crimes and other
atrocities. The Republic of Korea is taking steps to
ratify the Treaty at the earliest possible time.

While States have the primary responsibility to
tackle this challenge, the Security Council also has a
vital role to play in addressing both the supply- and
demand-driven aspects of arms transfers. With its
legally binding arms embargoes, the Security Council
can contribute to the prevention of arms flows to
conflict regions. The Council can strengthen the role of
peacekeeping missions in monitoring arms embargoes
on the ground. Examples like the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, where dedicated arms-
embargo monitoring units were established, offers a
good precedent. Improving information-sharing among
States, sanctions committees and peace missions will
also contribute to the effective implementation of these
embargoes. On the demand side ofillicit arms transfers,
an equally urgent task is to better secure these weapons
from the risk of diversion by strengthening national
stockpile security and management.

The Security Council should continue to mandate
peacekeeping missions to assist host countries in
their management of arms stockpiles, as well as their
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts.
States' stockpile management capacity should be taken
into account when the Security Council considers the
termination of an arms embargo.

Two years ago, the Security Council set an
important milestone by adopting resolution 2117
(2013), the first-ever Council resolution to address the
challenges posed by small arms. The resolution paved
the way for an enhanced role by the Council in tackling
this issue. We should continue in our united efforts to
stem the scourge of illicit arms transfer and misuse that
undermine our security, human rights and development
goals.

