Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): My delegationjoins other
Council members in thanking Nigeria for convening
today's debate. We also wish to thank your delegation,
Madam President, for the informative concept note
(S/2015/599, annex) that has been circulated, which
helps frame our debate today.

We wish to also express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his briefing, which we have heard
with much interest, as well as for his untiring efforts
and leadership in enhancing and consolidating the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations around the world.

We share the view that regional actors should
assume greater ownership of developments in their
respective regions. Malaysia aligns itself with the
statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Islamic State of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and Kuwait on
behalf of the countries of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

We are of the View that today's debate comes at a
particularly timely juncture as threats to international
peace and security have become increasingly complex
and challenging, with trans-border elements and
other multi-layered regional dimensions. As rightly
envisioned in the Charter of the United Nations, the
United Nations has been and remains at the forefront
of international, multilateral efforts to combat such
new challenges, which range from blatant violations of
international law, terrorism, transnational organized
crime, humanitarian crises, environmental degradation
and the outbreak of deadly diseases, among others.

However, the authors of the Charter of the United
Nations also had the foresight to presage that while the
Organization and the Council would constitute the hub
of the international peace and security architecture,
they could not substitute for regional and subregional
arrangements and organizations, which should perform
such functions at that level, as envisioned by Chapter
VIII of the Charter.

Over the years, regional organizations such as the
African Union (AU), ASEAN, the European Union (EU)
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, among others, have embarked on pragmatic
steps, including by modifying their outlook and
perspectives in order to more effectively meet and
address changing global dynamics. At the same time,
the Council has also taken steps to promote and enhance
its engagement with regional organizations, including
through the adoption of relevant decisions and through
the convening of joint regular consultative meetings
such as with the AU Peace and Security Council and
the EU Political and Security Committee. Furthermore,
close partnerships with various regional bodies on many
important strategic areas - such as conflict prevention,
mediation and peacekeeping operations - have also
been established and strengthened over time.

To date, cooperation and coordination among
regional organizations in dealing with conflict and
security challenges have been encouraging. Examples
include the partnership between the African Union
and the EU and the coordination between the AU and
African subregional organizations to address threats to
peace and security in the African continent. Malaysia
believes that strategic partnership between the United
Nations and regional organizations is vital in addressing
contemporary global security challenges. We further
believe that multilayered partnerships between the
Council and regional organizations could serve as a
strong foundation of the future global security agenda.

From our perspective within ASEAN, Malaysia
places great value and importance on the role
played by regional and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention and resolution, the deployment
of peacekeeping operations, post-conflict building
and reconstruction and other important areas. On its
own, ASEAN has placed greater emphasis on creating
an enabling environment for peace in order to ensure
uninterrupted economic development. It has promoted
regional architecture towards stability and prosperity,
including tools for conflict prevention and peaceful
settlement of disputes.

Based on our experience, we support further
efforts to deepen cooperation between the United
Nations, and the Council in particular, and regional
bodies. That said, we wish to highlight the following.
The level and degree of intraregional cooperation
varies significantly among regions, based on the unique
historical and political background of each region. In
addition, their aspirations, mandates and activities vary
enormously. In that regard, we believe that cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
will be more rewarding when such diversity is duly
observed and considered. Any form of cooperation
should be inclusive, flexible, responsive and adaptable,
especially in the case of complex joint endeavours
such as peacekeeping, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.

While regional organizations may provide an
attractive alternative to an overstretched United
Nations mission, it is important to bear in mind
that regional bodies are also vulnerable to similar
problems faced by the United Nations. While being
mindful of the advantage of regional organizations
in better understanding the conflicts in their regions,
experience in dealing with situations such as those in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Somalia,
Darfur and the Central African Republic, among others,
has revealed the limitations of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations. Without
sufficient financial and capacity-building support, the
aspirations and determination of regional organizations
could outstrip their ability to deliver, particularly in
harsh and challenging parts of the world. Consequently,
burden-sharing can easily become burden-shifting
as the international community places unrealistic
expectations on regional organizations that have yet to
build full capacity.

We are of the View that although significant
progress has been made in improving mutual
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we strongly believe that more can be
done. We hope that the discussion today will generate
more ideas and strategies in order to deepen, expand and
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, as well as among the regional
bodies, with a view to strengthening the capacity of the
international community to respond effectively to new
and old threats to international peace and security.

