Mr. Ybafiez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to begin by thanking you, Mr. Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Senegal, President of the Security Council
for this month, for having organized this open debate
to allow the Council to address the complex subject of
the maintenance of international peace in asymmetrical
situations. I also thank all the briefers - Ms. Jean,
Mr. Fedotov, Mr. Laborde and Mr. Boutellis - for their
constructive ideas and suggestions.

I would also like to reiterate Spain's strong
condemnation of the terrorist attack yesterday on a
unit of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), close to the
town of Douentza, and also the attack on 4 November
in northern Mali. We would like to express our sincere
condolences to the families of the victims and to the
Governments of Mali, Togo and France, and to the
United Nations.

Spain fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the delegation of the European
Union. We wish to make the following comments in our
national capacity.

Peacekeeping operations are a crucial tool in
achieving international peace and security, and they
prove their worth every day. In recent years, we have
seen important changes in the global security situation
that have compelled us all to adapt. Peacekeeping
operations have also been affected by those changes.
We commend the progress made in implementing
the recommendations for the reform of peacekeeping
operations. However, the increasing complexity of
their functions and of the security contexts in which
new missions are deployed requires that we deepen our
collective thinking about whether they are prepared to
act effectively in the new contexts.

We agree with the observation of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
that peacekeeping operations are not a suitable
instrument for carrying out military counter-terrorist
operations. At the same time, many peacekeeping
operations are now deployed in operative settings
where, in addition to the complexity of the political
processes, there are considerable asymmetric threats and
terrorism. Those are specific problems that cannot be
ignored. We are all responsible for resolving them with
a View to ensuring the protection of the contingents and
making it possible for them to carry out their mandate
effectively. To that end, we must begin by giving those
operations the necessary specific capacities.

Recent experience has shown us that the intelligence
and mobility capacities adapted to such contexts play
a vital role, as do the means and technologies used to
protect the contingents. They provide greater knowledge
and enable us to anticipate threats and maximize
the impact of their work. In that regard, we note the
fundamental role that the All Sources Information
Fusion Unit has played in the proper functioning of
MINUSMA. Similarly, specific training is Vital. Spain
has offered, in a timely manner and on request, training
in protection against improvised explosive devices.
The armies of numerous countries, such as Lebanon,
Afghanistan, Colombia and Peru, have benefited.

A clear and precise mandate and rules of engagement
are also necessary. We support the efforts being made
by the Secretariat to modernize, streamline and adapt
the procedures for bidding and force generation. It is a
bottleneck that needs to be addressed immediately. The
existing procedures are designed for a static model of
peacekeeping operation and are applied with difficulty
in highly volatile situations. That is why we commend
the new initiatives of the Secretariat. Similarly, we
need to make progress in decentralized management,
delegating more authority to the heads of missions and
giving them greater autonomy.
As we have previously said, the protection of
civilians is an essential and complex task. Its success
is fundamental for the credibility of the operations
themselves and of the international community. We
must focus on effective implementation of the mandates
for the protection of civilians on the ground, which is
made particularly difficult in the new security contexts.
The use of force for self-defence and in defence of
the mandate may require a robust mandate in those
contexts in order to truly protect civilians. That could
occasionally include a proactive, rather than a reactive,
approach when countering serious and imminent
threats. The autonomy of the Security Council to include
the necessary measures in the mandates that apply in
asymmetric contexts, in exceptional cases and always
in line with the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of peacekeeping operations,
must be respected. Training of contingents in the work
ofprotecting civilians is also vital, and it is an area that
we must continue to stress. We must also improve the
assessment mechanisms suited to such tasks.

All this requires a substantive and fluid dialogue
with the troop-contributing countries. Fostering such
dialogue was one of our campaign commitments when
we joined the Security Council in January 2015, and it
has been one of the priorities we have unquestionably
worked for throughout our term.

Developing local capacities to combat terrorist
threats, prevent radicalization or demobilize fighters
is a key element. The United Nations police could
contribute to supporting capacity-building for the
police forces of the host country with a view to them
operating more effectively and with increased security
in contexts where asymmetric threats are present, and
also to developing investigation capacities, such as
forensics.

In addressing asymmetric threats, we cannot limit
ourselves to focusing only on security. It is imperative
that we have a comprehensive focus that goes beyond
peacekeeping operations but should not be alien to them.
Political solutions are a central axis of peacekeeping
operations. Similarly, peacekeeping operations can
exercise their mediation and conflict prevention
capacities, contributing to combating radicalization
and violent extremism that can lead to terrorism.

To that end, we must insist on the need to maximize
the capacities of mission personnel to interact with local
communities and stakeholders. I believe that the police
forces under military dicipline, as is the case with the
Spanish Guardia Civil, have a very useful role to play
in that regard. The recent deployment of the Guardia
Civil in the framework of the European missions in
the Central African Republic has been a very positive
and rewarding experience, and it benefited from that
neighbourhood policing capacity to get closer to the
local population.

It must not be forgotten that the implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda in this
area is also crucial, given the positive role that women
and women's organizations can play in combating
violent extremism. Likewise, it would behove us to
bolster the coordination of our work in those areas,
including programmes to prevent violent extremism,
which are being undertaken by the various units of the
United Nations in this context. Such coordination could
enhance mission planning.

In the context of the ideas I have just presented,
we hope that the Secretary-General's Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism will be implemented.
It envisages integrating the prevention of violent
extremism into the relevant activities of peacekeeping
operations, in accordance with their mandates. As I
stated at the outset, we agree that the peacekeeping
operations are not a suitable tool for the military
operations against terrorists, but it is clear - and
I believe the debate is proof of it - that they have
an important role to play in ending the scourge of
terrorism. In suchjoint efforts, I can assure the Council
that the international community will always have the
active cooperation and the firm commitment of Spain.

