Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate immediately following
the Security Council mission to Afghanistan, which
was realized under Kazakhstan's strong initiative. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

The Secretary-General's visit to Kabul in June
2017 and the strategic review were both important
milestones in developing the relationship between
Afghanistan and the United Nations. We appreciate
the excellent efforts of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in fulfilling its
existing mandate. However, the emphasis on peace
and conflict, which the review encourages, will
require some changes in UNAMA's configuration.
The discussion about the mandate renewal will be held
mainly by Council members, but Japan hopes that the
voices of various stakeholders with great interest in
today's discussion will also be considered.

Japan has been engaged in efforts to resolve various
problems facing Afghanistan and Central Asia. We are
striving to achieve sustainable peace and development
in that region. It is regrettable that the security situation
in Afghanistan is still volatile, despite enormous efforts
by the Afghan Government and assistance from the
international community, and that it poses a threat
to Central Asia. Japan's position that only genuine
progress on an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace
process will be able to provide significant security
improvements remains unchanged. Japan calls on
Afghanistan and other regional stakeholders to be
united in seeking tangible outcomes in the second
round of the Kabul Process, to take place in February.

In our efforts to address the security-development
nexus in Afghanistan and Central Asia, Japan has been
paying particular attention to the development of human
resources. We have repeatedly emphasized our belief
that Afghanistan's potential and its human resources
can lay the foundation for economic development
and self-reliance and enhance the capability of future
Government operations. In September 2017, Afghanistan
celebrated the launch of work on the new Kabul City,
where we expect more than 250,000 residential units
to be built over the next 30 years. It was our pleasure
to have supported the capacity-building of the many
experts who conducted the research and planning for
that important project.

The main objective of long-term Japan-United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime coordination is to
establish border liaison offices on drugs and crime and
train drug enforcement agents. We believe that trainees
from Central Asia and Afghanistan will play key roles
in preventing and countering violent extremism in the
region. Japan will continue those initiatives.

I believe that the stakeholders participating in
today's debate are united in supporting Afghanistan
because a stable and prosperous Afghanistan is not
only of interest to the region, but also to the entire
international community. Our willingness to extend
assistance to a self-reliant Afghanistan is underpinned
by international agreements, including relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework. As we
fulfil our commitments, we look forward to seeing
tangible outcomes from Afghanistan. We must see
progress in the peace process in 2018, as well as in the
parliamentary and district council elections. Japan will
continue to do its part for a better future for Afghanistan
and its people.

