Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes you, Madam President, to New York to preside
over today's open debate of the Council on inclusive
development for the maintenance of peace and security.
I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Ambassador Patriota, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), for their briefings. The Chinese
delegation also listened closely to the statement made
by Ms. Gbowee.

Peace and development are two main themes
of today's world. According to the Charter of the
United Nations, the Organization has the lofty goal
of maintaining world peace and promoting common
development. Today's open debate explores the
relationship between inclusive development and the
maintenance of international peace and security.
This demonstrates the Council's attention to the
nexus between peace, security and development and
to the significance of addressing the importance of
development to the promotion of international peace and
security. In that connection, I would like to highlight
the following points.

First, we need to consider increased investment in
development to eliminate the root causes of conflict.
Poverty and underdevelopment are often major causes
of conflicts, crises and terrorism. The international
community and the United Nations in particular
should attach greater importance to the advancement
of the international development agenda. Developing
countries, constrained by historical factors and the
conditions of development, are faced with daunting
challenges in economic, development and social
progress. Developed countries should further assist
developing countries in official development assistance,
debt relief, market openness and technology transfer
and help them to achieve the objectives of poverty
eradication and the promotion of development.

Secondly, we should focus on mediation and
good offices to provide the basis for development.
The United Nations and the Security Council should
strongly uphold the culture of peace and reconciliation
and fully implement the responsibilities of mediation
and good offices entrusted to it by Chapter VI of the
Charter by further strengthening mediation capabilities
andimproving the means of mediation so as to play a
bigger role in the peaceful resolution of disputes, thereby
laying a solid foundation for the early achievement of
peace and development.

Thirdly, we need to focus on peacebuilding to
prevent conflict relapse. In post-conflict countries and
regions, the international community should prioritize
reconstruction in all development, political and
security areas, with special attention to the promotion
of coordinated economic and social development.
The key is to not only provide help to post-conflict
countries but to also develop their ability to help
themselves. The governance capacities of the countries
involved need to be effectively strengthened and their
ability to provide basic services enhanced so that
development and reconstruction can be advanced in
all sectors. Meanwhile, attention should also be given
to youth employment and women's empowerment so
that the public can enjoy early peace dividends. That
would be conducive to the stabilization of post-conflict
situations, the promotion of political reconciliation and
the consolidation of existing peace.

Fourthly, we should intensify overall planning and

coordination to create synergy. Relevant United Nations
bodies and international organizations responsible for
peace, security and development should leverage their
own strengths and carry out planning and coordination
in order to maximize synergy. Meanwhile, they should
increase coordination, respect their own mandates and
division of labour, and avoid duplication of work. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
safeguarding international peace and security, while
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) should play
a coordinating role in peacebuilding by expanding
partnerships and increasing cooperation with the United
Nations development system and agencies, the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund so that more
resources can be mobilized for reconstruction in post-
conflict countries, creating the external environment
and conditions necessary for their development.

Some 70 per cent of the items on the Council's
agenda are related to Africa, while two-thirds of
peacekeeping missions are deployed there. The
interlinkages among peace, security and development
are best demonstrated on the African continent. Without
peace and development in Africa, the prosperity and
stability of the world will be impossible to achieve. The
international community should vigorously support
African countries in addressing African problems
with African means, and promote regional and
subregional organizations, such as the African Union,
in playing a bigger role in advancing peace, security
and development. Moreover, we should also focus
on the issues of underdevelopment and insufficient
infrastructure faced by Africa in order to effectively
help the continent to translate its abundant human and
natural resources into the driving force for economic
development and substantive benefits for Africans.

As a most sincere and reliable partner of Africa,
China has consistently supported African countries'
self-strengthening through unity and their achievement
of sustainable development. In the spirit of truthfulness,
practicality, sincerity and kindness, China will
continue to participate constructively in the resolution
of hot-spot issues in Africa and play its due role in the
promotion of peace and security there. We will also
help the African people to improve their capability for
self-development so that they can live peacefully and
happily on the African continent, and increase school
enrolment and youth employment so as to eradicate the
root causes of conflicts and turbulence and to achieve
sustained peace and development on the continent.

