Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (interpretation from French): Whereas at the beginning of this year, concrete
positive signs pointed to a restoration of peace in Angola,
especially with the promulgation of the law recognizing
UNITA as a political party and the appointment by the
Government of UNITA officials to high-ranking posts, the
normalization of the situation in certain areas and the end
of Radio Vorgan broadcasts, it is regrettable now to note
that due to UNITA's intransigence, the political, security
and humanitarian situation has further deteriorated.

We have seen signs of unusual troop movements in
areas under UNITA control, which suggest preparations
for the resumption of hostilities. This attitude must be
condemned, as it runs counter to the spirit and the letter
of the Lusaka accords and the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Accordingly, we ask UN ITA to keep its word
and to honour the commitments it has voluntarily
undertaken, including the complete demilitarization of its
combatants and the extension of State administration to
the four areas still under its control: Andulo, Bailundo,
Mungo and N'Harea.

Similarly, rather than laying more mines, UNITA
should, in the interest of the Angolan people, which
aspires to peace and social and economic development,
allow the Government and international organizations that
have access to the relevant technology to pursue demining
operations. The completion of these operations will
facilitate the free movement of individuals, the cultivation
of arable land and the distribution of the humanitarian
assistance the Angolan population so badly needs.

In this context, we welcome the recent appointment
of Mr. Issa Diallo as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Angola, and we are convinced
that his commitment to the African cause and to peace in
general will be an undeniable asset in the continuation of
MONUA's activity.

It is for all these reasons that my delegation supports
the extension of MONUA's mandate until 15 September
1998 and that it will vote in favour of the draft resolution
before us.

