Mr. Mero (United Republic of Tanzania): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on a subject of great significance for global
peace and security, particularly to the continent of
Africa. I also wish to commend Secretary-General
Guterres for his strong statement setting out his vision of
the future of peacekeeping operations. Furthermore, let
me commend Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, for his briefing.

The United Republic of Tanzania is committed
to continuing to support collective measures to
attain global peace and stability. To demonstrate that
commitment, we are proud that, among the current
uniformed peacekeeping troops in 16 missions,
Tanzania is one of the highest contributors of the
123 contributor countries, with military, police
and corrections personnel deployed to a total of six
United Nations peacekeeping missions, namely, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic.

The pursuit of shared peace, security and
prosperity lies at the heart of the Charter of the United
Nations. It is the noble and legitimate aspiration of all
peoples and nations. It is our solemn duty to design
appropriate mechanisms in order to fulfil those
ambitions, which are shared by all humankind In such
circumstances, peacekeeping has, and must continue
to be, a collective global undertaking. We must be a
community of peacekeeping nations rather than a
disparate aggregation of troop/police-contributors,
personnel contributors, financial contributors or
resource-contributing countries.

Contemporary peacekeeping operations have
undergone a tactical shift from the traditional
peacekeeping role to multidimensional operations,
which require peacekeeping missions to be configured
in a robust manner in order to implement and defend
their mandates. In view of the new dynamics, there is
an urgent need for the Security Council, Member State
contributor countries and regional bodies to work closely
together under the auspices of triangular cooperation
mechanisms in order to achieve the envisaged political
outcome and to strengthen strategic coherence. In
that regard, based on triangular consultations among
the key stakeholders, the Security Council should be
guided by meaningful dialogue before the issuance or
renewal of actionable mandates, which must clearly
set out the operational priorities, implications and
required capabilities.

The Security Council and the Secretariat, in
collaboration with troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs and PCCs) and other actors, are indeed
solely obliged to deliver more effectively on their
responsibilities to improve peacekeeping operations. In
that regard, the Security Council needs to ensure that
a clear mandate is issued and that it is implemented
by all actors. The Secretariat should ensure that the
mandate is clearly interpreted and, accordingly, provide
guidance on its implementation. In consultation with
all actors, the Secretariat should review the status of
the implementation and should advise both the Security
Council and the TCCs andPCCs on the way forward
before the renewal of the mandate. In that regard, the
TCCs and PCCs clearly need to be informed about the
status of the operational performance evaluation of
their respective contingents in order to ensure a timely
response to the identified shortfalls.

While we commend the initiatives of the Secretary-
General to improve the security of United Nations
peacekeepers in implementation ofthe Cruz report, as a
Member State we have some concerns and reservations,
including with regard to the following. The TCCs and
PCCs remain solely responsible for ensuring that the
troops are well equipped and trained in accordance with
the specific mission requirements. The TCCs and PCCs
in the high-risk missions mentioned were not consulted
during the process in order to submit their points of
view to Lieutenant General Cruz. We think that most
of the issues outlined in the report are purely basic
military tactics and training, which are an integral part
of most national combat training standards.

In that regard, we would like to underscore the
need to respect the doctrines and training standards of
the TCCs. Since mission-specific tactical training is
not part of the United Nations training modules - but
it should be the case - we encourage missions to put
in place the appropriate mechanisms to regulate and
to evaluate the contingent's readiness for the mission,
which should include induction or in-mission training
for all troops.

As all those present may be aware, upon the
issuance of any mandate the Secretariat needs to clearly
interpret it and outline the specific actions and rules of
engagement of the respective missions. In that regard,
there is a need to ensure that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the commanders and the
civilian as well as the military staff officers in all
mission components have the correct mindset to defend
and to implement the mandate.

The United Nations is currently in the process of
downsizing the force levels of peacekeeping missions
due to budgetary constraints. It is very unfortunate to
note that the ongoing force reduction process is not
informed by the situation on the ground. As a result, the
lives of Blue Helmets are in jeopardy due to the fact that
the reduced force levels are outstripped by the proxy
forces and end up being overstretched and vulnerable
to those proxy forces. In that regard, we wish to appeal
to the United Nations, including the Security Council,
to regularly consult with troop- and police-contributing
countries in order to ensure that the mandates are
configured and realigned to clearly address the actual
situation on the ground with adequate force levels and
capabilities commensurate with the proxy forces.

Missions should be adequately resourced and
equipped with all critical enablers. In reference to
the recent attacks, we strongly propose the need for
all missions to have credible all-weather contingency
support for and reinforcement of troops in both day and
night operations.

In conclusion, albeit with even more weight than
in the preceding discussions, we pay heartfelt tribute
to the men and women who have had their lives altered
as a result of their participation in, and commitment
to, the cause of peace. We honour the memories of all
those who paid the ultimate price in the hope of seeing
a better tomorrow for those whom they worked hard to
protect. Their deaths must not be in vein. We owe it to
them to work hard and in a more united way in order to
realize the fruits for which they sacrificed their lives.

I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
Netherlands presidency of the Security Council
throughout this month.

