Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

Once again we take this opportunity to pay tribute
to humanitarian workers who risk their lives daily as
they carry out their duties. We join other colleagues
in congratulating the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
on his efforts to find a political solution to the serious
situation in Syria, which, as the Secretary-General
recalled, is in its eighth year.

Bolivia deplores the challenges to the implementation
of resolution 2401 (2018) that the Secretary-General
outlined in his briefing today. We condemn all deliberate
attacks on civilians and demand respect for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We call on the parties involved to focus primarily on
protecting hospitals, medical facilities, schools and
civilian residences, and the personnel of the various
agencies and humanitarian assistance organizations
whose employees put their own lives at risk as they
carry out their work on the ground. We call on the
parties to cooperate and enhance coordination efforts
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, provide unhindered humanitarian access and
allow urgent medical evacuations to be carried out, in
particular in besieged and hard-to-reach areas.

We call upon the parties to work together to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 2401
(2018) throughout Syria as soon as possible and in
accordance with agreements reached in the Astana
process and on the de-escalation zones. We underscore
the importance of unity within the Security Council
when implementing resolution 2401 (2018). Such unity
must be present if our goal is to fully implement it. We
also call on the members of the Council and all parties
involved to depoliticize the humanitarian situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic and ensure that its actions are
in line with international law.

We highlight a few forums for dialogue that could
assist with reaching consensus on a definitive cessation
of hostilities, such as the Syrian National Dialogue
Congress in Sochi, whose outcome is geared towards
strengthening the political process in Geneva. We hope
that that forum will allow for the full implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) as soon as possible.

In conclusion, we reiterate that there is no military
solution to the crisis. The only solution is through an
inclusive political dialogue ordered and led by and for

the Syrian people. We extend our best hopes for the
outcome of the next meeting to be held in Astana.

