Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait): I have the honour to deliver
a statement in my capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004)
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In
my briefing this morning, it is my intention to provide
an overview of the work of the Committee since I
assumed the role of Chair in January. I also intend to set
out a number of possible activities that the Committee
may undertake over the course ofthe remainder of 2018.

Since assuming the role of Chair in January 2018, I
have sought to continue the work of the Committee and
to raise awareness of the situation of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. On 1 February, in continuation
of its work, the Committee approved the addition to
its sanctions list of the names of four individuals who
continue to pose a threat to the peace and security of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Over the course of the first six months of 2018,
I convened various meetings of the Committee.
The speakers at those meetings included Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO); a representative of the Mission's
Joint Mission Analysis Centre on MONUSCO'S arms
embargo monitoring mandate; a representative of the
United Nations Mine Action Service on weapons and
ammunition management in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; a representative of the Permanent
Mission of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
the United Nations on combating sexual violence
and child recruitment in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Committee also met with the members of the Group
of Experts, who presented an overview of the findings
and recommendations contained in the Group's final
report (S/20l8/53l).

My delegation has also hosted, at the Permanent
Mission of Kuwait, four gatherings of Committee
members, including three informal informals on issues
related to the work of the Committee. In February and
April, for example, my delegation hosted informal
informals with the Senior Official of the United
Nations team, Mr. Robert Petit, in the course of his
periodic visits to New York. The Committee continues
to support Mr. Petit and his team of technical experts
as they provide support to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its investigations
into the March 2017 murders of two late members of the
Group of Experts, Zaida Catalan and Michael Sharp.

Looking forward, the coming months will be a
critical period for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, the Committee will remain
vigilant and ensure that its work and that of the Group
of Experts contributes to peace and stability in the
country and the region. Towards that end, I intend to
continue collaboration with relevant interlocutors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as those in
the Great Lakes region with a view to obtaining updated
information on various aspects of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that are relevant
to the Committee's mandate and promoting further
synergy in our work.

In terms of other activities that the Committee
is considering, I have announced the convening of
a briefing for all Member States in connection with
the final report of the Group of Experts on Friday,
27 July. Over the course of the second half of the
year, the Committee will likely convene a meeting
to hear the Group of Experts, whose mandate was
extended pursuant to resolution 2424 (2018), present its
programme of work. I would also like to explore the
possibility of holding meetings on the arms embargo
along the lines of the workshop format that the Group
of Experts recommended in its final report. As part of
its continued consideration of natural resources issues,
the Committee could be updated on efforts by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Member States
to address issues of illegal exploitation and smuggling
of natural resources by armed groups, and on actions
taken by Member States to assist the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region and the countries in the Great
Lakes region to develop a responsible minerals trade.

