Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council has just adopted a new resolution on
the Iranian nuclear issue. This is the sixth resolution
adopted by the Council on the matter since July 2006.
Like the previous five, the new resolution not only
reflects the concerns of the international community
about the Iranian nuclear issue, but also expresses the
aspiration of all parties to achieve an early and
peaceful settlement of the issue through diplomatic
negotiations. China calls on all members of the
international community to implement the resolution
comprehensively and in good faith. China has
consistently maintained that the actions taken by the
Security Council on the Iranian nuclear issue must
adhere to the following three principles.

First, it should contribute to the maintenance of
the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. As a
State party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Iran should strictly fulfil its
obligations under the Treaty. In the meantime, its right
to the peaceful use of nuclear energy should be fully
respected and safeguarded. Secondly, the Security
Council's actions should be conducive to peace and
stability in the Middle East, especially the Gulf region.
Thirdly, it should help to promote the current
momentum towards global economic recovery and not
affect the day-to-day lives of the Iranian people or
normal international trade and transactions.

The action taken by the Security Council should
be appropriate, incremental, clearly targeted and
commensurate with the actual practices of Iran in the
nuclear field. It should reinforce diplomatic efforts to
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue.

China was earnestly and constructive engaged in
the consultations on the draft resolution and worked
vigorously to ensure that the text fully reflected the
foregoing principles.

We are the view that sanctions can never
fundamentally resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. To
bring about a comprehensive and appropriate
settlement of the issue, it is imperative to return to the
track of dialogue and negotiation. The Security
Council's adoption of this new resolution does not
mean that the door to diplomatic efforts is closed. The
new resolution is aimed at bringing Iran back to the
negotiating table and at activating a new round of
diplomatic efforts.

To that end, the sanctions mentioned in the new
resolution are reversible. In other words, if Iran
suspends uranium enrichment and reprocessing
activities and complies with the relevant resolutions of
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Security Council, the Council will suspend or even lift
its sanctions against Iran.

It has always been China's view that Security
Council unity is essential to resolving the Iranian
nuclear issue. We have always maintained that the
importance of the unity of the Security Council, and
we are not in favour of hasty action. We believe that
we must make a greater effort to maintain the unity of
the Security Council.

Over the years, China has been committed to
peacefully resolving the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations and has made unremitting
efforts in that regard. China welcomes and highly
values the tripartite agreement between Brazil, Turkey
and Iran on nuclear fuel exchange for the Tehran
Research Reactor. We hope the parties concerned will
make full use of the positive momentum created by the
agreement and will spare no effort to resolve the
Iranian nuclear issue peacefully through dialogue and
negotiations.

As the Security Council adopted its new
resolution on the Iranian nuclear issue, the E3+3
Foreign Ministers issued a joint statement reiterating
their commitment to resolving the issue through
diplomatic negotiations and expressing their readiness
to redouble diplomatic efforts towards the resumption
of negotiations. China hopes that the countries
concerned will, on the basis of equality and mutual
respect, strengthen contacts and dialogue, foster mutual
trust, dispel misgivings, address one another's
concerns and seek a solution acceptable to all parties to
restart negotiations.

China will work along with all countries
concerned and continue to make its own contribution to
the peaceful settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue
through diplomatic means.

