Mr. Satoh (Japan): First of all, thank you very
much, Sir, for your very kind words regarding my first
Security Council meeting. I assure you of my full
cooperation.

I would also like to endorse what the President said
with regard to the excellent job that our colleague
Ambassador Greenstock did. I would also like to say that
I know that with his renowned expertise, the current
President, Ambassador Burleigh, will do a good job of
leading the Council.

On 31 October, the Revolutionary Command Council
and the Baath Party of Iraq decided to suspend
cooperation with the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and to maintain the restrictions on the work
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
Japan strongly regrets this decision. To our great surprise,
the decision came the day after the Security Council
completed its work on the presidential letter to the

 

Secretary-General describing the Council's initial views on
a comprehensive review of Iraq's compliance with the
relevant Council resolutions, which was proposed by the
Secretary-General on 6 August.

The decision on 31 October, together with Iraq's
decision on 5 August, has, in effect, rendered impossible
the implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including the provisions of resolution 687 (1991), which
stipulate the conditions that must be met in order for the
sanctions to be lifted. This is a regrettable situation for both
Iraq and the international community as a whole.

Deeply concerned by the Iraqi decision, Japan, for its
part, made a demarche to the embassy of Iraq in Tokyo on
2 November, urging Iraq to immediately resume full and
unconditional cooperation with UNSCOM. and the IAEA.

In view of the gravity of the situation, the Council
responded immediately by issuing a presidential press
statement on 31 October, sending a firm, unequivocal and
unanimous message to Iraq. The draft resolution before us
is the formal response of the Security Council to the Iraqi
decision of 31 October. The message is quite clear:
sanctions can be lifted only when Iraq complies with the
relevant provisions of the Security Council resolutions and
the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the Deputy
Prime Minister of Iraq and the Secretary-General, and this
can be achieved only through full cooperation with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA.

My delegation considers this draft resolution to be
appropriate and, therefore, has joined the United Kingdom
in co-sponsoring it.

