Mr. Khiari (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
on behalf of the Group of Arab States, I thank you, Sir,
for convening this important meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
The Group of Arab States would also like to thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing.

More than 70 years have passed since the
establishment of the United Nations, and since then the
Palestinian people have been living under occupation
and suffering from all forms ofIsraeli violations, which
have affected generations of Palestinians, in flagrant
violation of international treaties and conventions and
in defiance of relevant United Nations resolutions.

We are firmly committed to the Charter of the
United Nations and to international law and international
legitimacy, as they form the basis of international
relations. In the light of the Israeli occupation
authorities' flagrant and wanton aggression against
those principles, and the continued brutal occupation of
the Palestinian territories, we stress the importance of
maintaining a unified international position that rejects
Israel's status quo policy and of supporting the United
Nations and the principles set out in its Charter, as well
as supporting the right of the Palestinian people to self
-determination and establishing their independent state
across 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital.

At the most recent meeting of the League of Arab
States, held in Saudi Arabia on 15 April, Arab leaders,
in accordance with their belief in the role of the United
Nations, international law and international legitimacy
and with a view to bringing about peace in the Middle

East as a strategic option, underscored a number of
points, including the following.

First, it is important for there to be comprehensive
and lasting peace in the Middle East as an Arab strategic
option within the Arab peace process, which continues
to be the more comprehensive plan to address all final
status issues, most important of which are those of
refugees and security in the region.

Secondly, the Arab leaders stressed the centrality
of the Palestinian cause for all Arab nations and the
Arab identity of occupied East Jerusalem as the capital
of Palestine.

Thirdly, they stressed that East Jerusalem will
remain the capital of Arab Palestine, and called on
States of the world to not recognize Jerusalem as the
capital of Israel or to move their capitals there or take
any measures that would alter the legal and political
nature and character of Jerusalem, as that would have
repercussions in the Middle East at large.

Fourthly, they stressed the importance of
relaunching serious and effective Israeli-Palestinian
peace negotiations in order to overcome the impasse
caused by the stringent Israeli positions. The
negotiations should be time bound in order to bring the
conflict to an end on the basis of a two-State solution.
The Arab leaders supported the vision expressed by the
Palestinian President for peace in his statement before
the Council on 20 February (see S/PV.8183).

Fifthly, they rejected all unilateral Israeli steps
aimed at changing the realities on the ground and
undermining the two-State solution. They called on the
international community to implement the resolutions
of the international legitimacy, the most recent of
which is resolution 2334 (2016), which condemns the
settlements and confiscation of lands.

This meeting is being held at a time of tension as
Israeli occupying authorities are seriously escalating
their aggressions against the peace protesters in
Palestine, especially in Gaza Strip. These painful
incidents cause us to seriously request international
protection for the defenceless Palestinian people.

We renew our condemnation of those acts of
aggressions against the Palestinian people in the
strongest possible terms. We reaffirm our full support
for the call by the Secretary-General and many States
to conduct a transparent and independent investigation
into the fatal incidents related to the Great March of
Return for the fourth week in a row. Pressure must be
brought to bear on Israel to exercise restraint and refrain
from using live ammunition against the Palestinian
protesters while they commemorate the seventieth
anniversary of the Nakba. All those violations and
aggression exacerbate the humanitarian situation on
the ground, in particular in the besieged Gaza and
the camps. Basic relief services, including health
and education, are threatened as a result of the ever-
shrinking deficit in the budget of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNWRA) and the decline in financial
allocations. We would like to thank donors for their
support. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts to fill the financial gap and to
ensure the financial sustainability of UNWRA, which
would afford protection and a decent life to more than
5 million Palestinian refugees.

The international recognition of the State of
Palestine enabled it to obtain observer status at the
United Nations and to become a full member of a
number of organizations and international treaties. The
Group of Arab States seeks to promote the status of
the State of Palestine internationally. It has stepped up
its consultations with Member States and the Security
Council with regard to the continued efforts to enable
the State of Palestine to become a full Member of
the United Nations in line with the relevant United
Nations resolutions.

We strongly believe that we have no option other
than to put an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine
and all other Arab territories. That is the only way to
achieve peace in the region. We support all serious
efforts and endeavours to revive the peace process
and resume negotiations between the Palestinian and
Israeli sides on the basis of the two-State solution and
in accordance with the international terms of reference,
the resolutions of the Madrid Peace Conference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

