Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I am
pleased to see you in the Council Chamber, Sir,
presiding over this important meeting.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The countries of Central and Eastern
Europe associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia -
the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and
the European Free Trade Area countries belonging to
the European Economic Area Iceland and Liechtenstein
align themselves with this statement.

We are gathered to celebrate the birth of a new
independent nation. Today in Dili, representatives of
more than 80 countries have witnessed the Secretary-
General's handing of power to the elected
representatives of the Democratic Republic of East
Timor.

We join the people of East Timor in their joyful
celebration and commend their constant efforts, which
have finally been rewarded. The history of most
nations is fraught with tragedies but also with
successes. In their path to independence the East
Timorese have learned to persevere. Reconciliation
should now be the motto for all those linked to East
Timor, both within and outside the new nation. People
who have overcome civil conflicts and destruction
must now advance not by forgetting but by
remembering and overcoming their differences. That
effort should receive the sincere support of
neighbouring countries and of the rest of the
international community.

Just over three years ago, Indonesia and Portugal
reached an agreement on consulting the East Timorese
about their future. From that moment on, the role of the
United Nations was essential to the unfolding of a
painful but ultimately successful process leading to
independence. We express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, who has wisely led the
United Nations in the enormous task of helping to
create a new nation practically from scratch. All the
men and women who have served in United Nations
missions in East Timor, as well as the personnel of all
the United Nations agencies, of various governmental
institutions and of non-governmental organizations,
equally deserve our gratitude and admiration. The new
Special Representative, Ambassador Sharma, will also
receive the full support of the European Union in his
newly assumed responsibilities.

The General Assembly recently adopted its
resolution 56/282 removing East Timor from the list of
non-self-governing territories. That action serves to
remind us that the new State will be fully responsible
for its international relations. In the case of East Timor,
that is of fundamental importance to the country's
future. We welcome the steps that Indonesia and East
Timor are taking to improve their relations, including
the recent meeting of the two Presidents in Jakarta and
President Megawati's decision to attend today's
independence ceremonies. We trust that those visits
signal a shared willingness to establish a mutually
beneficial relationship. Many issues remain to be
resolved, such as that of bringing to justice those
responsible for the violence of 1999. We urge
Indonesia, together with East Timor, to resolve the
remaining issues, including the important issue of
border demarcation.

We also want to acknowledge once more the
crucial role of the countries that have supported the
United Nations effort by committing resources and a
significant number of troops.

The European Union has made a considerable
effort to support the nascent State and will continue to
be present in East Timor through the aid provided by
the European Community and by its member States
individually. Many European Union nationals have
participated in the successive United Nations missions,
and they will be present in the new United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET).

The European Union welcomes the stated
commitment of independent East Timor to the
protection of human rights. In this context, we
underscore the important position taken against the
death penalty through its prohibition in the
Constitution of the Democratic Republic of East Timor.

The European Union commends the leaders of the
new State for the way in which they have participated
in the nation-building process, which culminates today.
The people of East Timor have shown great political
maturity, choosing to support democracy as the only
way to achieve peace and progress. We reiterate our
congratulations on the successful holding of elections
for the first Constituent Assembly, in August 2001, and
the first presidency, in April 2002, and we trust that
their high standard of broad and peaceful participation
will be repeated in the future.

In spite of the achievements of these last three
years, we are aware that all has not been achieved. As
the new State develops and UNMISET gradually scales
down, the international community will need to
readjust its assistance, while taking into account the
fact that East Timor will continue to have great
development needs. The European Union and its
member States will continue to support firmly East
Timor in this next phase of its development. Public
administration, the judicial system, law enforcement
and defence are some of the main areas that will
require international support.

The Union welcomes Security Council resolution
1410, adopted on 17 May 2002, whereby UNMISET
was created. We trust that the new Mission will draw
from the experience of its predecessor in helping the
East Timorese build a democratic, viable and stable
country at peace with its neighbours.

In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of East
Timor will soon join us as a Member State of the
United Nations. It will be a new Member in a new
century, but it will certainly not be a newcomer to this
Organization. The United Nations should now regard
with pride the successful achievement of a multilateral
effort in which people from very different backgrounds
have participated with success.

