I join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Allow me also to extend a very warm welcome to the new Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, Her Excellency Dame Barbara Woodward. I look forward to working with her on the Sudan as well as on other matters on the Security Council's agenda. Despite multiple challenges, including the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Sudan has made great efforts to succeed with its historic transition. It is therefore of the utmost importance that the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) be fully operational at the earliest opportunity to support the country in its efforts, and particularly in the four mandated strategic areas. First, it is crucial that the Sudan receive the support of UNITAMS in order to progress with the political transition to democracy. In that regard, the focus should be on institution-building, as strong institutions form the backbone of democracy. We would like to acknowledge the Sudan for the significant steps it has already taken and would encourage the country to continue on that path of reform and institution-building. Secondly, we congratulate the Sudan on the signing of the Juba peace agreement on 3 October. The implementation of the agreement now becomes key, and the support of UNITAMS in its implementation cannot be overemphasized. I would also like to underscore the importance of the inclusion of women in that process. In addition, we call on the parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do so urgently. Thirdly, it is critical for the Sudan to receive the support of UNITAMS in assisting with peacebuilding, the protection of civilians and the rule of law. In that regard, we welcome the willingness of the Sudan to address civilian protection head on, but also recognize some of the capacity constraints where the United Nations can be helpful. Fourthly, given the economic hardship that the Sudan has seen in 2020, it is crucial for UNITAMS, together with international financial institutions, to put their full weight behind supporting the economic recovery. We would also like to welcome the intention to remove the Sudan from the list of State sponsors of terrorism. UNITAMS was established with the sole purpose of supporting the Sudan during its historic transition. It is very important for that messaging to be communicated clearly and through meaningful action to the Sudanese people. Given the immense challenges that the Sudan is facing, it is crucial that UNITAMS have sufficient capacity and adequate resources and be fit for purpose to offer support in all areas in which the Sudan needs it. We also reiterate our call to have the Special Representative of the Secretary-General appointed at the earliest opportunity. Allow me now to turn to the topic of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). By the end of December, the Security Council will have to make a decision about the future of UNAMID. Estonia supports a responsible withdrawal that is not politicized but based on the needs on the ground. Rushing the withdrawal risks losing the significant gains made by UNAMID over the years. Lastly, I would like to express our deep appreciation to the Sudan for offering its generous support to the Ethiopian refugees who are fleeing the fighting and violence in the Tigray region. Those actions prove once again why we must invest in a stable, strong and prosperous Sudan, as it gives so much back to the region. The international community must spare no effort to offer its support for the aspirations of the Sudanese people to achieve democracy, peace and prosperity.
