Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting and I thank him for his responsible introductory remarks. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs for her briefing. At the fourth round of meetings, hosted in the Kazakh capital on 3 and 4 May 2017, the Astana guarantors agreed, as my colleague the representative of Russia has said, on establishing de-escalation zones in my country for six months as a temporary measure. At the end of that meeting in Astana, the guarantors, including the Turkish regime, asserted their firm commitment to the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic and agreed, inter alia, to the following, as per an official Security Council document: take all measures to ensure a ceasefire on the part of all parties to continue fighting the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh, the Al Nusra Front, Fath al-Sham and all other individuals, groups, proxies and entities associated with Al-Qaida or Da'esh, as designated by the Security Council, in and out of the de-escalation zones. The three guarantors, including the Turkish regime, had to take measures by 4 July 2017 to separate the armed opposition groups from the terrorist groups that I have just mentioned. On 3 May 2017, the same day on which Astana agreement was concluded, my Government announced its support of the Russian initiative on the de-escalation zones in order to stop the bloodshed of the Syrian people and to ensure, to the extent possible, a return to normal life. The Government stressed that it would pursue its war against terrorism - namely Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and other associated terrorist groups. On 17 September 2018, the Sochi agreement provided for the establishment of a demilitarized zone in Idlib province and parts of rural Aleppo and Hama, while the Turkish regime committed itself to withdrawing armed groups and terrorist organizations from that region, including the Al-Nusra Front and other associated groups, to disarming them by 15 October 2018 and to ensuring normal traffic on the M4 and M5 highways by the end of 2018. My Government welcomed that time-bound and temporary initiative. It was the result of intensive consultations between the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian Federation. We once again stressed that we would continue combating terrorism until we had liberated every inch of our territory, whether through military operations or local reconciliation. That is the substance of a formal Council document on the Sochi agreement. Although we, our friends and other countries demanded that the Turkish regime honour the commitments to which I have just referred within the timeframe set in the Astana and Sochi agreements, the Erdogan regime, which does not abide by international legitimacy, reneged on them. Along with its terrorist organizations, Erdogan regime exploited the de-escalation agreements in order to bolster their presence and capabilities, especially in the Syrian areas adjacent to Turkey, and to impose a sustained terrorist reality at the cost of our people's suffering in Idlib, Aleppo and rural areas of Hama and Latakia, where they have endured crimes committed by those terrorist organizations. The victims of those crimes, as I explained yesterday, are civilians, humanitarian workers and everyone who dares to reject the practices of the terrorist groups. In the north-west, there have been repeated demonstrations against the practices of Turkey-supported terrorist groups, including plundering, looting, killing, kidnapping, detentions, torture, rape, the imposition of taxes, the stealing of produce, the pillaging of archaeological items, human trafficking, and the looting and selling of humanitarian aid. Two years after the Astana agreement and a year and a half after the Sochi agreement, the Turkish regime maintained observation posts on Syrian territory with the ostensible purpose of monitoring terrorist activities, preventing continued terrorist crimes and repelling attacks on the positions of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian forces. However, the Turkish regime turned those posts into operating rooms for supporting terrorist organizations. Proof of that is the fact that Turkish soldiers were killed far from those observation posts, as they were supporting terrorists. In her briefing today, the Under-Secretary-General confirmed what I have noted by saying that Turkish forces played a supporting role in terrorist operations against Syrian forces in Saraqib. In furtherance of its constitutional and national duties, relevant Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism, the Astana agreement and the Sochi agreement, the Syrian Arab Army and its allies launched a precise military operation to rid our people in Aleppo, Idlib and the surrounding areas of terrorist organizations and to restore State authority and the rule of law to areas controlled by the Al-Nusra Front. The latest report (S/2020/53), dated 20 January, a copy of which I have with me today, contains the twenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team presented in accordance with resolution 2368 (2017). I will now read out the following paragraph from page 3 of that report: "Tdlib Province, in the north-west of the Syrian Arab Republic, remains dominated by groups affiliated with Al-Qaida but also plays host to relocated ISIL fighters and dependents. Parts of Iraq, especially the area of Anbar Province bordering the Syrian Arab Republic, also represent a permissive security environment for the movement of ISIL fighters." They controlled the entire Idlib province. However, the Syrian Arab Army and its allies have succeeded in liberating large swathes of land, including more than 140 towns and villages, from the control of cannibals and the sponsors of international terrorism, who immerse themselves in the values and concepts of international humanitarian law which they learned from terrorist and extremist schools and academies. After all these efforts in counter-terrorism, some are now demanding that the Syrian army should go back to the lines of 2018. My country condemns in the strongest terms the practices of the Turkish regime and its aggression against Syria in support of terrorism, entertaining the illusion of reviving the bygone Ottoman sultanate. We categorically reject the claims of the Turkish regime that its aggression against my country is a form of self- defence, a way of implementing the Adana agreement concluded between our two countries in 1998 or any other illusionary pretexts. Speaking of self-defence, members of the Council are aware that the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations ended its work two days ago. The Mexican delegation proposed a good idea, namely, not misusing or misinterpreting Article 51 of the Charter. No one objected to the proposal except for the Turkish delegation. Indeed, the Turkish delegation opposed the Mexican proposal. It is the Erdogan regime that violated the Adana agreement, as well as its commitments under the Astana and Sochi agreements. It has disregarded good-neighbourliness and Security Council resolutions on counter-terrorism. I told the Council yesterday that the Erdogan regime has even used water as a terrorist weapon (see S/PV.8734). It cut off water supplies from the city of Al-Hasakah, which is host to 600,000 civilians, who were deprived of water. This regime has for years been recruiting, supporting, training and arming thousands of terrorists, including foreign terrorist fighters from more than 100 countries, according to United Nations reports. Turkish intelligence received them at Turkish airports and allowed them to infiltrate the shared borders between Turkey and my country. Turkish intelligence planned the crimes to be committed by those terrorists and provided them with military, political and media support. It then brought them together, integrated them into the Turkish forces and used them in its aggression in the north-east and the north-west of my country. It then transferred some of them to Libya and the Horn of Africa. My country categorically rejects the Erdogan criminal regime's targeting of Syrian civilians as fuel in its unrestrained war against my country, and its use of civilians as a way to pressure the Governments of European countries - to blackmail them and drag NATO into its childish adventures - to expedite the accession of Turkey to the European Union or to allow Turkish citizens to enter European territories without visas. We call on European countries to honour their commitments under international law and human rights instruments. We call on them not to get involved in shameful deals or political bazaars with the rogue Turkish regime at the expense of the Syrian people.In the past few days, we have witnessed the fighting of the Turkish army whose leaders Erdogan dismissed in 2016, claiming that they had orchestrated a coup. He has transformed the Turkish army from a secular force into an arm of the Muslim brotherhood, fighting with terrorist takfiri groups in Syria and Libya, in violation of international law, the Charter, Security Council resolutions and the Sochi agreement. It is regrettable that some continue to commend the Turkish regime while ignoring its crimes, such as transforming humanitarian delivery mechanisms, as contained in resolution 2504 (2020) and previous resolutions, into corridors for bringing in thousands of troops and military equipment, including tens of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters and all sorts of arms and munitions, along with chemical weapons. My country is fighting terrorism on our territories. Idlib is in Syria; itis notin Turkey or on NATO territories. It is not in Belgium, Estonia, France, Germany or California. My country is fighting terrorism on its own territories, not on the territory of another country. We are determined to use all legitimate tools to address the Turkish aggression in support of terrorism. We protect our people and defend the unity of Syria, our sovereignty and our independent national decisions. The Security Council must shoulder its responsibilities to put an end to the adventures of the Erdogan regime, which threaten international and regional peace and security. As the Secretary-General has said, this is what the Charter and international law require. In conclusion, I ask the States that called for convening today's meeting to answer the following questions. Does the presence of the Turkish forces on the territory of my country constitute a military aggression and a form of occupation or not? The Turkish regime seeks to impose Turkish practices and raise the Turkish flag on the Syrian areas that it occupies. It seeks to change the names of our streets to Turkish names, impose Turkish curricula in our schools and loot our wealth, resources and monuments. Is all that in accordance with international law or not? Have the Security Council's approaches to combating terrorism and maintaining international peace and security, in accordance with the Charter, changed or do some want to replace the Charter with a new, non-consensual and controversial document? Is there a remnant of credibility in the Security Council that allows the Member States that have entrusted it with its powers to continue to rely on the Council? It has become apparent that the aim of this meeting is to target the Astana format and distort the concept of international law - nothing else. If there had been any commitment to international law, as my colleague the British representative has said, his country would have never invaded and destroyed Iraq. It would not have killed a million Iraqis, stolen Iraq's national museum and resources, or destroyed its infrastructure. If there was an international law at that time to prevent the invasion of Iraq by the United States and Britain, we would not have reached this situation and Libya would not have faced what it is facing today.
