Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I hope that I will be able to
make my remarks within four minutes.

I take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate and for providing
a detailed concept note (S/2018/586, annex) to guide
us. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and all the previous speakers for their
insightful statements.

We note that this debate on mediation and the
peaceful settlement of conflicts comes at an opportune
time given the evolving nature of conflicts worldwide.
Now more than ever before, the prevention of conflicts
remains the best way to resolve them. However,
mediation cannot succeed in isolation. It is important
to invest in preventing conflict, building trust and
drawing up and having clear and inclusive mandates
to guide the mediation process, which should also be
complemented by reconciliation and post-conflict
development. Mediation therefore is and remains central
to the primacy of politics in the peaceful resolution of
conflicts in line with the Charter of the United Nations.

It has been observed that the United Nations has
registered more success in conflict management and
resolution than in prevention. We therefore note with
appreciation the success stories in conflict prevention
that the Secretary-General outlined this morning in
his briefing.

When the Secretary-General took up office in 2017,
he declared his vision for a renewed emphasis by the
United Nations on prevention and a surge in diplomacy
for peace. We note with satisfaction that a revamped
and expanded High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
of the Secretary-General is now in place. However,
more resources, both voluntary and assessed, should be
allocated for mediation and preventive diplomacy in the
sustaining peace processes.
When a conflict breaks out, it is usually more
costly to resolve it. As such, as the saying goes, a dime
or a cent invested in preventive mediation has more
value than a dollar or a pound invested in addressing
the outbreak of conflict. There is therefore a need to
give more significance to prevention and to building
capacities in the field, particularly in peacekeeping and
other political missions.

For many decades, Kenya has been at the centre of
regional peace processes and has chaired and worked
with our neighbours on many peace initiatives within
our subregion. We have achieved success and have
also overcome challenges in the process. We therefore
call on the United Nations and the international
community to continue to support such worthy regional
peace initiatives.

In order to achieve greater success in mediation
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts, in line with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, it is important to include women in all peace
processes, including mediation and other initiatives for
conflict prevention, since women and children bear
the greatest brunt when conflicts occur. Furthermore,
it is important to leverage technology, particularly
in conflict early-warning mechanisms, to facilitate
timely intervention.

We also consider that it is equally important
to recognize the role of regional and subregional
organizations - if I look at the African case, the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, the East African Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region - in conflict prevention, management and
resolution. They play a crucial role in mediation and
the peaceful settlement of conflicts in their respective
jurisdictions. Through continued technical assistance,
capacity-building, political support and general
goodwill, such organizations can even play a much
greater role. IfI take the example of the African Union
Mission in Somalia, apart from degrading a terrorist
organization, it has also been active in promoting
local reconciliation and has contributed a great deal
in confidence-building measures to support mutual
trust among communities. They need support from the
United Nations and other players.

In that regard, there is a need for adequate and
predictable resources for conflict prevention and
mediation. Addressing the socioeconomic conditions
that lead to conflicts, promoting human rights and
building national and regional capacities for conflict
prevention are key to sustainable peace and development.

In conclusion, national ownership and inclusivity
are very important in mediation processes. That calls
for strong coordination and cooperation among the
United Nations, national authorities, civil society, the
private sector and other stakeholders on the basis of
mutual trust and complementarity.

