Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
wish to express my appreciation, Mr. President, for the
Guatemalan initiative to organize this open debate on
the subject of peace and justice, with special focus on
the role of the International Criminal Court.

There can be no lasting peace withoutjustice. That
statement resonates throughout the world, particularly
in post-conflict situations. The pursuit of justice and
the quest for peace are not mutually exclusive; they
complement each other.

The International Criminal Court plays a crucial
role in fighting impunity for the most serious crimes
of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
and, in future, the crime of aggression. I welcome the
presentation made by the President of the International
Criminal Court, Mr. Sang-Hyun Song, whom I had the
honour of hosting in Luxembourg last week during a
celebration of the tenth anniversary of the entry into
force of the Rome Statute.

The Rome Statue offers important options to the
Security Council, especially in situations in which it is
confronted with mass atrocities. The functions of the
Council and of the Court are complementary. Both aim to
protect populations at risk. The perpetration of crimes,
as defined by the Rome Statute, threaten international
peace and security. The prevention of such crimes and
insistence on international accountability contribute to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The deterrent effect of the very existence of the Court
contributes to strengthening conflict prevention.

The cases of Darfur in 2005 and of Libya in 2011
clearly show that appropriate use by the Council of
its authority to refer a situation to the International
Criminal Court significantly enhances accountability
for the most serious crimes. In future, once the Court is
able to exercise jurisdiction with respect to the crime of
aggression, the fight against impunity will have made
further progress. My country has already included
the crime of aggression in its criminal code. By early
2013, as we pledged on 27 September at the High-
level Meeting on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels, Luxembourg will have completed
ratification of the amendments to the Rome Statute,
including the crime of aggression, that were adopted
in June 2010 at the Kampala Review Conference on the
Rome Statute.

We were invited to make suggestions as to how
to strengthen interaction between the Council and
the International Criminal Court. I would like to
mention two on the basis of the excellent concept note
(S/2012/731, annex) made available to us.

First, the Council could better strengthen
interaction with the Court if it is sufficiently well-
informed about crimes being committed on the ground.
In that respect, we welcome the increasingly frequent
participation of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in the deliberations of the Council.
We would encourage the Council to continue in
that vein and to make full use of other sources of
information, such as the reports of commissions of
inquiry. The information that the Council has received
from those sources on crimes committed in Syria in
recent months is overwhelming. We firmly believe
that those responsible for such terrifying violence, war
crimes, egregious human rights violations and crimes
against humanity committed in Syria will one day have
to answer for them.

Secondly, it is important to stress the principle
of complementarity. The Court is complementary
to national criminal jurisdictions, which are the first
line of defence against impunity. The Council can
play a useful role in that context by ensuring that the
peacekeeping operations it mandates in post-conflict
situations have adequate capacities or are able to carry
out appropriate measures to effectively support the
strengthening of the rule of law and national courts.

Luxembourg is committed to strengthening the
principle of complementarity. That is why we started
a partnership several years ago with the International
Center for Transitional Justice and why we support
the Justice Rapid Response initiative, which aims
to train national justice professionals to investigate
international crimes. It is in the same spirit that we
support the strengthening of the justice sector as well
as national reconciliation, in the framework of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

