Mr. Matjila (South Africa): At the outset, let me
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
today. Allow me to also express our appreciation to
Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for
Africa, for her comprehensive briefing on her recent
visit to the region and developments regarding the
situation in the Sudan. We also commend the work
being done by the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In addition, we
welcome the statement to be delivered by the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan to the United Nations.

Ms. Bintou's briefing highlights the intricacies
and challenges of making peace. Accordingly, the
peacemaking journey in Darfur has not been an easy
one, as we have all witnessed during the past 14 years.
However, the tireless efforts of the international
community and consistent support over the years
have resulted in the considerable improvement of the
security situation in Darfur. The improvement of the
security situation has even propelled the drawdown
of UNAMID. In that regard, South Africa welcomes
the continued improvement of the security situation
in Darfur during the reporting period, as well as the
absence of intercommunal violence, as reported. We
also note that the number of crime-related incidents and
human rights violations declined during this period.

However, it is clear that we are not where we should
be. Areas of concern remain, particularly in Jebel
Marra. The continued clashes between armed groups
and the Government of the Sudan serve to highlight that
more efforts are required in that region. The ongoing
insecurity obstructs the lives of many vulnerable
civilians. In that regard, we call upon armed groups,
particularly the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction to resolve their disputes through the avenues for
political dialogue that have already been established.

Furthermore, it is imperative that all parties
continue to implement the outstanding provisions of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. It remains
essential for all parties to continue their commitment
to the negotiations process under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel. In
addition, as the international community, we should
continue to support the process to ensure that we do not
reverse the gains that we have achieved thus far.

South Africa remains concerned about the violations
of human rights reported in the Secretary-General's
report (S/20l9/44). Women and children continue to
be the most affected by sexual violence, which has
increasingly become a weapon of war and conflict, and
affects the long-term prospects for achieving peaceful
and prosperous communities. We would like to urge the
Government of the Sudan to combat sexual violence in
conflict and bring the perpetrators to justice.

South Africa has noted the continued reduction
of the military strength of UNAMID, as well as the
handover to UNAMID's formed police units and the
redeployment of the police units. It is important that
UNAMID provide adequate rule-of-law and livelihood
services in terms of its mandate to address the security
concerns of the local communities and the 2 million
internally displaced persons. We therefore wish to stress
the importance of humanitarian support and access to
the affected areas in Darfur. It is crucial that there be
an eventual transition from humanitarian support to
reconstruction and development in the Darfur area, as
UNAMID eventually exits the Sudan. It is imperative
for UNAMID to continue to provide technical and
logistical assistance to the Sudan disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration commission to
assist with the disarmament and demobilization of
armed combatants.

In order to facilitate the implementation of the
transition, including through the relocation of the
Office of the Joint Special Representative to Khartoum,
it is vital to involve the relevant local authorities and
officials in the Sudan in that process, so as to ensure
an open dialogue and transparent processes that will
lead to the engagement of the Sudanese Government.
As the UNAMID mission transitions out of Darfur, we
strongly support the Secretary-General's observation
recommending the close partnership and continued
engagement of the Government of the Sudan, the
African Union and the United Nations system. That
partnership has been a key ingredient in the notable
achievement in Darfur. That partnership will also be
equally important in maintaining future progress and
stability in the area. Similarly, for any peace to be
sustained, we need to harness our efforts in addressing
socioeconomic development in the Sudan. Economic
development will alleviate potential conflict triggers
in future.

We should also guard against spoilers utilizing
the current socioeconomic challenges in the Sudan
to further their own narrow interests. Our efforts in
making peace in the Sudan have showed and continue
to show signs of progress. We should remain steadfast
and tireless in that trajectory. Making peace in Darfur
will continue to positively affect the region as we
all contribute to the African Union's aspirations of
silencing the guns by 2020.

Lastly, we would like to express our appreciation to
those working at the coalface in Darfur - Joint Special
Representative for Darfur Jeremiah Mamabolo and his
team - for their continued commitment to building
peace in the region.

