Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing and commend him for his clear methodology
of work. I warmly welcome him to the Security Council
and wish him all the best. He has our full support.

Regrettably, as the Syrian conflict enters its ninth
year, continuous violence is widespread on the ground
and brutal violations of international law, including
abuses of human rights and international humanitarian
law, still take place. Now, at the beginning of 2019, we
are at a critical juncture. We strongly believe that the
Idlib ceasefire agreement introduced some positive
dynamics. However, questions remain about the
future sustainability of the arrangement, the degree of
compliance by parties to the conflict in Syria, as well
as the ongoing difficult situation of internally displaced
persons and other civilians present in Idlib and its
surroundings. As we heard two days ago from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the situation is especially worrying in the north-west
and north-east of the country. We need to once again
emphasize the need to prevent military hostilities, which
could have disastrous humanitarian consequences.

Let me also briefly touch on the very important
issue of accountability for war crimes. We urge all
parties to the conflict to condemn arbitrary detentions,
kidnappings, hostage-taking and forced disappearances,
and to protect humanitarian workers and journalists.

I underscore that the political process continues
to fail to gain traction, including with regard to the
establishment of the constitutional committee, the first
step towards a genuine political process under United
Nations supervision. We see a special role for Syrian
women in that regard.

Let me underline something that has already been
mentioned by many around this table - no military
solution to the conflict can bring sustainable peace
to the Syrians. Instead, we should aim at reaching a
framework for an intra-Syrian framework political
agreement. A cessation of hostilities may give a chance
for peace talks to succeed under the auspices of the
United Nations in Geneva and to gain momentum so
that a political solution may finally be reached. We
also call on the Astana guarantors to follow through
on their commitment to protecting civilians as a matter
of priority.

Let me also insist that any political solution must
be brokered in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).
The United Nations, and particularly the Secretary-
General's Special Envoy for Syria, has a particular
role to play in that process. That is why we express our
full support for all of the Envoy's efforts to establish
a constitutional committee as soon as possible. We
ask all the actors involved, in particular the Astana
guarantors, to support that process. The constitutional
committee should be established now, as a matter of
priority, and further steps should swiftly follow to
enable a negotiated political transition process. It will
require the full and constructive engagement of all
parties to the conflict. A special role must be played
by the Syrian authorities, who should participate in the
negotiations in good faith and without preconditions.

Allow me to reiterate the European Union's
common position on the reconstruction of Syria. We
believe that it should commence once an inclusive
political transition is firmly under way, as we need to
support the safe return of the millions of Syrian people
who have fled their homes. We believe that the primary
long-term solution for Syrian refugees throughout the
region is their sustainable, safe, dignified and voluntary
return to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.

That is why the European Union is organizing the
third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future
of Syria in March, demonstrating our commitment
to millions of people affected by the conflict. The
conference will also renew international support for
the United Nations-facilitated Syrian-led and -owned
political process, in accordance with resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique.

