Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Mexico thanks the Dominican Republic for
convening this open debate on such a relevant topic on
the international agenda. As the Executive Secretary of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change recently pointed out, working to combat climate
change is synonymous with working to preserve the
human species.

The scientific evidence contained in the fall 2018
special report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change is clear, forceful and alarming. Increasing our
resolve is key to tackling the phenomenon, and our
current efforts are falling short. We are very far from
meeting the goal of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. In recent years, combating climate change has
consistently been, and will continue to be, a national
and international priority for the Government of
Mexico. Since the sixteenth Conference ofthe Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (COP16), held in Cancun, Mexico, where we
laid the groundwork for all our current understandings,
we opted for a binding, ambitious and dynamic regime,
which is embodied today in the Paris Agreement, with
the Framework Convention as the main international
intergovernmental forum for negotiating the global
response to climate change. In that regard, Mexico
supports and thanks the Secretary-General for holding
a high-level meeting on climate change this year.

It is important to analytically distinguish among the
causes and scope of the phenomenon in order to identify
the relevant agencies within the United Nations system
able to confront them and consequently ensure that
our efforts are truly coherent, coordinated, effective
and efficient. It is imperative that the Security Council
voice its concern about this critical issue, and we hope
that it will reaffirm that, in that regard, the Framework
Convention is the proper venue for coordinating actions
to address its causes and effects across its mitigation,
adaptation, loss and damage, climate financing,
technology transfer and capacity-building pillars.

The best way to ward off the risks associated with
climate change is to deal with its structural causes
and vulnerability factors. To that end, we must adhere
to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
which translates into building resiliency and fostering
international cooperation. The issues that come up in
discussions on the link between climate change and
security generally reflect the effects of the former, many
of which are related to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, including such development challenges as
displacement, migration, food security, water scarcity,
energy production and pandemics, among others. In
other words, the indirect effects of climate change on
populations constitute a threat to international peace
and security and are risk factors with regard to the
emergence and the exacerbation of conflicts. We must,
however, recognize that, although the phenomenon
increases vulnerability, it is not the underlying cause of
the institutional and structural fragility experienced by
many countries. It is not a matter of reconfiguring an
approach to combat climate change into one ensuring
security, but rather of recognizing its devastating
effects, which are intensifying on a daily basis, while
affecting international relations and security.

The discussion on the links between the effects of
climate change and security must always be based on
the context-specific context of countries and regions.
We therefore believe that, in order to provide them
with comprehensive and adequate attention, the effects
of climate change must be included as part of risk
analyses carried out by the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs on a case-by-case basis,
while maintaining an incremental approach based on
sustainable development and vulnerability.

No part of the planet is immune from the impact of
extreme climate events, hence the imperative need to
improve the mechanisms and methods to successfully
manage the risks they represent and avoid them.
Fortunately, such analyses have begun to be included
in the mandates of some peacekeeping operations that
recognize the effects of climate change as risk factors.
The application of such an approach would be welcome
in reviewing various conflicts on the Council's agenda
so that it becomes part of the analytical resources
underpinning the decision-making process of the
Security Council and with regard to peacebuilding.

In that regard, the sustaining peace approach offers
a broad, necessary and totally relevant paradigm shift
to approaching this issue. It is precisely peace, not
conflict, that must be the reference point for prevention
and the motivator for the use of all the resources and
tools available to foster peaceful societies that benefit
from sustainable development, including resiliency to
climate change. The best way to respond to its impacts
is therefore to meet the goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development so as to achieve sustainable
and inclusive development that leaves no one behind.

Before considering making this topic a standing
agenda item of the Security Council, we must have
reliable and rigorous analytical tools that inform and
support the decisions of the Security Council and
can therefore incorporate such a perspective. A clear
division of labour within the United Nations system is
the best way forward to address the impact of climate
change on international peace and security.

Based on all that I have just said, it is Vital that,
as one of the principal organs of the Organization, the
Security Council reaffirm its role as a contributor to the
harmonized efforts of the entire system, not as a body
that deals with that link alone or in isolation. In the
same vein, the work of the Security Council should take
advantage of and be appropriately complemented by the
tools and processes for addressing cross-cutting issues
on the agenda of the Organization, such as migration,
food security and disaster risk reduction, among others.

