I thank Special Representative Chambas and Ms. Ibrahim for their briefings. Since the last briefing on this issue (see S/PV.8698), the overall situation in West Africa and the Sahel has remained stable. Presidential and legislative elections were held successfully in Togo and Mali, and constitutional review has progressed in the Gambia. However, grave security challenges remain. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has added another layer of complexity to the regional situation and is undermining the region's economic and social development. Over the past few months, through its good offices and mediation efforts, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) has played an important role in promoting peace and stability in the region. China appreciates its efforts and contributions under the leadership of the Special Representative, especially during the difficult context of the COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 continues to spread in the region. The priority for UNOWAS is to closely monitor the evolving pandemic situation, assess its impact and help the countries of the region raise awareness, increase preparedness, strengthen and promote health care, save lives and mitigate the impact of the outbreak. In view of the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/585) and the situation on the ground, I would like to share a few more points. First, we should encourage the countries of the region to settle their differences through dialogue. Many such countries, including Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea and the Niger, all have important elections later this year. We have seen tensions rising in some countries, and electoral preparations are also affected by the pandemic. To create a favourable external environment, the international community needs to encourage relevant parties to enhance mutual trust and resolve differences peacefully through dialogue and consultation. China supports the continued good offices and mediation efforts of UNOWAS to help ensure peaceful, credible and transparent elections in those countries on the basis of full respect for their national ownership. Secondly, we should help the countries of the region eliminate the root causes of instability through development. Underdevelopment is the root cause of many regional challenges and threats. The international community needs to further promote the region's socioeconomic development, especially by increasing investment in agriculture, health, education, employment and infrastructure. We encourage UNOWAS to strengthen coordination with other United Nations agencies and regional and subregional organizations, and to enhance synergies by aligning international and regional development initiatives with the national strategies of the countries of the region. Thirdly, we should increase support to the countries of the region to combat security challenges. Boko Haram terrorism, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and intercommunal violence seriously undermine the security and stability of the region. We call on all parties to conflicts to heed the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. China commends the important role played by the Multinational Joint Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). More support is needed to build the capacities of the countries of the region to more effectively combat terrorism and transnational organized crime. The international community should provide more humanitarian assistance to the region and ensure its timely delivery to the most vulnerable groups. As a good friend and a good partner, China is a strong supporter of peace and stability in the region. We are committed to helping the region eliminate poverty, improving people's well-being and promoting development. We support a number of peace and security programmes in the region through the China-United Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund. We also contributed ¥300 million in aid for counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel and the G-5 Sahel Force. Ever since the outbreak of COVID-19, China has been providing assistance to Africa. We have delivered medical supplies to more than 50 African countries, including countries of the region, and have sent medical teams to Burkina Faso and Cote d'Ivoire. China will follow through on the commitments made by President Xi Jinping at the China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19, held last month. We will start, ahead of schedule, the construction of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters later this year. We will also accelerate the construction of China-Africa Friendship Hospitals and pair Chinese hospitals with 30 African hospitals in order to help African countries improve their capacity for disease prevention and control. Finally, China will continue to support the work of the Special Representative and UNOWAS. We will work with UNOWAS and the international community to help the countries of the region combat COVID-19, maintain peace and stability and achieve sustainable development.
