Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
objects to the adoption of the agenda for this meeting.
The Russian delegation's request that we hold an
open meeting on the law on the use of Ukrainian as
the national language specifically today, the day of
the inauguration of Mr. Volodymyr Zelensky as the
new President of Ukraine, democratically elected in a
transparent electoral process, is clearly not intended to
contribute to resolving the crisis between Russia and
Ukraine.

While France supports retaining the crisis in
Ukraine as an item on the Council's agenda, we believe
that the call for a meeting without prior notice by Russia,
a party to the conflict, would not allow us to have an
in-depth discussion and above all is clearly intended to
make life difficult for the new President of Ukraine.
The urgency of the law on the status of the Ukrainian
language, which was enacted on 25 April and will enter
into force on 16 July, is not comparable to that of the
humanitarian and security situation in Donbas. The
Council should remain focused on those two issues,
where we continue to expect concrete action, as the
lives ofmillions okarainian citizens depend on it. The
language question should be dealt with in accordance
with the commitments that have already been made,
including with respect to the ceasefire, the withdrawal
of heavy weapons, disengagement, the restoration of
control of the border to the Ukrainian Government,
the implementation of decentralization, the departure
of foreign armed forces and the dissolution of illegal
armed groups.

What we expect today from Russia is genuine
openness to dialogue with the new Ukrainian President.
In his inaugural speech in Kyiv only this morning, the
President of Ukraine spoke of restoring peace as one
of his major objectives. We are sorry that the Council
presidency did not respond to the proposal of six
delegations to postpone this meeting to a later date.
In that context, France objects to the adoption of the
agenda of the meeting and calls on the members of the
Council to vote against holding it.

