Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), Ms. Ellen Laj, for
her briefing and her active work in her post. We wish
her all the very best.

We also take note of the letter dated 9 November, the
recent report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in South Sudan (S/2016/950), the special report of the
Secretary-General on the review of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (S/2016/951),
the interim report of the Panel of Experts on South
Sudan (S/2016/963), and your statement, Mr. President,
in your capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.

We note the recommendations issued by the
Secretary-General on the Mission's mandate, wherein
he speaks of the priority given to promoting a peaceful
process and normalizing the situation in the security
area. That implies that peacekeepers should provide
capacity-building support to South Sudanese power
structures. Those proposals are in line with our own
approach. We think that the way to improve the
humanitarian situation and the human rights situation
in South Sudan lies through a lasting settlement on the
basis of inclusiveness.

As a step towards an inclusive political process
and national reconciliation, we welcome the amnesty
announced by President Salva Kiir for the supporters
of Rick Machar who participated in the armed clashes
in Juba in July and who are currently in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We share the opinion of the
Secretary-General that strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the Mission, including the deployment of
the Regional Protection Force, is not a panacea against
all of the country's ills.

With regard to the implementation of resolution
2304 (2016) and the joint communique' between the
Transitional Government of National Unity and the
Security Council of 4 September (S/2016/776, annex),
we see a certain amount of progress there, which shows
that there is a constructive nature to the currently
ongoing negotiations with Juba. In particular, the South
Sudanese agreed to host contingents from Kenya,
Ethiopia and Rwanda. It is not their fault that, because
of the well-known hasty and ill-advised actions of the
Secretariat, Nairobi refused to send a new contingent
to South Sudan and is withdrawing the contingent
that was already deployed. One more positive element
here is the letter of 15 November containing the draft
agreement between Juba and the Mission, addressing
the implementation of the communique of 4 September.

We thank Mr. Dieng for his briefing. We share
his concerns with regard to the spread in South Sudan
of rhetoric and actions targeting individual ethnic
groups. What draws our attention is the fact that such
rhetoric frequently comes from various kinds of armed
and criminal groups and undisciplined elements of
various power structures. We would therefore refrain
from drawing the conclusion that they represent an
intentional policy, all the more so since some parties
have a tendency to exploit the emotional reaction of
the international community to the really difficult
and dramatic situation in South Sudan. In particular,
some colleagues refer to that situation in order to
justify their appeals to expand the sanctions regime
against that country, including an arms embargo by the
Security Council.

Our position on that has not changed. We think that
implementing such a recommendation would hardly
be helpful in settling the conflict. Furthermore, newer
sanctions could further complicate the relationship
among the host country, the peacekeepers and the
international community. Generally speaking,
introducing targeted sanctions now against South
Sudanese leaders would be the height of irresponsibility.
Someone probably wants very much to see President
Kiir share the fate of Al-Qadhafi, against whom
targeted sanctions were also introduced.

In the Secretary-General's letter of 9 November,
we did not note any conclusion that the Government
is impeding the deployment of the Regional Protection
Force in South Sudan. Quite the contrary, there is
positive movement in that area. Therefore, even if
we were to follow the formal logic of resolution 2304
(2016), which was, by the way, supported by our
Western colleagues, the reintroduction of an arms
embargo by the Security Council against South Sudan
would be premature.

With regard to the sanctions against South Sudan,
there is again no unity among African countries,
including the neighbouring countries. That lack of
unity could undermine the effectiveness of potential
restrictions. We can see that in the example of a
number of African countries, including the Central
African Republic, where sanctions, including the arms
embargo, are not working. By the way, with regard
to the communique of the African Union Peace and
Security Council of 19 September and their statement
after their visit to Juba at the end of October, we saw
no call for new sanctions either. We draw that to the
attention of those colleagues who are selective in
referring only to those decisions of the African Union
that they find useful.

Another point needs to be made. There is an
official arms embargo against South Sudan imposed
by the European Union (EU), but the United Nations
experts confirm that a functioning network supplying
weapons to South Sudan is operating in European
countries, so the EU embargo is not working. Where
is the guarantee that a United Nations embargo would
function? By the way, we are surprised by the double
standards of some colleagues who actively call for an
arms embargo against South Sudan while their own
nationals and companies are involved in supplying
weapons to that country.

