Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
welcome the convening of this quarterly open debate
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and thank Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing.

We are deeply concerned over the continuing
deterioration of the situation on the ground and
call on all stakeholders to take moderate steps
towards constructive dialogue, based on respect for
international law and international humanitarian
law. Peru encourages any initiative on the part of the
international community aimed at finding a solution to
the question of Palestine, such as the outcome document
of the recent Paris conference on peace in the Middle
East, which reflected international support for the two-
State solution and the Quartet's recommendations.

Given the broad consensus that the status quo
is unsustainable, strengthened efforts are urgently
needed to achieve and maintain peace. The United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, must at
least facilitate the framework of an understanding to
ensure the resumption of direct negotiations between
the parties. Since 1947, when Peru became a member
of the United Nations Special Committee on Palestine,
we have clearly and consistently maintained our
position towards implementation of General Assembly
resolution 181(II). We support the solution of two
States, living side by side within secure and recognized
borders. We therefore underscore the importance of
compliance with Security Council resolution 2334
(2016), adopted last December, which is equally firm
against the acquisition of territory by force and any act
of provocation or incitement to violence or destruction,
regardless of its origin.

We reiterate our appeal for an immediate cessation
of settlement activities, home demolitions and evictions
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We condemn the continued launching of
missiles and the commission of terrorist acts and other
acts of violence against the population. We recognize
Israel's inalienable right to safeguard its security and
existence, including through legitimate defence, but we
stress that such action must accord with the principles
of proportionality and legality.

Furthermore, we reiterate our resounding
condemnation of the crime of all crimes against
humanity, as witnessed in the recent use of Chemical
weapons in Syria against the civilian population. We are
concerned over the persistent conflict in that country
and its devastating impact on the Syrian population
and have appealed to the members of the Council to
overcome their differences and take effective action,
as they did, for example, with the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2254 (2015), which established the
foundation for dialogue among the Syrian parties, with
the aim of achieving a political solution.

In addition, we urge the permanent members of
the Council, in accordance with the code of conduct
prepared by the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, of which we are a member, and
the France-Mexico initiative, to abstain from using the
veto in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity,
or flagrant violations of human rights or international
humanitarian law.

Finally, Peru considers it an urgent matter for
the Geneva and Astana talks to resume, in order to
ensure a definitive end to the hostilities in Syria. We
firmly support the efforts to that end on the part of the
Organization, and especially the determined work on
the part of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, Staffan de Mistura.

