I, too, would like to thank President Agius and Prosecutor Brammertz for their presentations. On behalf of my delegation, I also extend my condolences to them for the staff members of the Mechanism who lost their lives after contracting the coronavirus. As we embark on the third review of the progress of the Mechanism's work, France reiterates its full support for the Mechanism and commends its contribution to the fight against impunity and to the preservation of the legacy of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The Security Council must support the Mechanism in its work. The news from the Mechanism is obviously marked by the arrest of Mr. Felicien Kabuga on 16 May in the suburbs of Paris, thereby bringing to a close 20 years of active searching for that suspect. The arrest would not have been possible without close international cooperation at the level of the European justice system and police services, among Governments and with the Mechanism. It reveals the relevance and activeness of the Mechanism, which continues its investigative and fact-finding work and responsibilities. This is an important moment for Rwandan victims, for national reconciliation in Rwanda and for international criminal justice. Following the confirmation of the death of Mr. Augustin Bizimana, it is crucial that the remaining six suspects be brought to justice. To that end, we reiterate our call on States to cooperate with the Mechanism without hindrance, in accordance with their international obligations. With regard to the cases referred to domestic courts, France reaffirms that it is making every effort to complete the Bucyibaruta case within a reasonable time frame. Our particular objective remains to ensure that no crime of genocide goes unpunished. Thus, our efforts have included strengthening the capacity of the judiciary to prosecute participants in the Tutsi genocide in Rwanda who reside in France. We also take due note of the recent conviction by the Rwandan judiciary of Mr. Ladislas Ntaganzwa. Finally, no lasting reconciliation can take place without an acknowledgement of crimes and responsibility. We deplore the fact that, two decades after the end of the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia and throughout the region, the glorification of war criminals is spreading, in some cases encouraged by the open support of certain national and local authorities. As important commemorations are about to take place, we call on all those responsible to stop denying the crimes and responsibility established by the international criminal courts.
