Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would also like to
thank all of today's briefers for their important input.

As we have all heard from the briefers, the
humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad basin region
is truly one of the most neglected in the world. So
far, the international community has not had much
success in resolving the multifaceted problems of
the region - not for lack of trying, but because of a
lack of understanding of how to deal with all of them
at once. Extreme poverty, severe food insecurity
and malnutrition, weak governance, climate change,
particularly desertification, and the destructive
activities of Boko Haram - all of those factors
contribute to the disastrous situation. In that regard, we
have a few points to make.

First of all, how can the Security Council
effectively react to the crisis, apart from expressing
its deep concerns and calling for more international
awareness? Such actions no longer impress anyone.
Instead, we have to find a proper role for the Security
Council to play. First of all, the Council has to be fully
aware that a constantly deteriorating humanitarian
crisis can evolve into a full-blown threat to peace and
security in the region. An already apparent constraint
with security implications lies in the fact that, owing to
dwindling economic resources and the resulting strains
on State budgets, regional Governments are struggling
in their efforts to eradicate Boko Haram, which poses
an undeniable and serious security threat.

In that regard, we commend the efforts of the
Multinational Joint Task Force and other actors that are
fighting that terrorist group. But the countries of the
region need additional support from the international
community in order to rise to that challenge.

In our opinion, the Council would do well to
engage in a serious discussion on how to strengthen
the use of existing sanctions mechanisms against Boko
Haram's members and its affiliates. Relevant inputs
and initiatives from the region would contribute greatly
to the Council's work on that subject. Additionally,
improving socioeconomic conditions has to be the top
priority, if any progress is to be made in alleviating
the immense suffering of people in the Lake Chad
basin region.

