Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for the report he
just introduced to the Security Council on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(S/2012/603). I also wish to thank His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci for their statements.

At the previous Council meeting on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) (see S/PV.6769), the Togolese delegation
expressed its concern about possible difficulties
in connection with the legislative and presidential
elections to be held in Serbia with the participation
of Kosovo Serbs. At that time, the overall atmosphere
favoured scepticism and foreshadowed an uncertain
future.

Today, however, Togo is pleased to note the
commendable conduct of the elections, as indicated in
the report of the Secretary-General, thanks to the many
efforts on the part of the international community, in
particular UNMIK, the Kosovo Force (KFOR), the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, to create the conditions necessary for
Serbians to participate in the recent elections.

We are convinced that the post-electoral context is
also a propitious time to urge stakeholders in Kosovo
to work together to consolidate and strengthen the
achievements. The recent peaceful elections will
help to restore citizens' trust in their ability to move
beyond their differences in order to build democratic
institutions.

That bright spot, nevertheless, should not lead to
blind optimism. Although there has been progress in
strengthening achievements through various agreements
concluded among Kosovo stakeholders, much remains
to be done to guarantee the security necessary in
Kosovo for all of its communities to flourish.

During the reporting period, efforts made after so
many sacrifices to guarantee security in Kosovo were
called into question by acts of violence, in particular
acts committed against KFOR personnel, and a certain
undermining ofthe freedom ofmovement. The incidents
that took place in northern Kosovo could threaten the
peace, which continues to be fragile. We therefore
call upon all Kosovo authorities and communities to
demonstrate responsibility and establish conditions
conducive to implementing the Government's priorities
and meeting the needs of the population.

We are pleased that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has often called for dialogue among
the parties, which is the only guarantee for a settlement
based on consensus on the pending issues of northern
Kosovo, in particular democratic representation.
With respect to relations between Serbia and
Kosovo, we hope that the establishment of a new Serbian
Government will serve as an opportunity to resume the
stalled consultations between the Belgrade and Pristina
authorities, under the auspices of the European Union.
My country calls upon the two capitals to follow that
path.

My country also remains concerned about the issue
of human rights in Kosovo. We believe that upholding
human rights should be a matter for all members of
Kosovo society and that everything must be done to
ensure that no crime or unlawful behaviour bejustified
by the freedom of religion or belief. Along those lines,
my country urges the Kosovo authorities to establish
the conditions necessary to protect the fundamental
freedoms of each community while respecting those of
the others.

The reconciliation attempts undertaken by the
Government in connection with Kosovo's past, with a
view to overcoming the difficulties that the country has
faced, must be encouraged. In that respect, my country
welcomes the activities undertaken by UNMIK, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women to promote
and protect human rights in Kosovo.

So as to prevent duplication and take account of
all of the different activities being undertaken in
Kosovo with a view to reconciliation, a sustainable
political settlement of the crisis and the preservation
of the considerable investments that have been made,
the partners must take a consistent and coordinated
approach to the activities they undertake. We welcome
the positive steps taken by certain partners which
have stood by Kosovo, in particular UNMIK, KFOR,
EULEX and the OSCE.

