Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Your
Excellency, Minister for Foreign Affairs, we welcome
you as you preside over this important meeting which
you have organized. It underscores the importance
of peacebuilding and peacekeeping, and reflects the
principles, objectives and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations. I wish also to thank the delegation
of Peru for the good preparation of the concept note
(S/2018/325, annex), which stresses the importance of
peacebuilding and peacekeeping through advancing
and promoting the efforts made by various organs
of the United Nations to ensure their effectiveness,
particularly peacekeeping operations. We are meeting
today for these lofty ends which reflect the objectives,
purposes and principles of the Charter.

I wish also to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General; His Excellency the Foreign
Minister of Romania, whose country is chairing the
Peacebuilding Commission; and the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union for their
valuable briefings at the beginning of this meeting.

It is vital, when speaking of building and
maintaining peace, to highlight the importance of
the role played by the Peacebuilding Commission in
making and sustaining peace. We all are aware that
the Security Council's task is to maintain international
peace and security. However, the Council usually does
not act until tensions have escalated and become violent
conflicts that are tantamount to a threat to international
peace and security. This takes place at a very advanced
stage of conflicts and when solutions become difficult,
complex and very costly. The role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, however, according to its mandate under
resolution 1645 (2005), is to undertake a number
of activities, such as doing surveys and submitting
reports on the socioeconomic and political situation of
the countries under consideration, as well as dealing
with early-warning, quick-response, good offices and
diplomatic solutions. It is therefore a forum that deals
with various socioeconomic and political issues and
cooperates with the Security Council on security-
political issues.

We therefore believe in the importance of promoting
the role ofthe Commission in reaching the desired goals.
We are firmly convinced that the Security Council
has at its disposal the tools necessary to shoulder its
responsibilities, as stated in Chapters VI, VII and VIII
of the Charter, in responding to the traditional and
renewed challenges facing our contemporary world. The
most important of these tools is preventive diplomacy,
in addition to the important and fundamental role of the
Secretary-General in bringing matters to the attention
of the Security Council, as set out in article 99 of
the Charter.

The Secretary-General has made great efforts to
reform the peace and security pillar of the Secretariat. It
is a very important step that leads to the strengthening
of the Secretariat and which is supported by the State
of Kuwait. We look forward to the adoption of the twin
draft resolutions on this issue by the General Assembly
and the Security Council. This would ensure continued
efforts and the monitoring and assessment ofthe progress
made by Member States and the United Nations for the
promotion ofbuilding peace and sustaining peace. This
would also make the United Nations more transparent,

effective, accountable and capable of shouldering its
duties and responsibilities.

While we believe in the importance of this issue,
which is closely linked to keeping peace and security,
we express our full conviction that these efforts must
be reflected on the ground by all parties concerned
with building and maintaining peace. The topic of
peacebuilding and sustaining peace should not be
limited to thematic issues. Continuous follow-up of this
topic will effectively contribute to its implementation.

The State of Kuwait supports and encourages the
mediation efforts and all other efforts made to ensure
the peaceful resolution of conflict, as well as to help
build national and regional capacities with a view to
bringing about peace, stability and development and
promoting human rights, especially in areas of tension
or conflict.

We would like to stress once again the firm belief
of the State of Kuwait that development and human
rights are closely linked to security, and that all
peoples, through enjoying their social, civil, economic
and political rights, can eradicate the root causes of
conflict throughout the world. We would highlight
the Secretary-General's focus on strengthening the
main pillars of the United Nations, namely to ensure
security, peace, development and human rights, leading
to sustained peace. This undoubtedly requires full
coherent and coordination efforts on the part of the
relevant organs in order to respond to all crises that
threaten international peace and security.

