Mr. Dauth (Australia): Let me begin by joining
others in thanking you most sincerely, Mr. President,
for the honour you do us in coming to preside over this
very important meeting today. Thank you indeed for
that. Let me also, at the outset, applaud Ireland's skilful
handling of the Security Council presidency this
month. It has really been a very impressive
performance. It is fitting that Ireland, as a strong and
consistent supporter of East Timor's peaceful transition
to a stable, democratic and effective and independent
State, is presiding over the Council at this important
point in East Timor's transition process.

You have asked us to be brief, Mr. President. I
cannot promise that mine will be as entertaining as
some of the interventions this morning, but I can
promise to be brief.

I want to begin, obviously, like so many others,
by thanking Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello for his lucid
and comprehensive briefing this morning. I extend
Australia's continuing thanks to him personally, and to
all of the members of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), for their
dedication to establishing a solid foundation for the
future of East Timor. I associate myself with my
French and Portuguese colleagues in saying that Sergio
Vieira de Mello is an emblem of the sort of United
Nations that has just won the Nobel Peace Prize.

I also acknowledge with pleasure the presence of
Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri and other elected
members of the East Timor Second Transitional
Government. Their presence here today is vital to an
effective and honest appraisal of the progress that has
been made in the transition so far and of the priorities
and challenges that lie ahead.

Today the Security Council has an opportunity to
send an unequivocal signal to the people of East Timor
and to the international community of its continuing
commitment to a successful transition process in East
Timor. It is Australia's firm view that this signal should
take the form of a clear endorsement by the Council of
the recommendations set out by the Secretary-General
in his most recent report.

In that report, which we fully endorse, the
Secretary-General has set out all of the elements
required for an effective, timely and smooth planning
process for the remainder of East Timor's transition.
He has presented us with a carefully considered,
moderate and responsible plan for a phased downsizing
process. We hope that this will lead to a stable,
democratic State in East Timor, with the meeting of
long-term development needs assisted by United
Nations agencies and other donor assistance.
There is no question that an adequate
international military and civilian police presence will
be vital to East Timor's successful transition.
Australia supports the Secretary-General's detailed
recommendations for these two components 4 a
military and civilian police presence. No less important
will be an effective civilian presence.

We concur strongly with the Secretary-General's
view that a core component of civilian functions will
be vital for a period after independence if the future
East Timor administration is to survive and to function
effectively. We acknowledge the extensive work
undertaken by UNTAET and other agencies, including
the United Nations Development Programme, to
thoroughly examine the options available to fund this
civilian component. We have taken close note of the
limitations and risks which attach to an over-reliance
on voluntary and bilateral funding options. We strongly
support the use of assessed funding for the core
functions which are identified by the Secretary-General
as essential to the stability and functioning of
government, but for which local expertise does not yet
exist.

It is Australia's unequivocal view that
endorsement of the Secretary-General's
recommendations is necessary to enable timely and
effective planning for the future United Nations role in
East Timor. Unless there is a clear endorsement, we
risk unnecessary ambiguity and delays. It would be far
preferable for concrete decisions to be taken early to
protect the United Nations already substantial
investment in East Timor. The Council's endorsement
of the Secretary-General's recommendations will set
out for the United Nations the resources that will be
available for its use in the post-independence period. It
will also confirm the needs that must be met by other
players. This will create the best possible chance for a
smooth and seamless transition to the post-
independence period. Moreover, in East Timor, the
Security Council has an opportunity to give the United
Nations the time it needs to plan effectively for the
transition process. It must not let this opportunity pass
by.

None of us want to see an open-ended United
Nations presence in East Timor. Nevertheless, as the
Council itself has said recently, there must be no exit
without strategy. Accordingly, the Council has a
responsibility to ensure that the prospect of a
successful transition is not jeopardized by a precipitate
downsizing of the United Nations presence in any of
the core areas outlined by the Secretary-General, or by
inadequate resources and unreliable funding for a post-
independence United Nations mission.

Through continued careful management, and by
taking the right decisions at the right time, the Security
Council has the capacity to ensure the successful
completion of the United Nations mandate in East
Timor, and the establishment of the sort of political and
security environment we have all worked so hard to
achieve.

