Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere congratulations to China on its presidency of
the Security Council and to thank China for holding
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos, Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovie,
and Director for International Law and Cooperation of
the International Committee of the Red Cross Philip
Spoerri for their briefings.

The current state of the protection of civilians has
not improved since the last open debate of the Security
Council on the issue (see S/PV.6650). Attacks continue
against civilians, humanitarian workers and United
Nations peacekeepers. Earlier this month, seven United
Nations peacekeepers were attacked and lost their lives
during patrols to protect civilians in Cote d'Ivoire. The
Government of Japan strongly condemns such attacks.

In addition, the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas, as seen in Syria and the Sudan, is
of grave concern as it results in numerous civilian
casualties. It also leads to the creation of scores of
internally displaced persons and refugees, which
affects not only the epicentre of violence, but also
the neighbouring countries and regions. On the basis
of the current state of affairs, I would like to raise the
following three issues.

First, there are high demands on peacekeeping
operation missions to provide protection to civilians in a
role supplementary to the primary responsibility of host
Governments. Indeed, many missions are mandated to
do so. The implementation of the protection of civilians
mandate, which can affect the credibility of a mission,
is increasingly challenging and important, and the
lack of adequate resources is a pressing issue. In that
light, we commend efforts made by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support to produce a resource capacity matrix
and training modules, and we look forward to the
further improvement of those tools. In addition, we call
for efforts to improve effective implementation of the
protection of civilians mandate, with attention to the
mid- and long-term capacity-building of host countries,
as well as the efforts of local residents.

Secondly, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian
access is indispensable to protecting civilians. The
political climate, including United Nations sanctions,
often complicates negotiations on humanitarian access.
However, we stress that humanitarian assistance on the
basis of the principles of neutrality and impartiality
should not be politicized and that host countries
should cooperate in the light of their responsibility
to protect civilians. In such complex circumstances,
close communication among relevant bodies, such
as the Security Council, DPKO and the Department
of Political Affairs, as well as the leadership of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, are critical.

Thirdly, it is crucial to seek facts and to hold
perpetrators accountable for violence against
civilians in order to prevent the further deterioration
of a situation. In that light, the Government of Japan
welcomes the resolution adopted at the Human Rights
Council earlier this month to request a commission
of inquiry to urgently conduct an inquiry into the
events in El-Houleh (A/HRC/RES/S-l9/l). We urge the
Government of Syria to cooperate with the Commission
to fully implement the resolution.

The history ofthe issue ofthe protection of civilians
at the Security Council is rather short. The issue was
brought to the Council in the wake of a series of violent
incidents in a number of countries, including Bosnia
and Rwanda. That proves that the Security Council has
been strengthening its efforts to respond to the affairs
of the world as they occur. The protection of civilian
agenda is increasingly important. The Security Council
should bear in mind its important role with regard to
the issue and jointly fulfil its duty.

