Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
Mr. President, we are pleased to see you presiding over
the Security Council during the month of July. We
congratulate you, Sir, and your country's delegation
on the manner in which you have been guiding the
business of the Council this month, and in particular
for convening this open debate on such an important
issue for international peace and stability.

It is an honour for the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to take the floor on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries at today's quarterly open
debate on a subject to which we have historically
attached particular importance, namely, "The situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question".
First of all, we would like to convey our appreciation
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator of the
United Nations for the Middle East Peace Process, for
his valuable briefing this morning.

During the seventeenth Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement, held in September 2016 in Margarita
Island, Venezuela, the Heads of State and Government
reaffirmed their continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people, as well as their unbreakable support
for their just cause, all while calling on the member
States of the Movement to renew their commitment and
to strengthen and further coordinate their efforts to
promote the realization ofjustice and the rights of the
Palestinian people in the light of the critical situation
that continues to prevail and the ever-diminishing
prospects for a peaceful solution.

That was also the case almost a month ago when, on
27 May, the Ministerial Committee of the Non-Aligned
Movement on Palestine issued a political declaration
of support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
to solemnly commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of
the beginning of the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
lands and other Arab countries in 1967. The declaration
also sought to reflect upon other upcoming solemn
anniversaries, including the seventieth anniversary
of the General Assembly's decision to split Mandated
Palestine by adopting resolution 181 (II) in 1947, as
well as the seventieth anniversary of the Al-Nakba,
which the heroic Palestinian people have resisted.

In that regard, we emphasize that ajust and lasting
solution to the question of Palestine in all its aspects
remains a priority on the agenda of the Movement. In
addition, we reaffirm that the ongoing Israeli occupation
and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict as a whole continue
to pose a serious threat to international peace and
security that requires attention and an urgent solution, in
accordance with international law, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and, of course, the Charter of the
United Nations itself. In that regard, the Movement
stands ready to contribute to the achievement of a just,
lasting and peaceful solution. We call for increased
international and regional efforts to support that goal,
all while recalling the responsibilities of the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the matter,
including responsibilities that were recently reaffirmed
in resolution 2334 (2016), which was welcomed and
endorsed by the Movement in its communique dated
27 December 2016. We believe that the resolution
offers the most viable path to peace and establishes
the requisites and parameters for a just solution that
would safeguard the two-State solution, based on pre-
1967 borders. We believe it would create the necessary
conditions to end the occupation, fairly resolve the
conflict in all its aspects and make Palestinian-Israeli
peace and security a reality.

The member States of the Movement reiterate
their calls for full respect and implementation of the
resolution. We stress that that remains essential in order
to remedy the situation on the ground, remove tensions
and foster an appropriate environment for the search
for peace. In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's second report on the implementation of that
resolution, which was orally presented to the Security
Council by Mr. Mladenov (see S/PV.7977). However,
we reiterate the need for a substantive written report
to be submitted in order to support the Council's
functions and ensure adequate documentation of the
implementation of the provisions of the resolution,
especially in the light of continued disregard on the
part of Israel concerning the Security Council and its
violations of the Council's resolutions.

The Movement expresses its deep concern about
recent developments in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, in particular
with respect to the continuation and escalation of
illegal policies and measures by Israel, the occupying
Power, which are aimed at expanding its illegal
settlement campaign, continuing the consolidation of
its occupation and half-century invasion of Palestinian
lands and continuing with its violation of the rights
of the Palestinian people. In that regard, it is worth
mentioning the most recent issuing by the Israeli
occupying authorities of permits for the construction
of more than 1,800 units of illegal settlements in
East Jerusalem, as well as the fact that those policies
continue irrespective of the fact that they will result
in the eviction and expropriation of more Palestinian
property, including the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood.

Instead of ending its violations, reversing their
negative tendencies on the ground and demonstrating its
commitment to the two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders, as required by the Security Council
and the international community, Israel continues to
act in contempt of the Council and in violation of its
legal obligations.

In that regard, the Movement's member States
strongly condemn the recent provocative decisions
by Israel, the occupying Power, to carry out its
settlement activities, which are in grave violation
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We are
also alarmed and deeply deplore the blatant contempt
of Israel, the occupying Power, for the unequivocal
decision of the Security Council in that respect, which
clearly reaffirmed that Israeli settlement activities are
not legally valid and constitute a flagrant violation
of international law. The Movement calls on Israel
to immediately and completely cease all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in East Jerusalem, and to fully respect all of
its legal obligations, including those stipulated in the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949. The Movement also
recalls the call of the Security Council to end all acts
of violence against civilians, including acts of terror, as
well as acts of provocation, incitement and destruction.

With regard to Gaza, the situation remains of
great concern to the Movement, particularly with
respect to the deteriorating humanitarian situation,
which will by untenable by 2020, according to United
Nations officials in the field. In fact, according to
the latest report by the United Nations country team,
most projections for 2020 have deteriorated further
and faster than expected. In that sense, the continued
obstruction of the reconstruction of homes, property
and civil infrastructure destroyed by the Israeli
aggression of 2014, as well as the extremely slow
pace of Gaza's recovery due to Israel's current illegal
blockade, have forced thousands of families to remain
displaced and homeless. That has also prevented the
reconstruction of critical infrastructure, including that
related to the electricity supply, which has resulted in
serious repercussions on humanitarian, socioeconomic,
psychological and environmental conditions. In that
regard, we reiterate our call for a complete lifting of
the Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which has lasted
for more than 10 years. We simultaneously emphasize
that the Gaza crisis must be tackled in a comprehensive
manner, in accordance with international law,
including the relevant international humanitarian law
and human rights law, as well as the relevant United
Nations resolutions. That all should be taken in the
context of the general situation and the continuation
of the illegitimate and belligerent Israeli occupation of
the occupied Palestinian territory since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, and the unequivocal calls to put an end
to the half-century occupation.

In addition, the Non-Aligned Movement reiterates
its strongest condemnation of Israel's systematic
human rights violations against the Palestinian people,
including, inter alia, the wilful killing and injury of
civilians, including peaceful protesters; violent military
raids, including, in particular, in refugee camps; the
terrorizing of the civilian population; the imprisonment
and detention of thousands of Palestinian civilians,
including children and women; the confiscation of land
and property and the demolition of Palestinian homes;
the forced displacement of Palestinians, particularly
Bedouin communities; and settler terrorism and
violence against Palestinian civilians. We remind the
Council of its duties in this regard.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its calls for
strengthened international efforts to achieve without
delay an end to the Israeli occupation that began in
1967 and a just, lasting, comprehensive and peaceful
solution, and reiterates its readiness to cooperate and
support all relevant efforts, in line with the decisions
taken during the seventeenth Summit on the Island of
Margarita, which declared 2017 as the International
Year to End the Israeli Occupation of Palestine. In this
regard, and on the basis of the Movement's quest to
establish a peaceful and prosperous world and its role
as an anti-war and pacifist force, we offer the good
offices of the Non-Aligned Movement as a platform for
global peace and in particular for respect for the right
to life and the inalienable right of peoples to their self-
determination and independence.

The States members ofthe Movement also condemn
in the strongest possible terms the acts of aggression
committed by Israel against the Syrian Arab Republic
on 17 March and considers such acts to constitute a
grave violation of Syrian sovereignty and a breach of
international law, the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and the Agreement on
Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces of
1974. In this regard, we request the Security Council
to shoulder its responsibility by clearly condemning
those acts of aggression and taking the necessary
measures to prevent their recurrence, and holding Israel
accountable for threatening regional and international
peace and security.

The States members of the Movement reiterate
their condemnation of all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status and character of the occupied
Syrian Golan. In this regard and in line with our
principled position, we demand once again that Israel
to abide by resolution 497 (1981) and fully withdraw
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of4 June

1967, in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement takes
this opportunity to encourage States Members of
the Organization to redouble their current efforts to
overcome the ongoing shortcomings of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in order to ensure adequate,
predictable and sustained funding of the Agency
throughout its mandate so that it can fully meet the
needs of Palestinian refugees and therefore fulfil its
humanitarian mission.

