Mr. Owada (Japan): In its previous intervention, at
the formal meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in the occupied Arab territories, held on 15 April, the
delegation of Japan expressed its grave concern over the
recent developments in Lebanon. These developments are
detrimental not only to the interests of those parties directly
involved in the Middle East peace process but also to the
cause of peace pursued by the international community as
a whole.

The recent violence in Lebanon is exacerbating the
already tense situation in the region; there is a very real
danger that it could jeopardize the peace process itself. We
in the international community must do our utmost to
prevent the situation from sliding into a vicious circle of
violence and retaliation.

Japan was greatly alarmed over the attacks on
northern Israel by Hezbollah and by the Israeli
counterattacks on Lebanese soil, which have resulted in
a large number of casualties, and has called for all the
parties concerned to exercise the utmost self-restraint. It
is particularly deplorable therefore that today's shelling by
Israeli forces on the position of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) in southern Lebanon
has added tragically to the number of casualties, including
many civilians and UNIFIL personnel. This is a
development which cannot be justified, whatever its
background may have been. In order to prevent the
further deterioration of the situation, Japan once again
urges all the parties concerned immediately to cease their
hostilities and to exercise the utmost self-restraint.

Japan fully endorses the resolution just adopted by
the Security Council as an expression of the common will
of the international community. My delegation strongly
urges the parties concerned to comply fully with the
resolution as a first step towards the normalization of the
situation.

Japan renews its firm commitment to remain actively
involved in international efforts to support the Middle
East peace process. The Summit of Peacemakers in the
Middle East condemned terrorism unequivocally. As a
participant in that Summit, Japan is determined to join
international efforts to combat terrorism and to work to
ensure that the peace process is put back on track.

At the same time, Japan intends to continue to
extend its cooperation to Palestinians for their economic
and social development, which is essential to the creation
of conditions for lasting peace in the region.

Finally, I would like to express the deep condolences
of the Government of Japan to the families of those who
died in the attack, and its sympathy to all those who were
injured.

