Mr. Paet (Estonia): I would like to thank the
United States presidency and President Obama for
their initiative in convening this meeting to address
terrorism's threat to international peace and security,
with particular focus on foreign terrorist fighters.
Like many nations, Estonia is gravely concerned about
the recent wave of aggressive terrorism and violent
extremism, which crosses State boundaries and poses
a threat to countries far from conflict zones. Today's
discussion at the highest political level here in the
Security Council is therefore most timely.

We should agree on further ways and means of
cooperating in fighting the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters. The appalling wave of violence we
are seeing from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and the Nusra Front is being supported by an
influx of radicalized foreign fighters. They pose a
real threat, not only where they are fighting but also
after they return home to their countries of origin. The
problem's repercussions are also visible in the Sahel
region. Whatever its form or manifestation, no act of
terrorism, regardless of its motivation, can be justified.

Terrorism demands a global response. Only
intensive, close and well-coordinated cooperation
between nations and international organizations can
produce results. There are many different ways to
fight it. Direct action must be taken against terrorists'
safe havens, and it can include military strikes, as the
recent actions against ISIL have shown. Fighters must
be prevented from travelling to and from such havens.
Globally, we must block the financing of terrorism and
close all their channels of support. We must identify
and sanction individuals and groups who sponsor
terrorism or facilitate and finance the recruitment of
foreign fighters.

Another important path to reducing the threat
of terrorism is to address the conditions conducive
to its spread. That can range from strengthening
legal systems to reducing poverty and tackling the
development-security nexus. We can combat terrorism
more effectively by approaching it horizontally, as a
cross-cutting issue. We commend the manner in which
United Nations and European Union counter-terrorism
strategies are advancing this approach.

The outcome of our discussion today should enable
Member States to address this growing threat within the
context of respect for international law and human rights.
Estonia, as one of the sponsors of today's resolution
2178 (2014) on foreign terrorist fighters, therefore
fully supports its adoption and swift implementation.
It is crucial that all nations and relevant international
organizations provide the resources and mechanisms
needed to implement these measures. Estonia is fully
committed to that effort. We must tackle terrorism and
violent extremism as quickly as we can and wherever it
emerges in order to prevent it spreading further.

