Mr. Ayewah (Nigeria): Mr. President, permit me to
express my delegation's delight at seeing you preside over
the affairs of the Council during the month of September.
You may rest assured of my delegation's continued
cooperation. Let me also use this opportunity to express my
delegation's appreciation to Ambassador Nugroho
Wisnumurti and the Indonesian delegation for their able
stewardship during the month of August.

The proposal to establish a Commission to conduct a
full investigation of allegations of arms flows to former
Rwandese government forces, together with the efforts of
the Secretary-General to convene a regional conference on
security, stability and development in the Great Lakes
region of Central Africa represent a combined effort to
tackle the problems of the area from a regional perspective.
This approach, we believe, is viable, given our awareness
that problems in either Rwanda or Burundi have the
potential to destabilize the whole subregion.

My delegation has therefore supported both
initiatives in the belief that they would make a valuable
contribution to confidence building among the countries
of the region.

With respect to the draft resolution before us, which
the Non-Aligned Movement Caucus had the privilege of
initiating, we believe that it contains the elements - both
technical and political - that are required to ensure that
the Commission effectively discharges its functions. The
proposals regarding the working methods and procedures
of the Commission are generally in keeping with the
character of such a body as an impartial entity. However,
we need to be sure that all the States of the region are on
board if it is to achieve the desired objectives. We
therefore believe that the Secretary-General should
continue his consultations to convince all the States of the
region of the desirability of this idea.

We urge all States concerned to give full cooperation
to the Commission. In fact, this process of consultation
could form part of the mandate of the Secretary-General's
new Envoy, Ambassador Luis Jesus, who will be
organizing the regional conference, since we see both
sides as mutually reinforcing.

Let me say in conclusion that we hope that the
commission will approach its assignment in a businesslike
manner and with dispatch. We look forward to receiving
its conclusions as soon as possible.

