Mr. Farhfidi (Afghanistan): Let me begin by
extending our condolences to the people and the
Government of Spain and the bereaved families of the
17 Spanish soldiers who lost their lives as a result of a
tragic helicopter crash in the western province of
Herat, Afghanistan, on 16 August 2005. I also extend
my condolences to the families of others who have also
lost their lives in Afghanistan in the fight against
international terrorism.

Allow me to express my sincere congratulations
to you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of August. I would also
like to convey my compliments to your predecessor,
Ambassador Adamantios Vassilakis, on the outstanding
manner in which he handled the Council's proceedings
during the month of July.

My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and the other members of the
Council for including Afghanistan as an item on the
Council's agenda for this month. We are thankful to
delegations whose statements have presented valuable
and noteworthy views on the situation in Afghanistan.

We are very thankful to Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), who
provided detailed information updating and completing
the report of the Secretary-General dated 12 August
(S/2005/525).

The successful completion of the parliamentary
elections scheduled for 18 September 2005 will mark
the last step towards implementation of the historic
Bonn Agreement of December 2001. Since the signing
of the Agreement, Afghanistan, with the vigorous and
sustained support of the international community, has
succeeded in achieving many objectives that once
seemed beyond reach.

The meeting today will serve as an opportunity
for members of the Council and other Member States
to assess the achievements thus far and to reflect on the
form of continued cooperation between Afghanistan
and the international community that is to take place
upon the conclusion of the UNAMA mandate.

The Government of Afghanistan expects to see
the international community playing a role in ensuring
the security of Afghanistan during the post-Bonn
period. United Nations authorization of that continued
role would be welcome.

My delegation is grateful to the Secretary-General
and his colleagues for the report dated 12 August 2005,
entitled, "The situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security"
(S/2005/525). The report offers a lucid illustration of
the developments during the past four years, while also
referring to the challenges that remain to achieving
sustainable economic and social development and to
ensuring peace, stability and security in Afghanistan.

The determination and political will expressed by
the people of Afghanistan have made possible the
gradual, yet arduous, transition towards stability and
democracy in Afghanistan. During that transition,
Afghanistan successfully adopted a new constitution,
enshrining the principles of democracy, and
successfully held its first-ever presidential elections on
9 October 2004.

We have now entered the final and key phase in
the implementation of the Bonn Agreement - the
holding of parliamentary and provincial elections.
Nearly 6,000 Afghans have met the qualifications to
become candidates in the upcoming elections, more
than 600 of whom are women. Candidates began their
official campaigns on 17 August and are expected to
continue their efforts until 17 September - one day
prior to the elections.

The Government of Afghanistan expresses its
gratitude to the European Union, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and all other
international partners that have deployed electoral
support teams to monitor the electoral process. That
support will benefit the activities of the Joint Electoral
Management Body in ensuring the transparency of the
process.

The people of Afghanistan have indeed
recognized the importance of having strengthened the
capacity of State institutions in order to transform the
provisions of the Bonn Agreement to reality.

In its effort to further exert and consolidate the
authority of the central Government throughout the
country, the Government of Afghanistan continues to
make significant progress with regard to the formation
of the Afghan National Army and Police. The Ministry
of Defense, in collaboration with provincial authorities,
has made vigorous efforts to form a national army
whose composition is based on balanced ethnic and
regional representation. The Afghan National Army
has thus far demonstrated its effectiveness as it
conducts joint military operations with coalition forces
against those subversive elements that seek to
jeopardize the political transition. We express our
appreciation to the Government of the United States of
America for its lead role in assisting us in the training
of our National Army.

We also owe a debt of gratitude to the
Governments of all other friendly countries that also
assisted in enhancing our security institutions. We
appreciate the engagement of France in assisting the
Afghan parliament. Here I remind the Council that the
drafting of the Afghanistan Constitution of 1964 took
place with the assistance of a Frenchman, Mr. Louis
Fougere.

I would also emphasize the continued presence of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in
Afghanistan, within the leading role of NATO.
The Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, established on 6 June 2002, continues to
make progress in fulfilling its respective mandate to
promote and protect human rights.

Since the launching of the back-to-school
programme in 2002, the number of children who have
returned to school has increased to more than 4
million. In that context, we extend our gratitude to
UNICEF for its continued support in enhancing the
capacity of educational institutions in Afghanistan. The
return of a large number of refugees to the country, the
restoration of the rights of women - including their
participation in the political, civil, economic and social
life of the country - the introduction of the new
currency and the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme are other
major achievements.

One of the challenges to the Afghan Government
remains the security situation in the south and eastern
parts of Afghanistan, involving cross-border
infiltration by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The
Secretary-General also referred to this issue in
paragraph 62 of his report.

In paragraph 82 of the same report the Secretary-
General rightfully stated that

"it is time for the security situation to be
addressed resolutely. This requires military action
The insurgency's sources of funding, training
and safe havens must also be effectively
addressed."

The Government of Afghanistan remains fully
committed in its continuing struggle against the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and international terrorism. In this
regard, we once again express our sincere appreciation
to the international community for its ongoing support.

Combating the production and the cultivation of
illegal drugs in Afghanistan is among the top priorities
of the Afghan Government. Cognizant of the
significant threat posed to the long-term security and
stability of the country, the Afghan Government has
taken a series of measures aimed at destroying opium
and poppy crops.

President Karzai issued two presidential decrees
banning the production, trafficking and sale of illegal
drugs. He also convened an emergency Loya Jirga,
composed of governors, tribal elders and local
community leaders who were urged to use their local
and social influence to combat cultivation within their
jurisdiction. At the meeting, President Karzai also
called on participants to wage a holy war against the
cultivation of and the trafficking in narcotics.
Furthermore, in the course of the past two months,
President Karzai has chaired the deliberations of the
Committee on Counter-Narcotics, in which members of
the cabinet and major donors reviewed progress on the
eight pillars - which I shall soon list - of the Afghan
Government's counter-narcotics implementation plan.

The most recent and significant measure taken by
the Afghan Government to combat the scourge of
narcotics was the establishment of the Ministry of
Counter-Narcotics. As mentioned in the report of the
Secretary-General, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics
has adopted a comprehensive implementation plan
consisting of the key pillars of institution-building,
information campaigns, alternative sustainable
livelihoods for farmers, interdiction and law
enforcement, criminal justice, eradication, demand
reduction and regional cooperation. The Afghan
Government has also established a special tribunal to
punish those associated with the production, cultivation
and trafficking of illegal drugs.

We remain committed to cooperating closely with
all regional and international efforts to combat the
cultivation, production, trafficking and consumption of
illicit drugs. In that regard, we express our gratitude to
the Government of the United Kingdom, which, as the
lead nation, is working closely with Afghan authorities,
donors and the United Nations to integrate provincial
anti-drug activities and identify quick-impact and long-
term alternative livelihood programmes and
infrastructure projects. The social and economic
development of Afghanistan, in particular the
development of sustainable and gainful alternative
livelihoods, will have a positive impact on reducing
poppy cultivation.

We are of the View that the economic recovery
and the reconstruction of Afghanistan and the security
and the improvement of the lives of the Afghan people
are closely interrelated. Providing services, building
roads and creating jobs could have a great impact on
reducing insecurity and illicit activities, including
poppy cultivation and related crimes. The
consolidation of peace and security largely depends on
the international community's sustained engagement in
providing the necessary assistance for the rehabilitation
and the reconstruction of Afghanistan.

Since June 2005, the Afghan Government has
been in negotiations with UNAMA on the role of the
United Nations after the parliamentary elections. The
Organization's sustained engagement and support is
required in coming years for the rehabilitation and the
reconstruction of the country, as well as for the
consolidation of peace and security. That item would
be one of the first important subjects to be considered
by the next parliament of Afghanistan.

Let me conclude by stating that the people of
Afghanistan remain enthusiastic about the political
transition since the Bonn Agreement. As evidenced
during the presidential elections of October 2004, they
will defy all acts of intimidation by those acting
against the political process. I would also like to recall
that in the past Afghanistan has held national and
parliamentary elections and that the elections of
September 2005 are the first to take place with the
assistance of the United Nations.

The Afghan delegation is quite satisfied with the
draft presidential statement and appreciates the tireless
efforts of the Japanese Mission on this matter.

