Mr. Nibishaka (Rwanda): Allow me to express my
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestian question, as well as on the peace prospects
in the region.

Rwanda wishes to express its appreciation to all
stakeholders involved in the Middle East peace process,
particularly the United States Government through
Secretary of State John Kerry. We commend his tireless
efforts in bringing both sides to direct negotiations,
and we hope that the parties will seize this opportunity
to chart the way forward towards a just and lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestian conflict. The current
negotiations are at a critical moment that requires
both sides to demonstrate not only trust, decency and
sincerity, but also readiness to sacrifice some of their
important positions so as to reach a genuine peace
agreement.

Rwanda is confident that the two parties can reach
a two-State solution for both peoples, with a viable
independent State ofPalestine living side by side in peace
with a secure Israel. In order to reach that agreement,
there must an intentional show of good will and
confidence-building between Israel and the Palestinian
people, such as refraining from cross-border attacks
and from all provocations, including negative media
propaganda and all forms of incitement to violence that
would jeopardize the ongoing negotiations.

In that regard, we commend the Israeli Government
for continuing to honour its commitment by releasing
the third batch of 26 Palestinian prisoners, and we
welcome the recent measure undertaken by the
Palestinian Authority and facilitated by the Government
of Israel to respond to the direct impact of the recent
storm, which included permitting the delivery of water
pumps, humanitarian assistance and 1.2 millions litres
of industrial fuel to the Gaza power plant, as part of
the Qatari donation. However, my delegation strongly
condemns the continued rocket attacks into southern
Israel from Gaza, which remain a significant concern of
ongoing negotiations. We call on all parties concerned
in Gaza to participate in the peace process, which is
the only viable channel to the stability of the region.
Acts of that kind threaten to worsen the already fragile
situation on the ground and could derail the ongoing
negotiations.

With regard to the Syrian conflict, Rwanda is
extremely concerned by the deteriorating situation
in that country, which makes it more urgent to put an
end to the violence and to the suffering of the Syrian
people, and to find a political solution. We still believe
that there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict
and the cost of war is too high to endure. The crisis
has already claimed more than 100,000 innocent lives,
with over 9 million in urgent humanitarian need. We
urge all parties to respond positively to the opportunity
to find a political solution through the second Geneva
Conference on Syria and to cease hostilities. It is also
important that the concerned States, particularly the
permanent members of this body dedicated to peace
and security, stop supplying weapons to conflicting
parties that are responsible for gross violations of
human rights.

In that connection, I extend my heartfelt
appreciation to the United States and the Russian
Federation, as well as to the United Nations through the
Joint Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for their efforts in bringing all parties together to
resolve the crisis in Syria. In that context, Rwanda is
concerned about the thousands of innocent civilians,
including women, children and the elderly, who have
been trapped or besieged in contested areas and cut off
from aid for a month now due to continued fighting
between the Government and the rebel forces.

We welcome the high-level pledging conference for
Syria that took place on 15 January in Kuwait, and we
thank the donor community for its strong commitment.
We urge all those who pledged to honour their
pledges in time to serve the critical conditions of the
Syrians. We also call on all parties in Syria to take all
appropriate measures to facilitate safe and unhindered
access to populations in need of assistance, as put
forward by the presidential statement of 2 October 2013
(S/PRST/2013/15). It is important that the parties to
the conflict observe local ceasefires in order to help
humanitarian assistance to reach the needy, and that
they respect all their obligations under international
law.

With regard to Lebanon, we welcome the opening
of the trial by the Special Tribunal for Lebanon of four
suspects nearly nine years after the heinous attacks that
killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 21 other
people. Nevertheless, the overall situation in Lebanon
seems to be deteriorating. Rwanda strongly condemns
the recent series of violent attacks in Beirut and in
the northern city of Tripoli, as well as the shelling in
the Bekaa Valley that resulted in several deaths and
injuries. Of equal concern is the continued sectarian
tension in Lebanon, which is identified as part of the
spill-over from the Syrian conflict. We reiterate that
the only path to ending these sectarian tensions and
violence in Lebanon will entirely depend on a positive
outcome of the second Geneva Conference on Syria,
which is expected to end the Syrian conflict.

My delegation continues to urge the Lebanese
Government to remain steadfast to the Baabda
Declaration, setting out a policy of disassociation with
regard to the conflict in Syria. We further encourage
all parties in Lebanon to show commitment and
compromise in forming a new Lebanese Government,
which will facilitate the ending of tensions.

