Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): My delegation welcomes today's meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Mueller for their briefings on the situation, which must inspire us to act. By adopting resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council turned down a number of expectations and recommendations that, had they been implemented, could have advanced the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. Regrettably, three years later, my delegation notes with serious concern that the situation on the ground continues to deteriorate further, in particular in the occupied territories and on the Gaza Strip, which is under blockade. That situation makes the living conditions of Palestinians especially difficult. Ongoing settlement activities, including in East Jerusalem, the seizure or demolition of Palestinian infrastructure and other evictions are acts that are at odds with international law and violate relevant Security Council resolutions. My delegation condemns, in no uncertain terms, the hateful and inflammatory statements of all kinds that have been made recently, often for electoral purposes. The ramifications of such actions will serve only to deepen mistrust and divisions and, consequently, reduce the likelihood of the resumption of dialogue between the two parties, which, unfortunately, is now at a standstill. However, the Niger is hopeful that the upcoming general elections, in both Israel and Palestine, will create a new dynamic for the resumption of dialogue between the two parties and truly pave theway for sincere negotiations towards a resolution to the conflict, which has lasted for far too long. With regard to the security situation, my country deplores the resurgence of provocative acts in the occupied territories and the disproportionate use of force by the Israeli security services in suppressing peaceful demonstrations, in particular on the Gaza Strip. The vicious cycle of rocket fire and the indiscriminate reprisals that follow must stop in order to protect civilians, who pay the price. The parties to the conflict must work towards de-escalation, including through various existing structures. The situation in the region remains very volatile, as a result of serious incidents that occurred in recent weeks, such as the assassination of General Soleimani, Iranian missile launches at United States bases, the ongoing riots in Lebanon and Iraq, the crisis in Syria and the twists and turns of the Iranian nuclear deal, to name but a few. For my country, the continued blockade of the Gaza Strip and other restrictions on the movement of people and goods and on access to basic social services, in particular for women and children, are unacceptable. The endemic shortages of all kinds, caused by the blockade, make the lives of the people of Gaza unsustainable and, in the long run, could lead to an increase in the number of acts of violence and desperation, in particular on the part of unemployed young people in the enclave. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm my delegation's support for the efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and welcome the renewal of its mandate by the Security Council in December 2019. We call on all donors to provide their valuable support to the Agency so that it can continue to provide vital services to those in need. To that end, the aim is to protect the fundamental rights and dignity of the Palestinian people. In conclusion, I would like to urge the international community to continue its efforts in the quest for a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that takes into account Israel's security aspirations and the legitimate and inalienable rights of Palestinians, including their right to self-determination. My delegation reaffirm its position in favour of a solution comprising two States living side-by-side in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967 borders. Any solution based on force, and thereby unilateral in nature, would only further aggravate the situation. In that regard, the Security Council must show itself capable of discharging its responsibilities under the Charter by ensuring compliance with its own resolutions to ensure that, like all other peoples, the Palestinian people may enjoy peace, security, respect and dignity.
