Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan): We
join all other members in welcoming warmly to the
Security Council this morning Judge Theodor Meron,
Judge Vagn Joensen, Prosecutor Serge Brammertz, and
Prosecutor Hassan Bubacar Jallow. We also thank all
of them for their important briefings to us and for their
reports on the work of the Criminal Tribunals and on

the progress made regarding the implementation of the
completion strategy in keeping with resolution 1534
(2004).

We have listened carefully to the briefers' thoughts
and insights, and we welcome in particular President
Meron's willingness to touch upon some broader
reflections. Indeed, it is a pity the Security Council,
the one non-judicial organ of the United Nations that
undoutedly produces law, spends so little to no time
evaluating the jurisprudence of the Tribunals. Nor do
we try to understand in detail what those courts have
revealed over the course of their operations and then
decide how best their discoveries can fit into an agreed
recognizable formula needed for a permanent peace.

Instead, too much time is spent by us on the
technical and administrative details of the work of the
Tribunals, and it need not be so. The thematic debate the
Council held late last year on the Tribunals (S/PV.7073)
provided us with an indication of the sort of deeper
analysis the Council can conduct, and indeed should
conduct. If we are to focus on the administrative issues,
it should only be where the challenges are considerable.
I will get to those in a moment.

More fundamentally, we should concentrate on
the question of how the work of the two Tribunals
can be developed to ensure that their conclusions
shape the conscience of the concerned communities.
We recognize, of course, that crimes were indeed
committed by individuals of all ethnicities, but we
understand too that in two of the overall situations
covered by the Tribunals, the huge lopsidedness in
the overall volume and balance of crimes committed
creates no moral equivalences in that respect.

While it is true that the Residual Mechanism, the
referrals and subsequent national prosecutions will
continue the work done judicially, and that in the years
ahead there will likely be further outreach conducted by
the United Nations building on the existing programmes,
the jurisprudence and the establishment of fact and of
truth must still be made to fit much more deliberately
into the recovery architecture ofthe concerned societies.
Denials of wrongdoing by a particular ethnic group
or other are still detectable in respect of the crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda,
despite the weight of evidence underscoring no grounds
for them. Naturally, in the case of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
the Seselj, Karadeic', Mladie and Hadeic' trials still have
to be concluded, and they will very much be part of
the centrepiece of the Tribunal's work. We therefore
await the completion of the trials. We also join others
in calling for the apprehension of the nine remaining
fugitives in respect of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Yet even before we end all outstanding criminal
proceedings, if we are to achieve a permanent peace
among all the concerned societies covered by the work
of the two Tribunals there must be a seamless transition
from the judicial operations mounted by the Security
Council two decades ago to a more structured formation
of historical accounts. What do we mean by that? To
begin with, well-intended historical commissions need
to be established. They need to cement the conclusions
of the Tribunals drawn from the decisions handed down
in the broader historical narratives. Those narratives
must be threaded into precise algorithms designed to
draw out a reckoning from the perpetrator and, where
applicable, his or her broader community.

Without a genuine signature planted in the register
of remorse by those individuals who have done much
wrong and by their supporting communities, there can be
no permanent peace - a temporary peace, even lasting
decades, yes - but no permanent peace. Reckoning
opens the gate to human compassion from which a
reconciliation of a permanent character can begin to
emerge. All of this must then be fed into the national
curriculums of the countries concerned, curriculums
that must themselves be wholly reconstructed to reflect
the truth as they and we can best assess it. We hope that
in the future the Council will focus more on these sorts
of issues rather than the nitty-gritty of the completion
strategies the Tribunals are pursuing.

That said, I began by saying that we should be
discussing only the most pressing challenges. We agree
with others who have said that those challenges consist,
in the case ofthe ICTY, in finding lasting remedies to the
issue of relocating witnesses and in ensuring progress
in the category II cases in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in finding safe and permanent homes for those
acquitted, in the case of the ICTR. Those challenges
are not rocket science, and they can be resolved; that
is simply a matter of continued or expanded burden-
sharing and will.

We also completely understand the struggle both
Tribunals face on a daily basis as they work to fulfil their
mandates while still needing a highly motivated set of
skilled professionals at the heart of their operations. We
urge the United Nations leadership to think creatively

about how to keep these officials in The Hague and
Arusha until all remaining decisions have been dealt
with. Such issues cannot be beyond our ability to solve.

Finally, we congratulate all four of the briefers
on their outstanding achievements and the continuing
extraordinary work being accomplished by the
Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.

