Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the update
provided by the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom on the investigation into the chemical-weapon
attack that took place in Salisbury and the subsequent
poisoning in Amesbury last month.

I will make three points. First, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands condemns the use of chemical weapons
and stands in solidarity with the United Kingdom.
Secondly, issuing criminal charges is a significant
new development that supports and strengthens our
earlier conclusions. Thirdly, the Russian Federation
should cooperate to establish the full truth and
ensure accountability.

First of all, I would like to repeat, clearly and
unequivocally, that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
condemns the use of chemical weapons anytime,
anywhere and under any circumstances. Let me
reiterate our full support for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the important
work it does for us. As the United Kingdom is faced
with the reckless use of chemical weapons on its own
soil, the Netherlands stands in firm solidarity with our
neighbour, ally and friend.

Secondly, during previous meetings, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands expressed its shock about the
reckless attack with a military grade nerve agent on
British soil, which exposed innocent civilians to great
risks. Since then, we learned that the attack resulted in
even more victims, one of whom, Ms. Dawn Sturgess,
did not survive. We express our sincere condolences
to her loved ones. Issuing criminal charges is an
important step that brings us closer to establishing the
full truth so that justice can be served. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has full confidence in the investigation
carried out by the British authorities and in the fairness
and impartiality of the British justice system.

Thirdly, now that the perpetrators of this
horrendous act have been identified, they must be
brought to justice. Therefore, we call on all States to
cooperate to ensure that the two suspects have their
day in court in the United Kingdom and to bring the
full truth to light about how the attack was carried out.
Those who bear responsibility must be held to account.
I would like to recall that, on 22 March, the European
Council condemned in the strongest possible terms the
attack in Salisbury. European leaders unanimously
agreed with the assessment of the British Government
about the responsibility of the Russian Federation. That
assessment has now been confirmed by the criminal
investigation, which has led to criminal charges filed
against two Russian individuals.

During our previous meeting, on 18 April (see S/PV.8237), the Kingdom of the Netherlands urged the
Russian Federation to change its course from denial
to cooperation. We reiterate our call for the Russian
authorities to provide the United Kingdom with all
information to unanswered questions and to cooperate
with efforts to bring those responsible to justice.

