Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to express my appreciation for the
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) by his Special Representative, Mr.
Oluyemi Adeniji.

The delegation of Colombia notes with
satisfaction the important progress outlined in the
Secretary-General's tenth report and also the broad
support and cooperation that UNAMSIL is providing to
the authorities of that country. The action of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is contributing positively to this
atmosphere, which is favourable to peace. Its
sponsorship of the Abuja Agreement last December
was crucial to the process.

I would like to make the following brief
comments in that connection. First, my delegation
believes that the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone has been moving successfully towards an
increasingly complex phase by adding new
components, reinforcing others and preparing future
deployment plans. We support the Secretary-General's
intention to examine the role of the civilian police
advisers and to respond favourably to the petition for
electoral assistance. We are glad to know that today it
is feasible to think about holding elections towards the
end of this year.

Secondly, UNAMSIL's presence in areas formerly
controlled by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF),
including some points along the border with Guinea, as
well as more permanent patrolling in the Kono district
and other diamond-producing areas, reflect the
commitment that all members of the United Nations
have undertaken with respect to peace in Sierra Leone
and stability in Western Africa. The Freetown
authorities must respond to this display of support on
the part of the international community by restoring in
a visible way the authority of the State with a view to
providing basic services for the population and holding
the forthcoming elections.

Thirdly, my delegation recognizes President
Kabbah's efforts to bring about an understanding with
the rebels, as was demonstrated by the announcement
to release an important group of RUF members who
were jailed. We urge him to continue conversations in
the Joint Committee and to ease the way for the
transformation of this movement into a political party.
Preparations for the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission must also be accelerated; but we wonder
whether it is really the job of the High Commissioner
for Refugees to gather funds to establish this
Commission. We would like to hear Ambassador
Adeniji's comments on this point.

In the area of justice, we believe that the two
components, the Truth Commission and the Special
Court, must work on the basis of complementarity as
regards the allocation of responsibilities, the exercise
of justice and the thwarting of impunity. Colombia is
definitely one of the countries that is very interested in
justice. We also believe that there cannot be a conflict
between the search for peace and the search forjustice.

Fourthly, several delegations have already
referred to the sensitive humanitarian situation in the
country, which continues to worry us. For the moment,
we would merely like to point out that in the process of
involving the RUF leadership we see another example
of the growing interaction between the United Nations
and non-State armed actors. We believe that this
relationship should be used to induce them to abide by
the standards of international humanitarian law in areas
they control, where violations are reported on a daily
basis. This is a way of protecting civilians through
persuasion, which does not imply any changes to the
mandate of the Mission and should be undertaken with
no reservations.

Finally, I would like to join with other
delegations that have spoken in support of the manner
in which the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme is being implemented. We
believe, along with the people of Sierra Leone, that
since a considerable amount of resources has been
invested in deploying a peace mission, the funding for
this programme should also be strengthened. The
benefits of peace must be explained clearly in terms of
the opportunities they would provide for former
combatants. These benefits of peace should be made
more attractive than any illusory benefits of war.

