The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/1055, which contains the text of a
letter dated 7 November 2001 from the Permanent
Representative of Jamaica to the Untied Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

I now wish to make statement.

At the beginning of Jamaica's presidency of the
Security Council this month, we underscored that one
of our main objectives would be to support initiatives
that would promote sustainable peace and security.
While seeking to advance the peace process on all the
issues before the Council, it was our aim to continue to
pay particular attention to the humanitarian effects of
conflicts and to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, in particular the most vulnerable - women
and children.

Against this background, our programme for the
month sought to highlight several conflict situations
with the aim of encouraging a more proactive Security
Council response. In so doing, we hoped to build
confidence and trust between the Security Council and
various actors, demonstrating the commitment of the
Council to respond meaningfully to these crises.

As Jamaica approaches it final month in the
Security Council, we believe that this wrap-up meeting
provides an opportune moment to reflect on the
dynamics for change within the Security Council,
which will enhance the Council's capacity in its role as
a vital organ of the United Nations. The notes for the
wrap-up meeting, which were circulated, raised a
number of issues and posed some questions on which
we invited members to comment and to offer their
recommendations.

The first one relates to transparency. There have
been considerable improvements in the transparency of
the Security Council through open meetings and
briefings and meetings between the President of the
Council and affected or interested Member States,
representatives of institutions and non-governmental
organizations. Are there other ways in which the
Council can interact with Member States and others, in
order to share in their views on issues before the
Council?

Secondly, Council members often receive
information from press reports on initiatives taken by
individual Member States, groups of States and/or
organizations on issues of which the Council is seized.
Should Council members be satisfied that this is an
appropriate source of information in the exercise of
their responsibilities, or should we establish a practice
whereby the Council receives briefings on a timely
basis from these actors?

Thirdly, drawing on the experience of the
ministerial week, would it serve the interest of peace
and security if important issues before the Council
were discussed more frequently at the ministerial
level?

Fourthly - and this relates to thematic
debates - there have been a number of thematic
debates in the Security Council that have led to several
recommendations for the issues involved to be
examined in respect of specific conflict situations. How
can we ensure that the outcomes of these debates are
mainstreamed in the resolutions of the Security Council
and the reports of the Secretary-General?

Finally, over the past two years, in addition, the
use of Security Council missions to areas of conflict
has proved to be a very effective tool in the
confidence-building between the various actors and the
Security Council. Should Security Council missions be
used more frequently, particularly in more difficult
situations before the Council, as a means of advancing
the peace?

As there is no list of speakers for this meeting, I
would invite members of the Council, as we do in
informal consultations, to indicate when they wish to
take the floor in the course of our discussion.

