Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
Before turning to the main subject of my statement, I
should like to offer you, Sir, the congratulations of the
French delegation on your assumption of the presidency and
to say that we take great pleasure at seeing the
representative of Germany guiding the work of the Council.

My delegation voted in favour of resolution
997 (1995), which extends the mandate of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR) for six
months, until 8 December 1995, and maintains a United
Nations presence in Rwanda. The situation in that country
has changed considerably since this operation was
established. There is no longer a civil war. The camps for
displaced persons have been dismantled. The Rwandan
Government has requested that the United Nations draw the
relevant conclusions from these changes and that the United
Nations operation in Rwanda no longer be entrusted with
peace-keeping tasks per se.

That is what the Security Council has just done in
giving UNAMIR a new mandate. It is also envisaged that
the troop strength will be reduced by more than half. We
hope the Government of Rwanda will cooperate fully with
the United Nations operation and that it will continue to
respect the Status of Mission Agreement. We attach
particular importance to this last point.

Thus reconfigured, UNAMIR will have the primary
task of providing assistance to the Rwandan Government,
particularly with regard to what we see as the essential,
priority question: the return of refugees and their
reintegration into their communities. We hope the Rwandan
Government will continue to make every possible effort to
promote the continuation of this process. We are certain
that on the basis of such efforts the international
community will continue to render assistance to the
Rwandan people.

We also believe that the refugee question cannot be
resolved solely in a national framework. France therefore
continues to hope that a conference on peace, security and
stability will be organized so that the problems facing the
countries of the Great Lakes Region can be resolved in a
regional framework.

In conclusion, my country believes that confidence
can be re-established in Rwanda only if there is a halt to
the arms smuggling that fuels tensions in the region.
Measures to that end include the clarification of the
embargo regime imposed under resolution 918 (1994) and
the possible deployment in neighbouring countries of
military observers whose task it will be to monitor the
implementation of the embargo.

We regard the restoration of stability and confidence,
the return of refugees and national reconciliation as the
only ways in which the countries of the region, and
Rwanda in particular, will be able to return to the path of
peace and progress.

