Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
should also like to thank the Egyptian delegation for
convening today's meeting, as well as the Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Taye'-
Brook Zerihoun, for his briefing today.

For Uruguay, it is important that the Security
Council work to improve the effectiveness of United
Nations sanctions. In that regard, the ongoing analysis
of sanctions regimes is a necessary exercise of systemic
importance aimed at reviewing the efficiency and the
effectiveness of any tool that the Security Council has
at its disposal for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In that regard, we also recognize
the value of the contributions that Member States
often make, including the high-level review that was
undertaken several years ago under the auspices of
Germany, Australia, Finland, Greece and Sweden
(see S/2015/432). That review was an important task
that could be continued in order improve the design of
Security Council sanctions regimes.

I would like to focus my statement on one
fundamental area: the need for sanctions regimes to
be effective, with effectiveness meaning the complete
achievement of the goal of the sanctions. Each of the
sanctions regimes should be conceived as a tool that
allows the Security Council to achieve a goal. In order
to be effective, that tool must complement other tools,
such as mediation and dialogue. At the same time, I
would like, on that point, to mention the importance
ofnaming specific objectives when designing sanctions
regimes, objectives that, once achieved, will serve as the
basis for lifting those sanctions. Generally, the Council
imposes sanctions without establishing the conditions
under which they may be lifted. No specific goals are
set out, and there is a lack of guarantees for those who
are the object of the sanctions. In turn, individuals,
entities or States subject to sanctions do not know if at
any given time they can be absolved and, if that were
to happen, under what conditions. Moreover, sanctions
should be designed in such a way as to minimize
the adverse effects on the civilian population. The
periodic review and improvement of the initial design
of sanctions regimes, for which specific commitments
have been set out, are therefore crucial.

Secondly, Uruguay recognizes the suitability of
a comprehensive sanctions review, similar to those
conducted on the peacebuilding architecture, on
peacekeeping operations, and on women and peace
and security.

I wish to mention the importance of cooperation
for the effective implementation of all sanctions-regime
provisions. It would be useful for the information
collected by a group of experts to be made available
to other groups of experts, if they are considered to be
of relevance. We would also point out the necessity of
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations
and other institutions, such as INTERPOL or the
regional or international financial institutions.

It is also appropriate to highlight the importance
of cooperation between States for the effective
implementation of sanctions regimes. For that level
of cooperation to be viable, two variables come into
play: the capacities of States and their political will.
Frequently, the effective implementation of sanctions
regimes requires an infrastructure and logistical
capacities that are often lacking in developing
countries. That may include software, intelligence,
data cross-referencing, cutting-edge technology, etc.
That sort of lack directly affects the implementation
of the provisions of the various sanctions regimes and
undermines their legitimacy.

In conclusion, I wish to recall the importance
of systematic political commitment to the correct
implementation and design of sanctions regimes, which
are always understood as a means or tool of the Security
Council aimed at achieving an ultimate goal.

