Mr. Alkatiri: After a quarter of a century of
struggle and resistance, we are now only 23 days from
achieving our objective, the international recognition
of the independence of East Timor. That it will be
achieved on 20 May is a tribute not only to our people
and their contributions to the process, but also to the
international community and the United Nations, which
kept the idea of an independent East Timor alive in the
darkest hour of the struggle.

The support of the Security Council has been
fundamental over the past two and a half years, as the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the people of East Timor worked
together to restore security and stability and to
establish the foundation of an independent
Government. It was not always easy, as there was no
blueprint or manual on how to govern a country. We
learned as we went along.

Now, however, we are at a stage in which East
Timor is ready to govern itself. Since September 2001,
an entirely East Timorese Government has been
exercising executive authority, and while we are facing
a major challenge to develop our public and private
institutions as well as their social and communitarian
counterparts, the fundamental structures and
institutions of the country are now in place.
Government and civil society have been working hard
together to produce our first national plan, with the
objective of establishing a programme to alleviate
poverty and promote the development of East Timor.
We have a clear idea of our priorities after the broad
public consultation that preceded our planning process
and the open Cabinet meetings that the Council of
Ministers has been conducting in each of the 13
districts of East Timor, at which the population was
able to express its concerns directly to the
Government. We are concerned that our style of
governance should be seen not only as
representative- inasmuch as we are the elected
representatives of the people - but also as
participatory, in order to directly involve the people in
the decision-making process.

The present leadership of the country has a duty
to live up to two major expectations. The first is the
expectation of the people that the Government will
channel their energies and creative ability into the
development of the country. The second is the
expectation of the international community that the
Government will do all it can to convert the aid being
provided into investments that will benefit future
generations and thus increase the credibility of the
country, so that it can continue to deserve the
confidence and support of the international community.

As a result of the consultation process,
Government attention will be concentrated on four
major areas.

First, education and the eradication of illiteracy,
which currently stands at around 55 per cent, are
priorities.

Second is health, with particular emphasis on the
fight against malnutrition and endemic diseases such as
malaria and tuberculosis, as well as the provision of the
basics of public health, including clean water and
sanitation. Another priority is the campaign that has
already started for AIDS awareness and education.
Third is housing, which is another priority.

Fourth is agriculture and its development
potential. This is particularly important in order to halt
the exodus of the rural population to the city and,
indeed, to reverse that trend.

Our budget will be a clear reflection of those
priorities, which were identified in the national plan,
with a particular emphasis on service delivery and the
alleviation of poverty. The final budget will be
approved on 30 May.

I should also like to mention that the President-
elect, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and I had a long and fruitful meeting recently,
and we are in broad agreement on how to go forward.
The President-elect and I share the same objectives -
the well-being and advancement of the people of East
Timor - and we will work together with the
presidency, the Government and Parliament to achieve
those goals. We will, however, still be relying on the
support of the United Nations and of the international
community to consolidate the progress that has been
made thus far and to guarantee the stability of the
country after independence. I am referring to the need
for assessed funding for the 100 core functions that are
vital for the continued functioning of the Government,
and for donor funding for the 200 additional functions
that were identified, with the assistance of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), as
necessary for social and economic development and
poverty reduction.

In order to implement the national development
plan, international support is critical over the next three
years until the first revenues can be expected from the
gas and petroleum developments in the Timor Sea.
Those revenues will be considered as a credit by future
generations of East Timor to the current generation,
which will be paid back by a special development fund
for education, health and infrastructure.

We will be applying to join the World Bank and
the Asian Development Bank, and our application to
the International Monetary Fund is currently being
processed. We are working closely with the World
Bank to establish a mechanism to channel donor funds
to a budget support facility that will help to bridge the
gap between budget expenditures and forecast revenues
over the next three years. We are actively engaged with
the Australian Government and the oil companies
operating in the Timor Sea to resolve outstanding
issues, and we expect to sign the treaty relating to the
area of cooperation upon independence or shortly
thereafter.

But these measures to ensure political and
economic stability go hand in hand with the question of
internal and external security. The East Timor defence
and police forces are not yet ready to undertake those
functions, and there will be a need for a continued
United Nations presence with an executive role in
those two areas. We are aware of the importance of
signing the Status of Forces/Status of Mission
agreement (SOFA/SOMA) and the agreements on
police and military responsibilities. Those are of
fundamental importance in defining the coordination
between the Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the new
mission, in order to avoid the danger of parallel
command structures in the same country.

The security of our country is also linked to the
establishment of good relations with our neighbours
and, indeed, with all the nations of the world. One
important step will be the negotiation of our maritime
boundaries. Budget restrictions will, of necessity, limit
our diplomatic representations, but we encourage
diplomats to visit East Timor and see for themselves
the challenges that exist for the future, as well as the
considerable progress that has already been made with
the generous assistance of United Nations Members.
We are aware that various countries have expressed an
interest in establishing diplomatic relations with East
Timor on Independence Day and we are studying how
it will be humanly possible to bring this about in the
time that it is available.

To conclude, our priorities are to ensure that the
Government's programmes and policies reflect the
aspirations of our people and are executed with the
maximum efficiency and transparency and to maintain
the high standards of human and social rights that were
instituted during the transition period, counting on the
active participation and support of civil society. Of
particular significance will be the continuing
promotion of equality and women's rights and the
campaign against domestic violence. Our priorities are
also to plan for integrated and sustainable
development, with the help of the United Nations
agencies, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank; to consolidate the very real advances that
have been made over the past two and a half years,
with special emphasis on capacity and institution-
building; and to encourage a spirit of tolerance and
reconciliation within the community, allied to the
application of economic, social and political justice.

I would like to confirm our full support for the
Secretary-General's recommendations for the successor
mission and commit my Government to working
closely with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General to make that new mission as much a
success as UNTAET.

We have come a long way together during East
Timor's transition to independence and special thanks
are due to the Security Council for its continued
support; to the Secretary-General who, in spite of his
heavy load of responsibilities, has always been
available for advice and consultation; and, of course, to
our friend Special Representative Sergio Vieira de
Mello, who has worked tirelessly on behalf of the
people of East Timor.

