Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I align
myself with the words of the President in condemning
the terrorist attacks in Kabul. In so doing, I wish to
reiterate the condolences of Senegal to the families of
the victims and to the people and the Government of
Afghanistan.

The Senegalese delegation would like to
congratulate Bolivia on its assumption ofthe presidency
ofthe Security Council for this month. We also wish to
warmly congratulate the delegation of Cote d'Ivoire, as
well as the delegations of Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
the Netherlands, Poland and Peru on their outstanding
election this morning as non-permanent members of
the Security Council for the biennium 2018-2019.

Through the Ivorian Minister for Foreign Affairs
here with us today and his delegation, I wish to
reiterate the warmest congratulations of Senegal to
Cote d'Ivoire on its brilliant election to the Security
Council. To Ms. Mindaoudou, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire (UNOCI), the
Senegalese delegation offers its congratulations both
for her comprehensive briefing and, above all, for the
remarkable manner in which she fulfilled mission
in our sister country of Cote d'Ivoire and helped it
achieve stability.

Ms. Mindaoudou's briefing allows me to dispense
with revisiting the situation in Cote d'Ivoire, but like
other speakers who have preceded me I would like to
state that today, 2 June, is clearly and truly historic and
rich in symbols for our sister Republic of Cote d'Ivoire,
which this morning was elected a non-permanent
member of the Security Council and then comes to the
Council this afternoon for a final briefing on the end of
the United Nations Mission there. With its experience
as a host country of a United Nations mission, which
is, as Ms. Mindaoudou said, a success story in all
respects, Cote d'Ivoire is leaving the agenda of the
Security Council and coming to sit at the table of this
body to make a significant contribution to the work of
the Council for the next two years.

We believe that the political resolve of the senior
authorities in Cote d'Ivoire, which has so far prevailed,
will persevere and grow stronger in addressing the
remaining challenges, particularly in the security field.
In our View, the implementation and operationalization
of the law on military programming will be a decisive
step in this direction, as it will strengthen training
and discipline within the Ivorian army. With regard
to the threat posed by the spread of violent extremism
and terrorism in the subregion, the action of the
Ivorian authorities, working in close cooperation with
neighbouring countries, to strengthen the measures
taken against this increasing threat to subregion is
warmly welcomed.

We must be sure to consolidate and entrench the
gains made in the stabilizing C6te d'Ivoire. To that end,
alongside the Government of Cote d'Ivoire, the United
Nations country team, the Economic Community of
West African States, the African Union, the United
Nations and all bilateral and multilateral partners must
remain watchful and continue supporting Cote d'Ivoire
in its efforts to make peace permanent. In this regard,
the delegation of Senegal welcomes the United Nations
country team's effort to draft a $50-million joint
peacebuilding programme following the departure
of UNOCI.

I cannot conclude without paying well-deserved
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. A'ichatou Mindaoudou. Obviously, the
commitment of my country has been constant, in
particular through the rapid intervention force and
the aviation unit that we deployed within UNOCI, and
through the ceasefire agreement of 17 October 2002
between the mutineers and the loyalists mediated
by Senegal.

In conclusion, I would like to invite the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel, Mr. Mohammed Ibn Chambas, to continue
following the situation in C6te d'Ivoire as part of his
regional mandate.

