Mr. Aidarbekov (Kyrgyzstan) (spoke in Russian):
We are very grateful to the Russian Federation for
convening this meeting on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace
and security and for the invitation to participate.
The contributions of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO), the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) to countering terrorist threats
are important. We believe that the United Nations
and regional organizations have a unique and
complementary role to play, which, if successfully
coordinated, could make a significant contribution to
the cause of international peace and security.

On the importance of the United Nations cooperation
with the three regional organizations, it should be noted
that more than half of the world's population live in the
member States of those organizations.

The threat of terrorism today is very serious.
States are constantly faced with that challenge. Today
this threat permeates virtually any dimension of life.
Countering that evil should be based on close exchanges
among States, organizations and entities. I would like
to note in that regard the efforts to ensure regional
security that we are making within the framework of
such organizations as the CSTO, the CIS and the SCO.

The cooperation between the CSTO and the United
Nations has been very meaningful and long-standing;
in 2004, the organization was given the status of
an observer to the General Assembly. A number of
important documents were signed with key United
Nations agencies relating to combating global terrorism,
drug trafficking, illegal migration and maintaining
peace and security. Representatives of the United
Nations agencies and the CSTO secretariat meet on a
regular basis and discuss topical issues of international
cooperation in the area of the maintenance of peace and
security .

It is encouraging to note that in the framework of
the CSTO, joint exercises and special operations are
being carried out. As members may know, the Kyrgyz
Republic has drawn the attention of CSTO allies to the
problem of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their
countries of origin and the risk they pose of creating
new hotspots and armed conflicts.

Therefore, we consider it necessary to coordinate
more effectively the measures of the international
community in relation to that problem. At our initiative,
at a meeting of the CSTO Collective Security Council
in November 2018, Heads of State adopted a special
statement noting with concern the attempts of certain
entities to transfer terrorist activities from the Middle
East, Syria and Iraq to Central Asia and Afghanistan,
closer to the southern borders of CSTO member States.

This year, the Kyrgyz Republic is serving as the
president of CSTO. In order to enhance international
efforts to counter terrorism and the spread of terrorist
ideology, a draft decision of the CSTO Collective
Security Council has been developed on the plan of
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy forthe period 2019-2020, for adoption
at the meeting of the Collective Security Council to be
held in Kyrgyzstan in November. I also believe that it is
important to mention the unified approach to counter-
terrorism within the CIS framework. Its member States
unanimously agreed that it was necessary to develop
a common doctrine of counter-terrorist security and
a mechanism to implement it, taking into account
national interests.

Since the CIS was established, a vast institutional
and legal base has been developed in the field of
counter-terrorism. Among the fundamental documents,
I would like to highlight the Treaty on Cooperation
among the States Members of the Commonwealth of
Independent States on Combating Terrorism, which
laid the groundwork for cooperation among CIS
member States in combatting terrorism, as well as the
programme of cooperation of CIS member States in
combating terrorism and other violent manifestations
of extremism.

In terms of practical measures, the CIS Heads of
State Council established the CIS Anti-Terrorism Centre
on 21 June 2000. I would like to mention the signing,
in Tashkent on 31 October 2018, of a memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and the CIS Anti-Terrorism
Centre. The SCO has also developed a solid legislative
framework on combating terrorism in all its forms that
allows SCO member States to effectively cooperate in
that area.

The activities of the competent SCO bodies
relates to the practical implementation of the Shanghai
Convention on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and
Extremism, the SCO Convention against Terrorism
and the SCO Member States Cooperation Programme
on Combating Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism
for 2019-2021. SCO member States are guided by
the goals and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law and strictly adhere to the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly.

Furthermore, I would like to take special note of the
adoption of resolution 73/334, on 30 August, in which
the General Assembly noted that the SCO had become
an essential regional organization for addressing
security in the region, in all its dimensions. Kyrgyzstan
also chaired the SCO until June and those functions
are now performed by the Russian Federation. One
effective mechanism to maintain regional security is
the joint exercises conducted by the armed forces of
SCO member States, which are designed to enhance
their field training and the training of command
units, resolve logistical and deployment issues during
operations and address other important matters. In that
context, I would like to specifically mention the joint
military anti-terrorist command-staff exercises known
as Peace Mission, conducted within the framework of
the SCO, with the aim of preventing the penetration of
terrorist groups into our countries.
The States members of all three organizations
understand the central role of the United Nations in
combating the three evils of terrorism, separatism and
extremism. Our countries advocate for the development
and implementation, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of a global strategy, grounded in international
law, for combating new threats and challenges.
Kyrgyzstan believes that international cooperation is
essential to combating terrorism and advocates for its
legal basis to be strengthened in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

