Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I, too, would like
to join others in welcoming the Special Representative
here today, thanking him for his briefing, and also to
express our appreciation for his service and
commitment to the work he has been doing and to the
work of his team.

May I begin by underlining my own country's
commitment to security, stability and development in
the Great Lakes region. In support of those goals, we
are providing approximately $1 billion in bilateral
development and humanitarian programmes in the
region, and we will continue to sustain a substantial
effort, bilaterally and through the European Union.

As other representatives have said this morning,
the signature of the Pact on Security, Stability and
Development at the Great Lakes summit in December
2006 was a historic moment. It is a significant
opportunity to move towards lasting peace in the
region. We strongly urge, therefore, that the leaders of
the Great Lakes region press ahead with
implementation of the Pact. We hope that the new
Executive Secretariat, under the most able leadership
of Ambassador Mulamula of Tanzania, will be
established in Bujumbura in the near future.

The challenges that the countries and people of
the region face are shared, and the solutions must be
shared too. We will play our part in helping to resolve
them.

So much of what has happened in the region in
recent years is linked to events in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which is an important aspect of
the Security Council's work. We were awe-inspired by
the determined efforts made by the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to overcome the
catastrophic effects of conflict and to move forward,
through democratic elections, to a secure and better
future. They deserve our praise and our help for what
they have achieved.
The United Nations, too, deserves our
congratulations for its part in that achievement. We

look forward to receiving the Secretary-General's
recommendations next week on the future role that the
United Nations can play in helping the elected
Congolese authorities meet the needs and aspirations of
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Security Council should, in our view, also
continue to monitor closely progress in the peace talks
between the Government of Uganda and the Lord's
Resistance Army, which uses the Garamba National
Park in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as its
base. That conflict has driven more than 2 million
people from their homes and, while some of those have
begun to return, stability on the ground in northern
Uganda remains fragile. The United Kingdom
welcomes the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, former President Chissano, to find a
negotiated solution, and we hope and believe that the
Security Council will lend its strong vocal support to
his efforts.

Finally, may I urge the countries of the region to
join us in and add their weight to efforts to address
urgently the worsening crisis in the Darfur region of
the Sudan, one of the signatories of the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development. It is sobering to
note that, just as the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Burundi and elsewhere in the region are
beginning to experience the rewards and opportunities
that peace brings, their neighbours in Darfur are being
denied the most basic means of survival.

