The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Canada, the Dominican
Republic, Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Norway, Peru,
Spain and Uruguay, in which they request to be invited
to participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of
the Republic of Haiti, to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Jean-Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of the
Republic of Haiti, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. J ean-
Max Bellerive, Prime Minister of the Republic of Haiti.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH).

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Albert
Ramdin, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Assistant Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States, to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. If I
hear no objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Albert Ramdin.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as acting head of the delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the consideration of the item on the Council's agenda.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Pedro Serrano.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/200, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, to whom I now give
the floor.


