Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the presidency for convening this informative
meeting. We also welcome the briefings by the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), as well as the Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, as part
of a joint effort towards achieving peace and security.

I will begin by recalling my country's commitment
to peacekeeping operations since 1948 and by reiterating
our willingness to continue cooperating on this task,
which is the responsibility of all.

The three issues under discussion are absolutely
relevant and interrelated and reflect the new situations
and challenges and the changing reality involving
today's peacekeeping efforts. Regrettably, the civilian
population remains the most affected by conflicts, most
of which are intra-State in nature. The Council and the
international community as a whole are therefore called
upon to provide adequate protection for the civilian
population and to adopt comprehensive strategies,
taking into accoutn the specific needs, especially of
women and children.

We reiterate the need for adequate protection-of-
civilians training for the military, police or civilians
to be deployed. Chile has been contributing for more
than a decade through the Chilean Joint Peacekeeping
Operations Centre, which is in charge of preparing
and training national or foreign personnel prior to
deployment.

The Rights up Front Action Plan reaffirms the
central role of human rights in the work of the United
Nations. Respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law are ultimately the key concepts
underlying the protection of civilians.

Missions play a role as a source of information and
in keeping records to ensure that those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law are held accountable for their actions and
do not go unpunished. We support the zero tolerance
policy concerning missions. At the same time, we must
ensure sufficient dissemination of the protection-of-
civilians policy and existing complaints mechanisms to
the civilian population and within the missions.

With regard to the situation in UNMISS, recent
reports indicate an increase in internally displaced

persons and increasingly complex conditions requiring
the protection of civilians, including sexual violence
perpetrated with impunity, used as a tactic of war.
Recognizing the efforts undertaken by the Mission, we
would like to ask about the greatest challenges faced
by UNMISS in carrying out its mandate, specifically
regarding the protection of civilians? Do the briefers
believe that the troops have been sufficiently trained,
as of today, to carry out the protection of civilians
mandate?

The efforts already mentioned are taking place in
a difficult environment where, above and beyond the
nature of the conflict, actions by terrorist groups or
transnational organized criminal networks are taking
place. Those new challenges require better-trained and
-equipped troops and strengthened national capacities.

The use of intelligence, particularly as a prevention
tool, seems appropriate to address such asymmetric
threats. The experience in Mali bears that out
and reveals the need to predict conflict scenarios.
However, it is vital that this activity be provided with
a clear regulatory framework. We understand that the
discussion should take place among the membership
of the United Nations, particularly the troop- and
police-contributing countries within the framework of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. In
that regard, we would like to know about MINUSMA's
experience in managing information and if it led to
increased security on behalf of the troops and civilians.

We recognize the importance of the troops deployed
on the ground responding to a chain of command to
ensure the success of the assigned tasks. However, that
does not prevent the troop-contributing countries from
determining the conditions and locations under which
their forces will be deployed at the time of the signing
of the respective memorandums of understanding and
according to their capacities and means in relation
to particular situations. The early conclusion of such
memorandums allows the Department of Operations
Peacekeeping to know in advance the elements and
units available to meet the different scenarios.

