Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, Special Envoy
Menkerios, Ambassador Kamau and Ambassador
Antonio for their briefings today, and I offer a special
thanks to Egypt for convening this meeting.

I would like to address four key features of the
African Union (AU)-United Nations partnership
today - mutual respect, financing, capacity-building
and prevention.

I turn first to mutual respect. Given that more than
80 per cent of United Nations troops are deployed in
Africa, we have a great deal to gain from enhanced
communication between the AU and the United
Nations. Given that African peacekeepers contribute
more than half of the United Nations troops involved
in peacekeeping on the African continent, it is both
pragmatic and right to seek out African views on
mandate formation, political mediation efforts and all
the tools we deploy as the Security Council in the service
of conflict resolution and conflict prevention. I would
note, however, that it would be simplistic to suggest
that the African view on any issue is a monolithic one
any more than the views inside the Security Council
are monolithic. But more communication and more
listening to one another, more mutual respect and more
supplementing of formal meetings with more informal
conversations and brainstorming will make us each and
together more effective.

Secondly, financing is a hot topic in the Council
today. When it comes to discussing how to strengthen the
United Nations-AU partnership, there is understandably
a great deal of focus on how we can better support the
deployment of African-led peace support operations
to address urgent threats to peace and security. We
know that the United Nations will not always be able
or be best positioned to respond to a crisis. While the
Security Council continues to be responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
also know that the AU can be a particularly effective
partner in that pursuit, including when it comes to
conducting offensive military operations in complex
security situations where there is no peace to keep and
armed groups threaten the civilian population. There is
a clear need to improve the financial and operational
arrangements that undergird AU-fielded, United
Nations-authorized peacekeeping missions and that
will reflect our shared ownership and responsibilities.

We think there can be progress on this long stalled
issue. We hope that AU member States will fulfil
their commitment to finance 25 per cent of AU peace
operations while also developing a fiduciary framework
to govern the use of those funds and establishing
new approaches to mandating and overseeing those
missions with the Security Council to ensure that they
are effective and accountable. The proposals being
developed by AU High Representative Kaberuka could
be important steps in that direction. If we are able
to make progress, we will need to agree on common
approaches to mission mandating and planning
processes and on transparency and accountability
mechanisms. Those will enable the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
(PSC) together to monitor and promote strict adherence
to international peacekeeping standards, which should
include, of course, full respect for human rights norms
and a zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation
and abuse. By demonstrating that peacekeepers who
commit abuses will be held to account, we strengthen
the legitimacy of peacekeeping where it counts most,
that is, with the civilians that peacekeepers are sworn
to protect.

Thirdly, on capacity-building, improving the
operational capacity of the relationship will also
require ongoing efforts to build the capabilities of the
AU, as envisaged in the African Peace and Security
Architecture road map. Greater AU capabilities
will translate into the AU delivering more effective
peacekeeping missions. The United States has shown
its commitment to that effort. We have strengthened
AU command and control capabilities, supported
multinational exercises for brigades and trained more
than 250,000 peacekeepers since 2005. Two years
ago, President Obama also established the African
Peacekeeping Rapid Response Partnership, a major new
initiative to build the capacity of key African troop-
contributing countries so that they can deploy more
rapidly to peacekeeping missions. That was something
that they had requested of the international community
many times.

Fourthly, and finally, prevention is the issue on
which all of us can agree in the abstract. Who can
be against prevention? But where the differences
often emerge inside each of our respective Councils
is when concrete cases - real countries and real
circumstances - emerge. Members of both the United
Nations Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council must get better at dealing with the
political drivers of conflict. That can be more politically
sensitive for neighbours than it is for countries that are
far removed, and we should not dance around that fact.
All of us must recognize that it is highly destabilizing
when political opponents are attacked, people's rights
are violated, elections are highjacked and when
Constitutions are ignored. We have seen those kinds
of actions helping fuel conflict that then ends up on
both of our respective agendas. Conversely, those
States that prioritize investments in accountable and
inclusive institutions that deepen the rule of law, that
include women in decision-making processes and that
otherwise pursue improved governance and more open
societies are empirically far less likely to descend into
conflict and to eventually threaten regional peace and
security. Our partnership must advance those goals,
and Member States must be quick and unified in their
response when the roots of conflict begin to grow.

The situation in Burundi remains deeply perilous,
with more than 400 dead and 250,000 refugees to date,
the near collapse of the Burundian economy, rampant
insecurity and the constant threat of a real spiralling
into violence. The Security Council has often lagged
behind the PSC in responding to the crisis.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, five
days ago the Government issued an arrest warrant
for opposition leader Moise Katumbi, soon after he
announced he would run for President in elections
scheduled for later this year. The Government has said
that the elections will likely be postponed and that
President Kabila Kabange, who is prohibited by the
Constitution from running for a third term, will remain
in office until they can be held. Civil society activists
have been arrested or detained for protesting peacefully.
Opposition leaders are planning nationwide protests
for Thursday. Congolese security forces have in the
past used repressive tactics, including deadly force, to
prevent Congolese citizens from exercising their right
to peaceful demonstration. This is a conflict-prevention
moment. We know it. We see it. We know from history.
We know from the present. It is imperative that we show
a united front in calling on President Kabila Kabange
to abide by the Constitution and step down when his
term ends.

Marshalling a unified political front is equally
important if conflict does break out. It is the sole way to
maintain collective positions and to support meaningful
actions. In South Sudan, the United Nations and the
AU have supported the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) efforts to pressure both sides.
Without those pressure points, without that leverage,
it is hard to imagine the formation of the transitional
Government that has occurred. The situation is
extremely fragile, and sustaining momentum in the
weeks and months ahead will require high-level
attention and a continued, unified IGAD, AU, United
Nations front.

By contrast, sadly, in the Sudan, the members of the
Security Council and the PSC have been embarrassingly
divided. We have failed even to successfully pressure
the Government of the Sudan into permitting the
delivery of supplies required by the soldiers and police
who make up the beleaguered mission. Hundreds of
containers of African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and contingent-owned equipment
are languishing in Port Sudan and Darfur regional
airports, while attacks against the mission by militia
and other armed groups continue. Rather than hosting
indicted Sudanese leaders, United Nations and AU
member States should be exerting all the influence
possible to persuade Khartoum to change course. Even
if we could make progress on ensuring more predictable
funding for AU missions - something that I think we
all agree is a priority issue - it will mean little if we
cannot unite behind the delivery offood to peacekeepers
who are risking their lives on the front lines. If we are
to forge a more robust United Nations-AU relationship,

we should seek more progress on those concrete cases
that affect millions of civilian lives in the here and now.

