Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would first like to thank
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for his valuable briefing
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well as
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of MINUSMA,
for his work in extremely difficult circumstances. We
commend MINUSMA's mediation efforts and call on it
to further strengthen its exercise of its good offices, in
accordance with its mandate.

(spoke in French)

I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome
the presence here today of His Excellency Mr. Tieman
Hubert Coulibaly, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.

(spoke in English)

Poland has been following the political situation
in Mali and the Sahel closely. It is currently one of
the world's most critical regions in the fight against
international terrorism. We share the concerns about
the deteriorating security situation in the North and
in central Mali in particular, with its spillover effects
on Mali's neighbours. Stabilizing Mali politically
and ensuring its territorial integrity will be crucial to
maintaining peace and stability in the Sahel region. In
the more than two and a half years since the signing
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
many of its provisions are still relevant. Building trust
and overcoming barriers between the Government
and other national stakeholders are essential to
facilitating the electoral process. In that regard, we
welcome the President of Mali's assurances that all
the elections scheduled for 2018 - presidential,
legislative and local - will be held in accordance with
the constitutionally mandated deadlines. We should all
realize that organizing elections in such an unstable
security environment is challenging. Women should be
included in every decision-making body related to the
peace process, and I therefore welcome the compliance
of all the political parties with the 30 per cent quota
requirement for women in elective functions, as well
as the representation of young people on the lists
submitted for local and regional elections.

We encourage the Government of Mali to finalize a
strategy for developing northern Mali and formulating
a national emergency plan, as well as to adopt a timeline
for implementing the Agreement, as part of the trust-
building efforts among the stakeholders in the peace
process. Constitutional revisions, security and justice
reforms and a process of centralization are only some
of the issues that must be addressed soon. We hope that
the relevant African political actors and institutions,
such as the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the African Development Bank
and Mali's neighbours will continue their mediation
efforts and support action aimed at effectively
implementing the Malian peace process.

As a member of the European Union (EU), Poland
welcomes the possibility of further cooperation with
MINUSMA in the context of the operationalization of
the Joint Force of the Group of Five (G-S) for the Sahel,
based on resolution 2391 (2017). Progress is being made
on efforts to conclude a technical agreement as soon as
possible between the United Nations, the EU and the
G-5 Sahel States.

In conclusion, Poland encourages all the parties in
Mali to continue furtherpolitical dialogue. We would also
like to offer our full support to Special Representative
Annadif and look forward to the conclusions of the
upcoming MINUSMA strategic review.
