Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman, Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie and Mr. Ging, Director
of the Coordination and Response Division of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
for their briefings.

In recent days, the overall situation in eastern
Ukraine has been stable, and the ceasefire has largely
been maintained. Not long ago, the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2202 (2015), reflecting
the firm support of the international community for
the diplomatic efforts of the leaders of the Russian
Federation, France, Germany and Ukraine and for a
political settlement of the question of Ukraine. The top
priority now is for the parties concerned to continue to
implement in a comprehensive manner the 12 February
Minsk agreement reached by the leaders of the Russian
Federation, France, Germany and Ukraine and advance
the process of political settlement.

China is against any gross violation ofhuman rights
in Ukraine and any act that causes the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation of the country. We also
believe that a political solution is the only way to
resolve the question of Ukraine.

The question of Ukraine involves multiple complex
and interwoven historical and contemporary issues;
a comprehensive long-term solution requires a full
accommodation of the legitimate rights, interests
and claims of the various regions and ethnic groups
in Ukraine, addressing the legitimate concerns of
the parties concerned and achieving a balance in the
parties' interests. The international community should
continue to increase diplomatic efforts to push for a
political settlement of the crisis in Ukraine.

In terms of the Council's discussion on the question
of Ukraine, China takes an open approach. We believe
that the discussion should play a constructive role in
easing tensions in the country. Moreover, the threat or
use of unilateral sanctions all too often in international
relations is not conducive to finding a fundamental
solution.

Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of all countries has been China's consistent position.
China's position on the question of Ukraine has been
objective and impartial.

We welcome and support the Minsk agreements
reached by the leaders of the Russian Federation,
France, Germany and Ukraine. We call on the parties
concerned to continue to make efforts to ease the
situation in eastern Ukraine, with a view to achieving
peace, tranquility, stability and development in Ukraine.
China is willing to continue to play a constructive
role towards a political settlement of the question of
Ukraine.

