Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Chinese presidency and
the delegations of Senegal and Angola for convening
this important open debate. I would also like to express
my appreciation to the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Zerihoun, for his briefing.

It is important to remind the international
community of the phenomenon of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea and their dangerous
security and socioeconomic implications. It is a true
threat to international trade and it negatively affects
stability and development in the countries of the Gulf
of Guinea and West Africa.

Despite the partial decrease in the prevalence of
this phenomenon, there is no time for complacency.
Criminal networks continue to operate with their basic
capacities. Egypt values the efforts of the countries
of the region to combat this phenomenon, which
include the holding of the Summit of Heads of State
and Government on Maritime Safety and Security
in the Gulf of Guinea in Yaounde' in 2013, with the
participation of 25 countries. The Summit adopted
the Yaounde Declaration on combatting piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. It also endorsed the creation of the
Interregional Coordination Centre on Maritime Safety
and Security for Central and West Africa.

We also should not ignore the important role of
the African Union and other regional organizations,
including the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission. We look
forward to the extraordinary summit of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union of Maritime
Security and Development in Africa, which will be
held in Lome in October. Its outcomes will definitely
contribute to African cooperation in that regard.

If anti-piracy efforts are to be successful, we must
support national efforts to protect the coastlines and
to strengthen cooperation, information-sharing and
lessons learned at the regional and international levels.
It is also important to ensure that the shipping industry
is committed to best practices when sailing in high-risk
areas. Furthermore, it is important to combat impunity
by prosecuting people involved in acts of piracy and
by tracking the leaders and people who finance piracy
networks.

In that regard, Egypt would like to stress the
importance of taking into consideration the different
political and security conditions and the different
modus operandi of pirates from one region to another.
Networks of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the
coast of Somalia have taken advantage ofthe absence of
State authority for two decades and established a base
to launch their attacks and seize ships and their crew
for ransom. However, the perpetrators of acts of piracy
and armed robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea have
adopted a different approach. They have seized ships
and their cargo passing through the region. There is no
doubt that combatting these different modus operandi
require differentiated approaches.

Egypt would like to stress that the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is the legal
framework for combating acts of piracy. It is important
for all States to uphold their responsibilities under
the Convention, in particular to prosecute persons
suspected of being involved in acts of piracy. It is also
important to delineate high-risk zones that have seen
an increase in acts of piracy. It is important to delineate
such zones according to specific and clear criteria in
order to ensure the best use of resources in the fight
against piracy. These resources should be allocated
to regions that are experiencing the highest levels of
piracy. Egypt also stresses the need for the international
community, especially through the International
Maritime Organization, to hold open consultations
with the participation of all parties to promulgate
regulations that allow for the use of security personnel
aboard commercial ships.

In conclusion, human and natural resources on
the African continent, if appropriately exploited,
could ensure the well-being and stability of the
peoples of Africa, while contributing positively to
the international economy. The African Union has
adopted the 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime Strategy,
which is an ambitious development vision aimed at
strengthening security in the African maritime space
and at using to good advantage the African coasts
in mining, fishing and trade, without damaging the
ecosystem and maritime life. The Strategy also aims
at developing the infrastructure of African ports and
promoting true complementarity between landlocked
and coastal countries.

Nevertheless, Africa is facing a number of
challenges that prevent it from occupying the place
it deserves. There is a link between these challenges.
Poverty and underdevelopment are fuelling armed
conflicts and undermining State authority, thereby
leading to the proliferation of terrorist networks,
transnational organized crime, smuggling and piracy.
Therefore, in order to address many of the challenges
that the African continent is facing, it is important to
make a clear diagnosis ofthe root causes ofthe problem.

The international community should support
African efforts to find timely solutions, including
security cooperation in the areas of piracy, organized
crime and terrorism. It is also necessary to strengthen
long-term programmes aimed at achieving sustainable
development and combating poverty in Africa. The
Security Council and the United Nations should also
follow up on international efforts to strengthen the
capacity of countries of the region to combat piracy.
It is also necessary to ensure continued financial and
technical support and determine the strengths and
weaknesses of current mechanisms in order to develop
them appropriately.

