The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of France.

France deeply regrets the result of this vote.
The ongoing reports of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) show that
chemical-weapon attacks in Syria have never ceased.
That justifies, more than ever, the continuation of
investigations to identify and punish those responsible,
in the light of, among other things, the latest conclusions
of the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
on a sarin attack in Al-Latamneh, in north-western
Syria, on 30 March.

Today's vote was therefore yet another squandered
opportunity. By failing to renew the mandate of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM), we are depriving
ourselves of the possibility of documenting the cases of
use of these weapons not only by the Syrian army, but
also by non-State actors. It is a new kind of threat for
which we must prepare ourselves.

We regret that the mandate renewal could not
be adopted today, as it should of course have been,
with pragmatism and responsibility, free from all
politicization, to ensure the continuity of the work of the
JIM. The Mechanism has proved itself. It is therefore our
shared responsibility to build the consensus necessary
to end the use of chemical weapons in Syria and prevent
their re-emergence elsewhere. I would like to recall
that 192 States, including Syria, have committed to
renouncing the use of chemical weapons. Beyond the
specific responsibility of the States parties, including
Russia, we must all protect and strengthen the chemical
non-proliferation regime.

As the final conclusions of the Mechanism
approach, France will never give up. My country will
not resign itself to tolerating the deconstruction of the
non-proliferation regime. On the contrary, our priority
must remain the full and complete dismantling of the
Syrian chemical-weapon programme and the fight
against impunity. In that spirit, France fully supports
and reiterates its full confidence in the existing
mechanisms of the United Nations and the OPCW.

France considers compliance with non-proliferation
commitments to be among the most fundamental
standards of international relations. Their violation is
a danger to us all. We must therefore send a message of
strength, including by identifying the perpetrators of
these crimes. Any hope of lasting peace and stability
in Syria requires the truth. That is a priority for France.
This hope also calls for a political solution leading to
a negotiated democratic transition, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). That is the aim of France's efforts
to establish a contact group to actively support the
mediation of Mr. Staffan de Mistura.

As we celebrate United Nations Day today, I believe
that it is important to put everything that is at stake into
perspective. The international non-proliferation regimes
are among the most important shared achievements of
recent decades. Let us make no mistake - these regimes
are the backbone of international peace and security.
Yet they are being put to the test today, from the nuclear
programme of North Korea to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, not to mention many other threats all
over the world. On behalf of France, I would therefore
like to appeal today for our extraordinary vigilance and
for action. Let us not allow political differences - or,
worse, short-term tactical calculations 4 to undermine
those regimes. The continued existence and solidity of
the international non-proliferation regimes are of vital
importance to our common security. That is why it is
the responsibility of the international community, and
of the Security Council in particular, to maintain and
strengthen them. And that is why today's negative vote
is not and cannot be the last word.

France therefore solemnly calls on all States
members of the Security Council to come together
around the essential issues that I have outlined and
to build the necessary consensus before the mandate
of the JIM. lapses in mid-November in order to renew
it. We should all be aware that this is our historic
responsibility.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
