Mr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe): I wish at the outset to
congratulate my old friend, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani of Singapore, on the excellent manner in
which he conducted the work of the Security Council
in January and for the invitation he extended to us, on
behalf of the Security Council, to come to New York
on this occasion. I am at the same time pleased to see
Ambassador Sai'd Ben Mustapha, a fellow African,
presiding over the Council this month, during which
the Council will deliberate on many issues of special
interest to Africa. We commend the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for his unrelenting determination to
promote the interest of peace in Africa and the world
oven

I have the honour, on behalf of the Political
Committee on the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and on my own behalf, to express our gratitude
to the United Nations Security Council for inviting us
to interact with it, once again, in this manner on the
very pressing issue of restoring peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are aware of
the considerable amount of time and attention that the
Council has devoted and is devoting to the resolution
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Only earlier this month, the Council met,
separately, the Presidents of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, as part of its efforts to
contribute to the resolution of this conflict. We join the
Council on this occasion so that together we may not
only exchange views on this matter but also agree on
the next steps required to support and encourage
further progress in the peace process.

The last time a similar meeting between the
Political Committee and the Security Council was held,
on 15 and 16 June 2000, the process of implementing
the Ceasefire Agreement was facing numerous
challenges: there were ceasefire violations and fighting
in various provinces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) was
experiencing numerous obstacles, and the national
dialogue still had to overcome a series of
complications. The picture then looked sombre -
indeed, some would say downright depressing.

Today, we have a radically transformed situation,
one that yields renewed hope and optimism in and for
the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The guns have been silent on the front lines for
more than three weeks now, and the speedy
implementation of the process of disengagement and
redeployment of forces, which all the parties have
signed on to, could help sustain that silence for an even
longer time. MONUC, by its own admission, is
enjoying the cooperation of all the parties to the
Agreement, and the hitherto thorny issue of the
facilitator of the national dialogue has been resolved.

The parties to the Ceasefire Agreement have
never tired of meeting and exploring various initiatives
to overcome whatever impediments stood in the way of
progress in the peace process. The most recent of such
meetings of the parties were held in Lusaka on 12 and
15 February 2001 at the Political Committee and
summit levels respectively. Beyond reaffirming their
commitment to the implementation of the Ceasefire
Agreement, the parties deliberated on and made
significant progress on such critical issues as the
disengagement and redeployment of forces and the
inter-Congolese political negotiations. All the parties
have now signed the sub-plans for disengagement, and
the only two that are yet to issue the disengagement
orders to their troops are expected to lodge them with
the Joint Military Commission (JMC) and MONUC
shortly.

The preparations for the inter-Congolese dialogue
are set to get underway in earnest any day now,
whenever the facilitator, former President Sir Ketumile
Masire, visits Kinshasa in response to the invitation
extended to him by President Joseph Kabila. In View of
the urgency that the parties attach to the
commencement of the national dialogue, all the
Congolese parties were urged to begin consultations
amongst themselves and to cooperate fully with the
facilitator.

It is patently evident that the parties continue to
take their obligations seriously and wish to take
advantage of the current propitious turn of events to
move the process even further and in more tangible
ways. Both the Political Committee and the summit
underlined their desire and determination to accelerate
the pace of implementation of the peace process. It is
in this frame of mind and with this expectation that we
meet with the Security Council today as partners in the
search for durable peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We hope, therefore, that hesitation and
doubt will give way to renewed confidence in the peace
process and that renewed confidence will translate into
timely concrete actions in fulfilment of the
responsibilities assigned to the United Nations under
the Ceasefire Agreement and in numerous Security
Council resolutions on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We note with some concern in this regard,
however, that the United Nations, under the new step-
by-step, gradualist and minimalist concept of
operations for MONUC, conveys an unfortunate
impression of hesitancy and doubt about the peace
process. The parties firmly believe that now is the time
not for prevarication and doubt, but for rapid
engagement in view of the positive prevailing
circumstances. The Lusaka summit was unequivocal in
its expectation that the United Nations should respond
with

"the full and speedy deployment of military
observers and related personnel to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as authorized by Security
Council resolution 1291 (2000) of 24 February
2000".

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is a vast
country. It is necessary that MONUC be allowed to
deploy the 5,537 men authorized under resolution 1291
(2000). Cutting the number to under 3,000, as is now
being proposed under the new deployment concept,
would certainly convey an impression of a lack of
seriousness, if not of downright cynicism and a lack of
sincerity and of commitment to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I believe that one
of the news agencies yesterday described the figure as
"minuscule".

Downsizing the force would be tantamount to
amending resolution 1291 (2000) by the back door,
through administrative fiat. That would be most
unfortunate. We therefore appeal to the Security
Council to reconsider the proposed figure for
deployment under the new concept. If yesterday there
were any doubts as to the sincerity and commitment of
the parties to the Ceasefire Agreement, those doubts
should now be dispelled. The parties have spoken in a
very clear and unambiguous manner: they want peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and they
want it now; furthermore, they are prepared to take
some risks to attain it. They eagerly invite and await a
commensurate response from the Council, not only in
assuming, with the necessary speed, its responsibilities
under the Ceasefire Agreement but also in ensuring the
full implementation of its own resolutions on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in particular
resolution 1291 (2000).

We now have a unique opportunity to make
tangible progress that would firmly set this process on
the path to success. This is not the time to imagine that
every light at the end of the tunnel in the Congo peace
process is necessarily that of an approaching high-
speed train. We must seize the moment to make
progress. Let the Council increase confidence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo peace process by
taking some bold and generous steps. We are not
saying that the Council should throw all caution to the
wind; what we are urging is that it act urgently and
decisively to promote peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and that it be willing to take
calculated risks if need be - as it has done in Sierra
Leone, as it has done in Kosovo and as it has done in
East Timor. We ask the Council to enforce our renewed
commitment to the peace process by taking bold and
brave decisions: yes, why not inspire us by agreeing
here and now to accelerate the implementation of phase
III of the United Nations deployment?

We must not let this chance slip away. The
Congolese people look with great anticipation to the
Council's actions, so that they may enjoy peace and
progress as a sovereign and independent people. That is
the least we can and must do for our brothers and
sisters in the Congo. The Council is called upon to
assume its responsibility and lead the way.

I would be remiss in my duty if I did not use this
opportunity to appeal to the Security Council to come
to the financial assistance of the Joint Military
Commission, a key institution in keeping the Lusaka
peace process alive. The JMC is in dire financial straits
and may have to shut down if assistance is not rendered
as a matter of urgency.

Finally, I wish to take note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2001/128) of 12 February 2001,
which covers some important developments since his
last report to the Security Council. It contains a great
deal of useful information and makes useful
recommendations for the consideration of the Council.
The Political Committee, for its part, will have an
opportunity to comment on and update some aspects of
the report during our official private meetings with the
Council later today.

The eyes and the hopes of the Congolese nation
are riveted on our proceedings today. We must give
hope to the Congolese mothers and children. The
situation brooks no delay. Let us all agree that enough
is enough. The moment for inaction is past. This
conflict chapter must be closed. Peace, yes peace, must
return to the Congo.

