Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (Spoke in French):

I thank the French presidency for having chosen
two women as speakers - or, in the new French, as
"briefers" - which was very encouraging. I would like
to thank Ms. Zerrougui for her testimony. As she said,
the context is much better than the last time she briefed
the Security Council (see S/PV.8318), and I think what
she just said is really encouraging. I do not want to
repeat everything he has done, but the new President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi has taken some good and very
important steps. He has opened up the political space,
which I think is very important. But Ms. Zerrougui also
said that the political process remains fragile, which is
why I would also like to take advantage of the presence
of the Ambassador of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and his delegation to encourage them to continue
along that path. It is difficult, but in my opinion that is
the only alternative.

In that context, let me mention what the briefer from
the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, Ms. Anny Tenga
Modi, said. I think what shejust said was very important,
and perhaps in his statement the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo could answer some
of the Ms. Modi's questions she asked and respond to
her demands, namely, for a stronger role for women in
the country's political process. I would like to repeat
some of what she said because it is extremely important
to make men in the military and political forces aware
of the issues that need to be addressed in terms of
integrating women into the military forces.

There are not enough women in the military and
police forces. In the elections, as was the case in the
past, there were not enough women on the electoral
rolls. We really must see to it that more women appear
on the rolls in the communal elections and that there
be more female observers in local elections. In general,
I understood what Ms. Modi said: there is a need for
broader civil education to highlight the rights and
strengths of women and what they bring to politics
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I see that
already the President's diplomatic adviser is a woman,
for which I offer my congratulations.

I would like to mention an issue that is very
important, even if my colleagues have already raised
it: the rule of law. I believe that every effort should
be made to strengthen the rule of law. Justice must be
strengthened. We must curb corruption, as my Belgian
colleague said, and fight impunity. I would also like to
echo what my American colleague has just said about
the murders of Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, which
remain unsolved. And there is still sexual violence
used by security forces. Also, as my Belgian colleague
said with regard to Yumbi, there a real possibility that
crimes against humanity were committed there. The
rule of law is needed. There must be no impunity for
crimes that have been committed.

With respect to the region, I echo what my American
colleague said: the situation between Uganda and
Burundi is not encouraging. The situation in the region,
including Burundi, has security implications for the
east of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We have
to keep watching this situation, especially in a region
that has been hit by Ebola and where humanitarian
assistance providers continue to be attacked.

With regard to the future of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I think we have to wait. We have
to see how the President sees the situation. There are
still some tasks to be done. We must focus on the most
important tasks, and we have just referred to them. I
think that a drawdown and exit of the Mission should
not be a goal in itself. There must be an independent
strategic review to identify what the future looks like
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is also
very important for the troop-contributing countries, as
it will give them an idea of how long they can expect
to remain in the country. There is currently no real
path towards withdrawal. We also need to make sure
that we send a clear message that the international
community remains fully engaged on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

