Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): In this twilight of your
presidency, Sir, I welcome the opportunity this meeting
offers me to congratulate you, as this is the first time that
I have spoken in an open meeting of the Security Council
since you became its President. I therefore speak to
celebrate your presidency and the manner in which you
have acquitted yourself this month. I can assure that your
name has gone into the records of the Security Council as
representing one of the most successful presidencies, by
far, during my country's membership of the Council over
the past year and a half.

The date of 30 June 1996 marks the end of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Haiti
(UNMIH). UNMIH is one of the few successful United
Nations peace-keeping operations of recent years. The
men and women of UNMIH - led so ably, first, by
Ambassador Brahimi and, currently, by Ambassador Ter
Horst - rightly deserve a pat on the back. They have
done a marvelous job in helping to establish a secure and
stable environment in Haiti in which democracy could
thrive. And they brought the hope of a promising future
to a people that had long despaired under some of the
most repressive military regimes in the western
hemisphere. We salute them.

Haiti has had a tortured history. The memories of
the anguish that the general population had to endure
under the former military rulers, the militia and their
sympathizers will linger in the minds of the majority of
the people of Haiti for a very long time to come. A sense
of insecurity pervades the national political psyche in
Haiti - and for good reason. Suspicions and fears of a
possible return to the past - that is, to a lawless and
dictatorial past - are ever present in the minds of those
who have known nothing but oppression and more
oppression all their lives. UNMIH has brought the people
of Haiti relative peace and tranquillity such as they had
never experienced.

 

It is no wonder, therefore, that any talk of the
withdrawal of UNMIH recalls for them the unforgettable
memories of the oppression of earlier years, as the Haitians
feel left without any protection. The people of Haiti are not
yet confident that the fledgling Haitian National Police can
afford them adequate protection against elements of the
former Government forces, which they fear, rightly or
wrongly, still retain the capacity to destabilize the emerging
democratic institutions. They have the sympathy and
understanding of my delegation.

The United Nations Mission in Haiti was not expected
to solve every problem it found in the country. It has been
in Haiti to help establish a secure and stable environment
in which both presidential and legislative elections could be
held in a free and fair atmosphere. That has been
accomplished. Responsibility for institution-building,
national reconciliation, confidence-building and the
economic rehabilitation of Haiti rests with the Government
and the people of Haiti themselves. But it is clear that this
is not a responsibility that can be left to the people of Haiti
alone.

The internal security of the country is not yet assured,
and reconstruction and national healing cannot take place in
conditions of instability. It is for this reason that my
delegation supported the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to establish the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH). The draft resolution before us
establishes UNSMIH. UNSMIH will contribute in no small
measure to the training of a professional police force in
Haiti capable of ensuring the protection and security of the
general population and its property. And, more important,
it will reassure the people of Haiti that the international
community is not about to abandon them, and will thus
frustrate the intentions of elements of the former military
and militia forces who may be bent on fomenting trouble in
the country when the United Nations leaves.

True, the draft resolution we are about to vote on does
not give the Government of Haiti what it had expected, but
this happens in any negotiation process.
What is important in the circumstances is for the Haiti
authorities to fully utilize the resources being made
available to them under UNSMIH. This will be especially
necessary in the training of a professional police force
which can gain the full confidence of the people and
proudly assume all the national security responsibilities in
the country. And we are confident that UNSMIH will assist
the Haitians in realizing that national dream which is the
pride of all nations.

