Mrs. Saidane (spoke in French): Allow me
to begin by thanking the Peruvian presidency for
having convened today's debate on an issue of critical
importance for the advancement of our collective
aspirations vis-a-vis international peace and security.
We hope that the Council will consistently follow up on
the youth, peace and security agenda. Council. I wish
also to thank all of those who spoke this morning, as
their input makes it possible for all our debates on this
issue to be increasingly well-informed and detailed.

More than two years have elapsed since the
adoption of resolution 2250 (2015), which represented
an unprecedented acknowledgement of the urgent need
to mobilize young people in the promotion of peace
and security, reaffirming the fact that without young
people nothing is possible, nothing can be envisaged
and nothing can be achieved.

The International Organization of the Francophonie
(IOF), which currently has 84 member States and
Governments, acknowledges young people as actors
critical to the success of its efforts in all areas. Based
on this certainty, in 2014 the IOF, at its fifteenth summit
of Heads of State and Government, held in Dakar,
focused on women and young people in Francophone
regions and their role in peace and development. In
acknowledgement of the 270 million young people in
Francophone areas, the organization has since 2014
been committed to including them in all its bodies at
all levels. The 2014 summit gave rise to the IOF's youth
strategy, which hinges on an inclusive approach based
on human rights.

I wish to focus on all consultations conducted
by the organization not only with its youth networks
but also with its member States and to share with the
Council some aspects of our efforts on the basis of two
core premises.

The first concerns the call made by young people
today for us to question some of our certainties. Indeed,
it is evident that young men and women represent the
majority of the population and that it is we, those above
age 35, who are now in the minority. Yet we continue
to expect the majority to adapt to the demands of the
minority without even including it in a dialogue on
the necessary adjustments. This is especially true for
mediation and crisis-exit processes, which, with a few
exceptions, rarely welcome young people. Not only
that, what we are in effect asking of them is that they
get on a speeding train without ever considering how
fast it is going.

The second premise relates to one of the points
that the study on young people, peace and security
specifically underlines, something that we welcome.
We need to move away from simplistic stereotypes that
view young people only as a high-risk, irresponsible
and potentially violent group, even though the vast
majority of young people wish only to contribute
positively to peace, security and development, and have
already been doing so.

Iwish here to discuss some of the efforts undertaken
by the IOF to forge a robust partnership with and for
young people that is aimed at building peace within the
French-speaking community, which has by no means
been spared conflicts and violence.

First, with respect to inclusion and participation,
our efforts are not limited to systematically including
young people in decision-making processes and
bodies; the aim is also to give them a voice, through,
for instance, the Free Together campaign. In its
first year the campaign, launched in 2016 on social
networks, mobilized more than 5,000 young people
in the French-speaking community in the context of
an initiative crafted by young people and focusing
on the revalorization of coexistence, respect and the
engagement of young people in public life. These same
young men and women are also continuing to make
contributions in the framework of the Francophone
network for the prevention of radicalization currently
being set up, as well as in the context of the national
"Free Together" initiatives, specifically in Cote d'Ivoire
and Benin, in partnership with the national authorities.

Furthermore, convinced that it is more important
than ever to work to reconcile young people and
decision-makers and to create the climate of mutual
trust that is critical for dialogue, the IOF has harnessed
its capacities in the area of advocacy, political mediation
at the highest level and technical partnership with its
member States in order to contribute to the maintenance
of the rule of law, which protects young people, their
voice and their participation.

The United Nations Development Programme,
which in 2017 carried out a study on factors contributing
to violent radicalization in the Sahel region, stressed
the fact that one of the triggers of such violence was
without a doubt State violence against citizens, and this
aspect must remain at the heart of our concerns.

In addition to being guarantors of coexistence,
young people, as has been stressed repeatedly today, are
the economic actors of today and tomorrow. Given that
the economic integration of young men and women is a
critical component of their contribution to the building
of peaceful societies, the IOF has adopted an economic
and digital strategy through which it mobilizes funds
for the support of innovation and entrepreneurship for
young project leaders.

As education remains the cornerstone of young
people's involvement, the IOF also supports the
development of educational and vocational training
policies, through, inter alia, the Institute of the
Francophonie for Education and Training, based
in Dakar, as well as the Francophone University
Association, which includes more than 800 institutions
of higher education.

Lastly, the IOF focuses on the mobilization ofefforts
in the areas of integrated cooperation and of sustainable,
inclusive and responsible human development. The task
is so urgent and the challenge of such magnitude that
no country or organization can achieve it alone; hence
the importance of today's debate. Because all national
and international actors must act hand in hand with and

for young people, an alliance was created between the
IOF, the Commonwealth, the Ibero-American General
Secretariat and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, which together represent 167 States and
61 per cent of the world's population. That alliance
led to a call for universal humanism, launched jointly
by the four women at the helm of those organizations,
and to an action plan in which youth is acknowledged
as a key actor in the stability of societies and in the
establishment of the social cohesion necessary for
peace and security.

I wish to conclude by focusing on that call, which
is part and parcel of the quest to better align the efforts
of the various relevant organizations and existing
mechanisms, and to stress that we already have
numerous opportunities at our disposal to systematically
integrate young people into decision-making processes,
as they are already organized enough to be credible
interlocutors. We must accept being called into question;
that is the aim of our present and future efforts.

