Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the convening of
this meeting and to Special Representative Tanin for
his briefing and the laudable work carried out by his
team on the ground. We also thank Mr. Ivica Daeic',
First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, and Ambassador
Vlora Citaku for their briefings today.

The Dominican Republic would like to commend
the electoral authorities in Kosovo and the population
in general for the success of the parliamentary elections
held on 6 October. However, we note with concern the
apparent impasse in the process ofnormalizing relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. If that deadlock were
to endure, it could jeopardize the stability achieved so
far. We therefore urge the parties to pursue formal talks
in the current format, and we call on both parties to
reconsider all unilateral measures that are slowing the
return to dialogue.

Measures aimed at building confidence among
the population play a decisive role in fostering the
aforementioned negotiations. The activities of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in promoting youth empowerment,
multilingualism, intercommunal dialogue and respect
for human rights are fundamental in that regard.
Similarly, the participation of women and young people
in the democratic process and in decision-making is
a necessary tool to advance towards a leadership that
contributes to achieving a peaceful society on the
path towards development and inclusion for future
generations. In that regard, the Dominican Republic
also welcomes the renewed work to search for missing
persons through, inter alia, the amendment made to
the Law on Missing Persons in Kosovo. In addition to
being a key element for reconciliation, we wish to recall
that families have a right to know the whereabouts of
their loved ones.

A final aspect that should be highlighted is the
importance of making headway in addressing the needs
of victims of sexual violence, who continue to be affected
after the conflict and are currently excluded from the
Government's reparation plans. We believe that the
counting of victims should not stop upon the cessation
of conflict, especially when it comes to cases of sexual
violence. The harm done to victims must be assessed
and taken into account in any Government action on
that conflict-related scourge. We take this opportunity
to applaud the work carried out by the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo through its monitoring
and operations pillars.

We hope that the outcome of the investigations being
carried out by the ad hoc investigation team regarding
the detention of two members of the Mission will be
able to provide a detailed explanation of the incident and
respond to the concerns of the international community
in relation to that confusing situation in order for the
necessary measures to be taken to correct any irregular
action. We reiterate our support for and recognition of
the work carried out in Kosovo by UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, the European Union and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe with a view to
achieving sustainable peacebuilding. We call on the
parties to honour their commitments under the Brussels
Agreement and to comply with resolution 1244 (1999).

In conclusion, we take this opportunity to
congratulate the delegation of South Africa on the
extraordinary work carried out in the Council under
its presidency.

