Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will speak on behalf of
Kuwait later on in the consultations focusing on the
humanitarian situation. However, I wanted to just very
briefly address the dramatic escalation that we see, and
I wanted to do that publicly and to express our very deep
concern over the military offensive in southwestern
Syria and its humanitarian consequences. I would like
to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for
their briefings today and for giving us the full picture
of the effects that that has not only on the humanitarian
situation and the population there but also with regard
to the political process.

Some 50,000 people have already been displaced.
The majority of them are moving towards the
Jordanian border. We therefore urge all stakeholders
to respect their obligations under international law and
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians and civilian infrastructure. I would like to
very strongly reiterate the Secretary-General's call for
an immediate end to the current military offensive. As
we have already stated today, there is a de-escalation
agreement in place, which has provided relative calm
to south-western Syria over the past year. We call on
the guarantors to uphold their commitments to that end.

The recent escalation in south-western Syria
contravenes resolution 2401 (2018), which was
unanimously adopted by the Council in February.
We call on all parties to respect and comply with
Security Council resolutions and their international
obligations, including to reduce violence, protect
civilians and ensure full humanitarian access. The full-
scale offensive that we are now seeing is in complete
contravention of what we in the Council wish to see and
what we had demanded, in particular a de-escalation
and full commitment to and engagement in the political
process. We must redouble our efforts to achieve a
political solution, in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and fully endorse, both in word and deed, the efforts
of the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura and the
United Nations-led political process. Let us therefore
discuss how we can achieve that solution during our
consultations later today and as we move forward.

