Mr. Serra (Italy): I would like to thank the Peruvian
presidency for organizing this open debate, and all the
briefers for their insightful presentations.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

We attach the greatest importance to the linkages
between organized criminal groups and terrorists.
Due to its position at the centre of the Mediterranean
Sea, our country is exposed to the consequences of all
forms of trafficking and related crimes committed by
exploiting the flow of persons, drugs, weapons and
financial resources between Africa, the Middle East
and Europe. The actions of organized groups represent
a serious threat that we are addressing in the most
cooperative way, and we commend the efforts and the
comprehensive, collaborative approach of the United
Nations system and international organizations, as
illustrated by this debate.

Among the numerous documents provided by
United Nations bodies attesting to the linkages between
these phenomena, let me also highlight the important
contribution provided by the balanced analyses of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
supporting the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities.

The considerations included in the Monitoring
Team's reports highlight an essential point: we need
more information and more evidence-based research,
not to determine if those connections exist - because
we know they do - but to define how and where they
exist and in what ways they impact our societies. In
that context, we support your initiative, Sir, to adopt a
Security Council draft resolution on this subject.

I will focus on the Italian experience in fighting
links between terrorism and criminal groups. The
National Antimafia and Antiterrorism Directorate,
established in 1991, has a mandate to fight organized
crime and, in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014),
to counter terrorism. The Directorate has no direct
or operational investigative power, but is in charge
of coordinating the work of all prosecutor's offices
in order to share information, avoid overlapping and
provide specific expertise. The positive effects of the
mechanism include more specialized prosecutors, more
effective cooperation with law enforcement, closer
international cooperation and better coordinated use of
information and evidence.

The National Antimafia and Antiterrorism
Directorate and its database have proved to be an
essential tool in addressing the increasingly complex
action of organized criminal groups and terrorist
organizations. At the national level, the Directorate is
a point of reference for the exchange of information
with relevant bodies, including law enforcement,
financial units, the intelligence service and the
specialized private sector. At the international level, the
Directorate established permanent coordination with
foreign prosecutor's offices, relevant European Union
authorities and international organizations, including
financial intelligence units. It also has a critical role in
supporting joint investigations, providing mutual legal
assistance and facilitating extraditions.

In the last two years, the Directorate collected
more than one piece of evidence of existing contacts
and, in some cases, operational cooperation between
organized criminal groups and persons belonging to
terrorist groups in Italy and abroad. Part ofthe evidence
is financial in nature. In some cases, criminal activities
provided a source of illegal funding then diverted to
terrorist operations. In other cases, criminal networks
were exploited to secure the transfer of funds of both
legal and illegal provenance to support terrorists'
needs. In that regard, I recall the memorandum of
understanding signed between the Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the Guardia di Finanza that will
improve our common action against illegal financial
flows linked to terrorist networks. The international
scope of the contacts and the significance of illegal
financial flows should bolster our commitment to carry
out financial investigations in all cases of suspected
terrorist involvement in criminal actions. This is a
lesson learned that Italy is keen to share alongside the
institutional and operational solutions I just described.

