Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation is very pleased to participate in this open
meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

The situation that is evolving in the field,
regrettably, compels the Council to remain focused on
that worrisome development. Despite the adoption in
close succession of three resolutions calling on the
parties to renounce violence, the situation has
continued to deteriorate. Israel has pursued its policy of
re-occupying self-governing Palestinian zones, in
contempt of the relevant provisions of those
resolutions.

My delegation deplores the growing number of
victims among the civilian populations. In its efforts to
lead both parties to renounce violence and occupation,
the Council has worked strenuously to ensure the
effective implementation of resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), in particular the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from Palestinian cities. It
is, however, in the interests of all the parties that these
recent resolutions of the Council be fully implemented.

Israel must abandon the intensification of its
military campaign against Palestinian towns and the
Palestinian Authority and stop defying the international
community in general and the Security Council in
particular. The isolation of Chairman Arafat and the
ongoing siege of the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority must come to an end.

My delegation notes that, following several
attempts to negotiate, several mediators have been
unable to obtain an effective ceasefire or the
withdrawal of Israeli troops. It would appear that the
initiatives of the "quartet" must now be harmonized to
arrive at a common strategy for action that can achieve
a settlement to the crisis.

In that regard, my delegation welcomes next
Wednesday's meeting in Madrid of the "quartet", in
which Secretary-General Kofi Annan will participate.

The world today places great hope in the trip to
the subregion that the United States Secretary of State,
Colin Powell, has just begun. Given the seriousness of
the situation and the urgency of taking measures to put
an end to the escalation of violence, my delegation
would have wished that this visit had begun with the
parties involved. We nonetheless expect much from
this high-level United States initiative.

The private meetings held on 2 April and today
have revealed a difference of opinion between the
parties over the meaning of the three resolutions
adopted recently. This reflects the realities on the
ground. My delegation encourages the Council to
institutionalize this practice of private meetings with
the two representatives in order to continue examining
the evolution of the positions of the parties and their
compliance with their commitments.

Furthermore, we believe that the situation along
the Blue Line is also a source of great concern. All
parties must commit themselves to respecting the Blue
Line and agreed provisions. No action can justify
another. There can be no doubt that the risk of
escalation along the Line is real.

My delegation notes with concern that if the
initiatives under way do not bring about an immediate
and unconditional ceasefire and the withdrawal of
Israeli troops, the humanitarian situation, which is
already a cause of concern, could worsen inexorably,
ultimately with even more civilian victims.

We must recognize that this situation could also
bring about the full dismantling of the Palestinian
Authority, and even its pure and simple destruction.
For our part, we are convinced that this policy runs
counter to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people and international law. It deserves to be
vigorously condemned, because its natural consequence
is an increase in terrorism and the emergence of
uncontrolled armed groups whose activities will be
even more damaging to international security.

It is therefore imperative that every measure be
taken for the full implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions so that the possibility
remains open of a final settlement of the Israeli-Arab
conflict.

In that connection, and in light of the statements
that the Israeli and Palestinian representative made this
morning during our private meetings, we feel that it is
useful to suggest to the Council as well as to the co-
sponsors of the peace process that they do everything
they can to convince the two parties to make parallel
statements in which they clearly recognize the need to
implement without delay the relevant resolutions of the
Council, in particular 1402 (2002).

