Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am delighted to see you, Sir, presiding over today's
meeting of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

On behalf of 51 - may I repeat, 51 - members of
the Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004), I would
like to stress the relevance of today's debate. I will now
highlight the main elements of our statement, as the full
version has been circulated.

Resolution 2325 (2016) reaffirms that the
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery constitutes a
serious threat to international peace and security. We
see proliferation taking place in the Middle East and in
Asia. We condemn proliferation in all possible forms
by anyone and we will make every effort to prevent it.
In that connection, we condemn in the strongest terms
the nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile-development
activities conducted by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, in flagrant violation of Security
Council resolutions.

That threat is more pressing than ever because of
the risk that terrorists and other non-State actors might
acquire and use such weapons, in addition to the rapid
advances in science, technology and international
commerce. Unfortunately, we have seen that that threat
has materialized in Syria, Iraq and Malaysia. The use
of chemical weapons undermines the hard-won taboo
of those atrocious weapons, contrary to the norms
established by the international community and upheld
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons (OPCW).
We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Syria,
as confirmed by the OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. In order to stem the risk of
further chemical-weapon use by any party in Syria,
we urge the Syrian Arab Republic to cooperate fully
with OPCW to fulfil its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

(spoke in Spanish)

In that regard, we support the global approach that
advocates the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), established pursuant to resolution 2325 (2016).
First, a specific approach must be adopted so as to
allocate resources to areas where they are most needed,
all the while taking into consideration the circumstances
unique to each State. In more concrete terms, we believe
that the chemical and biological sectors require greater
attention, in particular in terms of inventory control
procedures, the protection of related materials and
the relative accessibility of such materials, including
formulating a more urgent response to the issue.

Secondly, it is important for States, at the very least,
to criminalize the reckless funding of activities that
lead to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
regardless of whether or not they are linked to terrorist
activities, and to establish national control mechanisms
to prevent them.

Thirdly, the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) demands not only the adoption of legislation,
but its enforcement and the establishment of national
controls. A good example is the compilation of national
lists to monitor and control materials that can be used
for proliferation purposes. We encourage those States
that have not yet done so to develop such controls. It is
also important to strengthen cybersecurity, in particular
in sensitive sectors.

Fourthly, it is imperative that resolution 1540
(2004) be fully implemented. We encourage States that
have not done so to submit their first report. We also
encourage States to provide additional information on
implementation and good practices, consider developing
voluntary national action plans, identify effective focal
points and maintain ongoing dialogue with the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), including through visits by the Committee.
In that regard, we welcome Morocco's initiative to
host a training session for African contact points. We
underscore the importance of assistance and welcome
capacity-building through bilateral contributions to the
trust fund managed by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. We stand ready to assist States at
their request in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004)

(spoke in English)

We welcome increased cooperation between the
United Nations and relevant international and regional
organizations, as well as among the relevant Security
Council committees, in combating proliferation. In that
effort, parliamentarians and civil society, in particular
industry and academia, also have a role to play.

Finally, we acknowledge the key role played by
Bolivia as it leads the 1540 Committee and highlight
the importance of transparency. A good example of
such transparency is today's open debate. In view of
the current threats and challenges, we believe that the
Committee needs to have in place an adequate support
structure so that it can assist States and more efficiently
monitor implementation.

Rest assured, Sir, of our continued support to the
work of the Committee and to your chairmanship.

