Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We express our
appreciation to the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
comprehensive and objective briefing. We also thank all
the invited briefers for their thoughtful and important
contribution to this significant issue.

As we continue to witness unprecedented, grave
crises in the Middle East, which have been a major
destabilizing factor in global security for five decades,
we believe that now is the time to seriously address
those issues. Kazakhstan's position on the Middle
East process is crystal clear and remains unchanged.
We support negotiations that would result in a two-
State solution and call for the prompt resumption of
such negotiations, especially in the bilateral format,
without preconditions. The ultimate goal should be
the restoration and promotion of the peace process, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1067) and 338 (1973),
the Madrid principles, the land for peace formula and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

Kazakhstan strongly believes that the Security
Council and individual United Nations institutions
should work together to develop a new, more detailed
road map reflecting the demands and wishes of Israelis
and Palestinians. Such a road map could help to
facilitate direct talks between the sides. There should
be a stop to settlement enlargement on the Palestinian
territories, which could lead to a new cycle of violence
that nobody wants.

My country underscores the importance of
achieving inter-Palestinian unity. There should be
a unified Palestinian voice in negotiations with
Israel and the international community. The difficult
humanitarian situation in the region, which includes,
inter alia, extreme poverty, growing unemployment
and the chronic economic backwardness of Gaza,
contributes to instability and frustration, which can,
in turn, create conditions that lead to the resumption
of the conflict. Kazakhstan is particularly concerned
about the gravity of the Palestinian situation and calls
for urgent international action to mitigate suffering.
The blockades and checkpoints imposed on Gaza
only aggravate the social, economic and humanitarian
situation and diminish the prospects for peace.

We welcome and support Israel's decision to
provide some economic concessions to the Palestinians
to facilitate and ease the conditions of daily living in
the territory of the Palestinian Authority.

Finally, Kazakhstan is convinced that the efforts of
the co-sponsors of the peace process, international and
regional organizations, as well as the good will of all
sides and actors in the negotiating process, should bring
a political solution to the Middle East.

