Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic wishes to offer its most heartfelt condolences to the people of Kuwait over the death of Amir Al-Sabah. We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We are extremely concerned about the latest details on the pronounced deterioration of the situation on the ground, as we note the resurgence of cases of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on occupied Palestinian territory and in Israel. This month, COVID-19 cases in occupied Palestinian territory have increased by 30 per cent and by 83 per cent in the Gaza Strip, where it has more readily spread throughout the community. Immediate measures are needed to alleviate the humanitarian situation and prevent greater deterioration. That includes the full cooperation of Israeli authorities in allowing the Palestinians torespond effectively to the needs of the sick and the most vulnerable. A permanent ceasefire is critical to enabling both countries to respond to the pandemic. We welcome the announcement of President Abbas, in his address to the General Assembly, of the preparations under way for the holding of parliamentary elections, followed by presidential elections, with the participation of all political parties. The Dominican Republic supports regional efforts that seek to create new conditions that are conducive to peacebuilding. That is why we welcome the normalization agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and, more recently, between Israel and Bahrain, which has become the fourth Arab country to establish direct dialogue with and links to Israel. These efforts and strategies all deepen cooperation among these nations, promote positive transformation and could increase stability and security in the region. However, above all, they should serve to promote the legitimate aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike to live in peace, prosperity and justice after so many years of division, hostility and suffering. Although we understand its position of resigning from the chairmanship of the League of Arab States, we call on Palestine to maintain its indisputable place in the Arab world and take advantage of all spaces to promote constructive commitments towards the creation of new opportunities for its cause. For many Palestinians, this could be the darkest hour, but we would like to remind them that it is precisely after the darkest hour that there is always a new dawn. We reiterate that any movement towards annexation in the occupied Palestinian territory would have serious implications and violate international law, including resolution 2334 (2016). The settlements not only contribute to the escalation of tensions on the ground, but also make the possibility of a peaceful two-State solution more remote, hindering both social inclusion and the aspiration to a lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians. Accordingly, we reaffirm our full support for a two-State solution as set out in United Nations resolutions and continue to adhere to the framework of agreements between Israelis and Palestinians. The fundamentals have not changed; there must be a peace agreement between these nations. The political leadership of both countries must be willing to compromise, realize that the only way forward is to negotiate their way out of this long and painful conflict and lead their peoples on their own paths towards a lasting peace for present and future generations. I would like to take advantage of this penultimate meeting for the month of the Niger's presidency of the Security Council, which ends tomorrow, to thank President Abarry for the magnificent work he and his team have accomplished on behalf of his country. President Abarry has guided the Council in a manner we have rarely seen, for which we sincerely congratulate him.
