Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate. Italy aligns
itself with the statement made by the observer of the
European Union and wishes to add some remarks in its
national capacity.

This debate could not be more timely. This year

marks not only the seventieth anniversary of the
Organization, but also the sixtieth anniversary of Italy's
membership in the United Nations. We are strongly
committed to the Organization and to the maintenance
of international peace and security, as set out in Article
1 of the Charter. We express that commitment as the
top contributor of troops to the United Nations among
Western countries; the seventh contributor to the
regular peacekeeping budget of the Organization; and
the proud host country of the United Nations agencies in
Italy, including the food and agricultural hub in Rome,
the Brindisi logistics base, and the United Nations Staff
College in Turin.

"Building peace for a better tomorrow" is the motto
that accompanies the logo of our Security Council bid.
Peacekeeping, peacebuilding and creating conditions
for a better life globally are the cornerstones of our
United Nations action and will continue to guide our
future commitment. Yet, as our daily tweets remind us
all too often, our efforts are constantly challenged by
old and new threats that demand from us a renewed and
strengthened multilateral partnership. While we may
have different views on the nature of these threats and
how best to address them, I am sure we can all agree
that today's threats to peace and security are complex
and know no boundaries. From terrorism to climate
change; from the need to protect public global goods
to the eradication of poverty; from fighting Ebola to
tackling major international crises, including in the
Mediterranean, the Organization is called upon to act
effectively and inclusively.

The growing complexity and costs of crisis
management lead us to believe that greater efforts
should be dedicated to conflict prevention and
mediation. Preventive diplomacy and mediation should
be seen not only as a moral imperative but also as a
strategic investment to create more stable environments
and better economic and social conditions. We need to
shift from reaction to action, from fixing to prevention.
From this perspective we should enhance the United
Nations early warning mechanisms and increase our
collective capacity to provide an effective and timely
response to arising conflicts. Partnerships with regional
organizations should be strengthened to improve our
understanding of local realities. We support the work of
the Department for Political Affairs especially in this
area. We have also helped to set up the Framework of
Analysis for Atrocity Crimes of the Office on Genocide
Prevention, which we consider to be a priority.

Devoting more human and financial resources
to conflict prevention and peacebuilding through
understanding and confidence-building is a good
investment. Global conflict prevention also depends on
respect for the rule of law and meaningful mechanisms
of accountability for the most serious crimes under
international law. The Rome Statute of the International

Criminal Court thus represents the cornerstone of what
should become an integrated system of accountability
that can assure the end of impunity for perpetrators of
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
And it is the job of the Security Council in that
respect to ensure that there is follow-up to the calls for
accountability.

"Peace cannot be kept by force. It can be achieved
only by understanding." These are the words of Albert
Einstein. Understanding, listening, preventing and
mediating should be our tools of choice in pursuing
the purposes of the Charter. The multiple sources of
instability require multiple sources of action using the
necessary tools and stakeholders to address the threats
we face.

Italy is ready to do its part. Back in 1992,
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali spoke of
the Italian formula as an original mix of institutional
and non-institutional approaches to brokering a
peace agreement. He was referring to the experience
in Mozambique and the peace agreement signed in
Rome, with the involvement of a prominent Italian
non-governmental organization, the Community of
Sant'Egidio. Some 20 years later, the Italian formula
is still relevant. In the Mediterranean we are all aware
of the importance of understanding, listening and
mediating to prevent rather than react to crises in
complex situations and we apply this approach through
multilateral channels. This Italian formula applies first
and foremost to our peacekeeping missions where the
use of the most recent technologies goes hand in hand
with the close involvement of civil society. In the same
spirit, Italy promotes respect for human rights with an
inclusive and balanced approach, taking into account
all of the different positions.

The maintenance of international peace and
security requires a holistic approach that addresses the
complexities of the international scenario. The year
2015 could be a year of action. The review of peace
operations, the peacebuilding architecture review and
the high-level review of resolution 1325 (2000) will
be keys to that end. The international community
is also formulating a new definition of sustainable
development that integrates the economic, social
and environmental dimensions. It is also tasked with
mobilizing all available resources to finance the new
agenda and with reaching a universal agreement on
climate change. These three important steps will define
our collective action and our ability to tackle the root
causes ofinstability, inequality and uncertainty. In this
context, I should like to recall that in a little more than
two months Expo Milano 2015 will officially open,
focusing on food security and nutrition to promote
sustainable ways to feed the planet.

I conclude by reaffirming our strong commitment
to our joint efforts against terrorism. Ten days ago,
Italy co-sponsored resolution 2199 (2015) to combat the
funding of terrorist groups. We affirm our contribution
to this effort and our condemnation of all acts of
terrorism. After hearing the reference made by some
delegations to Security Council reform, I should like
to stress that merit and not privilege should be our idea
for the bedrock of a new Security Council. That is the
challenge that all Member States should address while
reaffirming their commitment to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

