The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 15 February 2008 from
the Permanent Representative of Eritrea to the
President of the Security Council, which will be issued
as document S/2008/100.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls that, on
30 January 2008, it adopted resolution 1798 (2008)
on the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE). The Security Council is
following with the utmost concern the situation
confronting the Mission. It expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Secretary-General to
address this problem.

"The Security Council notes with great
concern that, by maintaining restrictions on
UNMEE despite the Council's numerous
demands, and by refusing to reinstate fuel
deliveries to UNMEE, the Government of Eritrea
has created a situation in which a temporary
relocation of personnel and equipment from
Eritrea has been rendered inevitable. The Security
Council also expresses deep concern about the
impediments and logistical constraints put on the
Mission in its attempts to organize this temporary
relocation. The Security Council condemns such
steps taken by Eritrea.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the lack of cooperation from the Government of
Eritrea, which not only gravely contravenes
United Nations Security Council resolutions and
the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities of
18 June 2000 (S/2000/601), but also fails to
comply With Eritrea's general obligation to assist
forces that have been stationed with its consent.
The Security Council holds Eritrea responsible
for the safety and security of the Mission and its
personnel.

"The Security Council demands that the
Government of Eritrea resume full cooperation
with UNMEE, including by ending all its
restrictions on the Mission, and abide by all its
obligations as a United Nations Member State.

"The Security Council expresses its
determination to closely monitor the situation and
to consider further appropriate steps for the safety
and protection of the Mission and its personnel."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.
08-24186
