Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me too begin by thanking
Special Representative Yamamoto and my good friend,
Ms. Sima Samar, for their briefings.

The situation in Afghanistan remains a source of
concern to the international community. Persisting
conflict, instability and turmoil and a fragile economy
continue to compound the suffering of the Afghan
people. That is also the message of the Secretary
General's report (S/2019/493). We share his regret with
regard to the continued fighting and its heavy toll on
the civilian population. We are also concerned about
the aggravating humanitarian situation.

But there are also grounds for hope. After decades
of war, there is reason now to be cautiously optimistic
about the prospects for peace. Several rounds of direct
talks between the United States and the Taliban have
opened up a real opportunity for progress towards
peace in a country that has been ravaged by conflict and
violence for more than a generation. The international
community had long reached a consensus that a
negotiated peace was the best, and indeed only, hope
for securing durable peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan.

That has also been my country's consistent
position and recommendation. For almost two decades,
Pakistan argued that there was no military solution
to the conflict and that the only sustainable path to
peace in Afghanistan was through dialogue. We are
therefore gratified that this is the path that is now being
seriously pursued.
Apart from Afghanistan, there is no country
other than Pakistan that has suffered more from the
four decades of war and foreign interventions in
Afghanistan. There is no other country that will gain
more from peace in Afghanistan. In his very first
address to the nation after his election last year, Prime
Minister Imran Khan reaffirmed Pakistan's support for
peace, stability and prosperity in Afghanistan, and we
have played an active role in the pursuit of that goal.

My Government responded positively to United
States President Donald Trump's request to Prime
Minister Khan last year for help in the Afghan peace
process. We have not only called for a reduction of
violence on all sides, as well as a ceasefire, but have
taken whatever steps we could to contribute to that
objective. Our consistent efforts helped to overcome the
decades-old political impasse on the commencement of
a peace dialogue.

Our contribution to the launch of direct United
States-Taliban talks in Doha, after the initial round in the
United Arab Emirates, has been widely acknowledged.
As the next step, Pakistan released Taliban leader
Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar at the request of our
international partners. During the six rounds of talks
between the United States and the Taliban, Pakistan
maintained a close liaison with the process and fully
supported those peace efforts, with the endorsement
of those at the highest levels of the progress that has
been made.

Pakistan will continue to play whatever role it can
to help promote a political settlement that can end the
long suffering of the Afghan people. The path to peace
will not be easy. Hurdles remain. Many challenges
lie ahead before a comprehensive agreement can be
reached and accepted by all the parties. Together with
the other international partners, we feel that there is now
an urgent need to take the next important step - the
initiation of an intra-Afghan dialogue. We urge all sides,
including the Taliban, to commit to that. We also hope
that the seventh round of United States-Taliban talks,
expected early next month, will be able to kick-start a
genuine and inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue process.
That could lead potentially to the most decisive phase
in the peace effort.

Cooperation between Pakistan and Afghanistan
is a vital component of the endeavour to realize peace
and security within Afghanistan and the entire region.
Strengthening bilateral relations is a priority for my
Government. My Foreign Minister visited Kabul three
times last year, sending a strong signal of our desire to
work closely and meaningfully with the National Unity
Government. At the invitation of Prime Minister Imran
Khan, President Ashraf Ghani will visit Islamabad later
this month.

We are confident that the visit will provide impetus
to further strengthening our bilateral relations. The
combined potential of Pakistan and Afghanistan is
considerable. Expanded trade, energy cooperation
and the implementation of the various transregional
economic projects already identified can greatly
enhance peace and prosperity for the entire region.
We stand committed to working with Afghanistan to
promote our shared political and economic objectives.

Let me conclude by recalling that the great
philosopher and poet of the East, Muhammad Iqbal,
who first conceived of Pakistan as an independent
State and also described Afghanistan as the heart of
Asia, declared more than a century ago that, if there is
instability in Afghanistan, all of Asia will be unstable,
whereas peace in Afghanistan will bring peace
and prosperity to the entire region. Today, we look
hopefully to a future where the restoration of peace in
our neighbouring country will lead to the realization
of stability and security that has for so long eluded
our region.

