Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Williams for his
excellent briefing on the situation in the region. We
thank him for his outstanding work and wish him every
success in his new position.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the Permanent
Representative of Portugal on behalf of the European
Union, and since we also share the evaluation of the
situation and observations of Mr. Williams, I wish to
limit my statement to the following remarks.

As we heard in the briefing, in the past few
months we have witnessed several key diplomatic
moves, important initiatives and developments
concerning the Israeli-Palestinian dispute that we hope
will significantly contribute to fostering the peace
process in the region and overcoming previous
impasses.

I wish to start with welcoming last month's
Quartet statement, which accurately reflects the
complex situation on the ground and provides, in our
opinion, vital ideas on how to proceed further and
enhance the prospects for peace in the region. We are
convinced that the Quartet represents the most
appropriate mechanism for advancing the peace
process and we are looking forward to its next meeting
here in New York next month and its continuing full
engagement.

We also welcome and support the appointment of

Mr. Tony Blair as the Quartet Representative. We see

this nomination as yet another practical step in

enhancing the ongoing peace efforts in the region. The

results of his latest visit on 24 and 25 July and the visit

of United States Secretary of State Rice on 1 August to

the region, which involved meetings held with Israeli

and Palestinian representatives, are encouraging. We
are looking forward to their expected follow-up.

I would like to use this opportunity to reaffirm
our full support to a settlement of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict that is just, comprehensive and
lasting and based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions, Road Map goals and principles, and
negotiations between the two sides. We believe that the
international community must mobilize and intensify
its efforts to help the parties to achieve this kind of
solution as soon as possible in the interest of regional
and global peace and security.

In this regard, we welcome and support President
Bush's call for an international meeting this autumn in
order to move forward the peace process in the Middle
East. We also believe that the Arab Peace Initiative
retains its importance as a major element for success in
resolving the Middle East dispute. We hope that the
engagement between the Arab League countries and
Israel, as represented, among others, by the recent
historic visit of the ministers for foreign affairs of
Egypt and Jordan to Israel on 25 July, will bring
concrete positive results towards this end.

In addition to the previously mentioned
multilateral efforts and diplomatic initiatives, we also
stress the need to continue in direct and meaningful
political dialogue and meetings between Israeli Prime
Minister Olmert and Palestinian President Abbas,
which are, in our view, key to further progress in
achieving the two-State solution, Israel and Palestine
living side-by-side in peace. We welcome their meeting
yesterday in Jerusalem and hope that such contacts will
now become regular and that both leaders will seize
and further enhance this positive momentum through
concrete and immediate action, including confidence-
building measures.

Israel's initial release of a group of Palestinian
prisoners and detainees and the partial transfer of
withheld Palestinian tax and custom revenues are
concrete examples of such actions and are welcome
vital steps forward. However, we also reiterate our call
on Israel to complete the release of the remaining and
future Palestinian funds, to release the Palestinian
legislators in its custody and to continue to meet its
further Road Map commitments, which will support
progress in the peace process.

As for the Palestinian side, we reiterate our
support for President Mahmoud Abbas and the
measures he has undertaken aimed at bringing the
situation in the Palestinian territories under control and
restoring law and order. We also support the
Palestinian Government under the premiership of
Mr. Salam Fayyad. Our support was personally
reaffirmed by my Foreign Minister, Mr. Jan Kubis,
during his visit to Israel and the Palestinian territories
at the beginning of July.

As far as the situation on the ground is
concerned, it is of the utmost importance not to forget
the continuing critical humanitarian situation, which
first and foremost affects the people of Gaza. We must
not abandon them. It is imperative to work to find ways
to open border crossings in order to allow humanitarian
and commercial flows in and out of Gaza. In that
regard, we also call upon Hamas to end its illegal
actions in Gaza, which are outside the rule of law and
the framework of the Palestinian Authority, which we
consider the sole representative of the Palestinian
people.

At the same time we strongly condemn the rocket
attacks launched from Gaza against Israeli civilian
targets and populations. We reiterate our call for an
immediate end to violence by Palestinian factions and
to attacks on Israel, as well as for the release of the
abducted Israeli soldier, Corporal Shalit.

As for Israel, we believe it has the right of self-
defence against terrorism and its perpetrators. Although
we understand its anxiety over the safety and well-
being of its citizens, we stress that Israel's measures
and responses must always be proportionate and
respectful of international law, including as regards the
protection of civilians.

Briefly turning to Lebanon now, we remain
deeply concerned about the continuing instability and
political deadlock, which have paralysed the country
and are hampering the process of reconciliation and
reconstruction. We call upon all parties in Lebanon to
resume the national dialogue and to assume their
responsibility for bringing about lasting peace in the
country, in the interest of the entire Lebanese
population.

We consider the forthcoming presidential
elections to be a key moment in the process of
normalization and stabilization of the political situation
in Lebanon. It is important to ensure that the elections
are conducted in a calm and constitutional manner that
leads to the election of a President and to the
consolidation of the democratic institutions in the
country.

We support the democratically and legitimately
elected Government of Lebanon. We believe that its
legitimacy must not be challenged. The mandate it
received from the Lebanese people to lead the country
in the 2005 democratic elections must be fully
respected by all.

We urge all actors inside and outside the country
to respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of Lebanon, as well as to stop
foreign interference without delay. In that regard, we
believe that the international community must do
everything possible to assist Lebanon to achieve a
comprehensive and sustainable solution through the
full implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004) and
1701 (2006). Those resolutions must be respected and
fully implemented by all the relevant actors in the
region and inside the country.

