The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

First of all, we cordially welcome Mr. Carlos
Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila, High Counsellor for
Post-Conflict. We would like to take this opportunity
to express Bolivia's support for the task ahead of
consolidating Colombia's long-awaited peace. We
would also like to welcome Mr. Jean Arnault, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
to thank him again for his commitment to peace and to
our region.

Together with the beginning of the mandate of the
new Colombian Government, we are also witnessing
a new stage in the peace process, in which the
commitment to implementing the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace in order to effectively reintegrate ex-combatants
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into civilian life is
crucial to the entire peacebuilding agenda in Colombia.

In what has now been almost two years, Colombia
has seen a definitive ceasefire between the Government
and the FARC-EP, the laying down of arms, a significant
drop in the levels of violence, the formation of a new
political party and its participation in this year's
electoral process and assumption of its new legislative
duties. We must always keep in mind the magnitude
of what has been achieved in order to be sure that this
process is irreversible. And although the tasks ahead
are not simple, we must reaffirm the commitment that
we all have to the Colombian people.

We are encouraged by President Duque Marquez's
positive statements and by the measures he has taken
in these initial months, among which we want to
highlight the appointment of high-level officials
to the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement. The role of Colombia's institutions in the
implementation of the agreement is essential, and we
encourage them to continue working on that process.
The presence of the High Counsellor and Foreign
Minister Trujillo in the Council today is a clear sign of
the new Government's willingness to continue working
with our Organization and the international community
to build a stable and lasting peace in Colombia.

My country is of the view that the peace agreement
is also an opportunity to comprehensively address
the fundamental problems in Colombia by seeking
to eliminate the deep-rooted historical discrepancies
between rural areas and cities, and the poverty,
inequality and absence of the State in the areas affected
by the conflict.

All the progress we have made in implementing
the agreement has taught us important lessons about
our ability to address Colombia's challenges. To briefly
mention the issues that my country believes are urgent,
the first is that respect for the independence and
autonomy of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace must be
ensured and victims' right to truth, justice, reparation
and non-repetition guaranteed. It is also vital to
eliminate the uncertainty and fear that FARC-EP ex-
combatants feel with respect to their legal guarantees,
and to ensure their access to transitional justice.

Secondly, regarding security guarantees, as the
Secretary-General says in his report (S/2018/874), the
competition of criminal groups for territorial control
and the expansion of illegal economies has allowed
violence to persist in the areas that were under the
control of the FARC-EP. We firmly condemn and
express our deep concern about the assassinations of
social leaders, former FARC-EP members and human
rights defenders. We believe it is essential to expand
the presence of public law enforcement beyond the
reintegration areas. We also encourage compliance
with the national pact for life and the protection of
social leaders and human rights defenders agreed to on
23 August.
Thirdly, with regard to the numbers related to
progress on economic reintegration, of the dozens of
projects proposed for almost 14,000 ex-combatants, only
17 have been approved and two funded. It is vital that
the National Reintegration Council resume its activities.
Support is also needed for productive projects and for
generating income for FARC-EP ex-combatants, for
which access to landownership, among other things, is
crucial. In that regard, we of course reiterate the call for
ensuring that the United Nations agencies in the country
are well coordinated with the rest of the international
community. The initiative of Vice-President Marta
Ramirez highlights the importance of the economic
empowerment of women in this process. Promoting and
supporting gender and ethnic perspectives and the role
ofyoung people in reintegration processes is vital to the
proper implementation of the peace agreement.

Finally, I would like to emphasize our unwavering
commitment to the Colombian people, in this and other
forums and through our observers on the ground, and
to the objective of continuing to contribute to our
brother country of Colombia's attainment of its long-
desired peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

