Mr. Martin: On 28 May, six days after I last
briefed the Council, Nepal's newly elected Constituent
Assembly held its first meeting. It voted to implement
a federal democratic republic, and within the allotted
period the former king left the palace, without incident,
to remain peacefully in Nepal.

Tomorrow the Assembly is scheduled to elect
Nepal's first president and to proceed to name a prime
minister, who will form a new government. In his
12 May report (8/2008/313), the Secretary-General had
said that he did not anticipate a further extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN), but that once the government was formed, I,
as his Special Representative, together with the
Resident Coordinator, would enter into discussions
with it regarding whatever assistance it may request
from the United Nations for the completion and
consolidation of the peace process and for the long-
term development of Nepal. Obviously, discussion with
a new government has not been able to take place, but
in the meantime the Council has before it a request
based on a consensus among the main parties for an
extension of the mandate of UNMIN. The clarification
of that request sought by the Secretary-General has
now been received through the Permanent
Representative of Nepal.

Allow me to begin by summarizing the outcome
and the unfinished business of the negotiations that
have delayed the formation of a new government. The
interim constitution provided for the decision regarding
a republic to be made by the first meeting of the
Assembly, but it was silent on arrangements for the
functions of head of State during the drafting of a new
constitution. It provided for a prime minister to be
selected by political consensus or, failing that, by a
two-thirds majority and, similarly, to be subject to
removal by a two-thirds majority vote. The Communist
Party of Nepal (Maoist) (CPN (M)), which had
campaigned for its own leader to become executive
president and whose members constitute over one-third
of the Assembly, was persuaded in the post-election
negotiations to agree to the amendment of the interim
constitution to provide for a president and vice-
president, with the prime minister remaining executive
08-42878
head of government, and to allow for the prime
minister to be elected or ousted by a simple majority.

Those were aspects of a broad-ranging agreement
signed on 25 June by leaders of the Seven-Party
Alliance, which constituted the basis for proceeding to
the formation of a new government, and I will refer
later to other aspects of the agreement. After the
agreement was signed, however, the Assembly was
unable to proceed immediately to adopt the required
amendments to the interim constitution, as the newly
elected Madhesi parties, which had not been party to
the aforementioned negotiations but form the fourth-
largest bloc in the Assembly, demanded that
undertakings given to them in a February agreement
with the interim government should also be entrenched
in constitutional amendments. Their interpretation of
the February agreement includes the acceptance of the
highly controversial demand for the Tarai plains of
southern Nepal to become an autonomous Madhesi
province within the future federal State. For twelve
days, they prevented the Assembly from carrying out
business. Only last Sunday, 13 July, were the
amendments to the interim constitution voted by the
Assembly, with members of Madhesi parties
boycotting but no longer obstructing the proceedings.

With the conclusion of the 25 June agreement,
Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala of the Nepali
Congress announced his resignation, although until that
can be submitted to the new president, he has remained
at the head of the caretaker cabinet, in which ministers
from the other two main parties, the Communist Party
of Nepal (Unified Marxist Leninist) (UML) and the
CPN(M) have ceased to participate. The most
contentious and unresolved issue has been the sharing
of posts and power among the parties. The Maoists
have been acknowledged by the other parties to have
the right, as the largest party in the Assembly, to name
the prime minister. But both the Nepali Congress and
the UML have publicly laid claim to the presidency,
with the Nepali Congress stating that it will otherwise
not participate in a new coalition Government. The
Maoists continue to appeal for all major parties to
participate in a Maoist-led Government, but have not
accepted the preferred presidential nominees of either
the Nepali Congress or the UML, and have now
nominated a Madhesi, who is not from any of the major
parties. Efforts to achieve consensus appear to have
broken down ahead of tomorrow's vote, with
08-42878
potentially serious consequences for the support base
of a new government.

A significant attribute of the presidency is that
the president will be commander-in-chief of the Nepal
army, acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
The responsibilities within government for the security
sector and for decisions regarding the future of the
Maoist army have been an important element in the
negotiations and one of particular relevance for the
continuing role requested of the United Nations. The
constitutional amendments introduce the position of
leader of the opposition, who will be a member of the
constitutional council, which considers appointments
to constitutional bodies. But the Nepali Congress,
which has publicly contemplated remaining in
opposition, insisted that the leader of the opposition
should also be a member of the National Security
Council. That was voted down by the Maoists and the
UML.

It was, however, agreed and provided by the
constitutional amendments that members of political
parties not included in the Government should be
represented in the special committee to be established
under article 146 of the interim constitution to
supervise, integrate and rehabilitate the combatants of
the Maoist army. That special committee will thus be
quite large, and the 25 June agreement envisages that it
may require a technical committee of experts
functioning under its auspices.

The inter-party negotiations displayed wide
differences of View among the parties regarding the
future of the combatants, which were not resolved,
although the process by which the special committee
would carry out its task was elaborated somewhat. It is
to collect information regarding the circumstances of
those combatants registered and verified by UNMIN.
The verified combatants will be offered a choice
between an economic package and other unspecified
alternatives for rehabilitation. Those who choose
integration will be deemed eligible for possible
integration with security bodies "after fulfilling the
standard requirements". In response to concern that if
the Maoist leadership heads the new government, it
should not also continue to control a political army, the
Maoist army will be under the supervision, control and
direction of the multi-party special committee until
integration and rehabilitation is complete. From the
outset of integration and rehabilitation, Maoist
combatants will have no involvement with any political
3
organization, and those who have had dual political
and military responsibilities will have to choose one or
the other.

The 25 June agreement requires that the
integration and rehabilitation of the Maoist combatants
shall be carried out within six months, and in this
context provided that a request would be made for
UNMIN to continue monitoring the management of
arms and armies for six more months. The Government
thus wrote formally to the Secretary-General on 8 July
requesting such ongoing monitoring and assistance in
implementing that aspect of the 25 June agreement.
The letter was received as the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2008/454) was in the final stages of
drafting, and the Secretary-General noted that it lacked
the clarity required for him to recommend a continuing
United Nations presence in the form of a special
political mission and instructed me to seek further
clarification. Shortly before leaving Kathmandu, I met
with each of the leaders of the three largest parties: the
Prime Minister, who is President of the Nepali
Congress; the Chairman of the CPN(M), who it is
expected would be prime minister of a Maoist-led
government; and the General Secretary of the UML.
Each of them confirmed that they wished UNMIN to
continue as a special political mission headed by a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, in
order to assist in taking the peace process forward to
its logical conclusion. They noted the importance in the
period ahead of not only continued monitoring of arms
and armies, but also assistance in implementing the
agreement on the management of arms and army
personnel in accordance with the multi-party
understanding of 25 June. That of course in no way
detracts from the fact that the process remains and will
remain a fully Nepalese-owned process.

Consistent with that and as already noted, the
wishes of Nepal's Government and leading political
parties have also been clarified to the Secretary-
General by the Permanent Representative of Nepal. I
am thus now authorized to convey to the Council the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate
of UNMIN should be extended, as requested by Nepal,
for a period of six months.

Shortly before leaving Nepal, I participated at
ceremonies marking the closure of each of the five
regional UNMIN offices - with some sadness,
because I believe that their presence and the frequent
visits of their personnel to the districts have had a
significant mitigating effect on local conflicts, which
are yet to be addressed by effective local governance or
peace committees. As the Secretary-General's report
noted, the Electoral Assistance Office closed at the end
of May and the Office of Civil Affairs is now
terminating with the closure of regional offices and the
end of the current mandate.

Our plans envisage that, if the Council extends
UNMIN's mandate, the Special Representative will
continue to be supported by the Political Affairs
Section while the Arms Monitoring Office will
continue at approximately half its previous
establishment of 186 arms monitors. I am advised that
this is viable, for a time, but I hope that early decisions
by the special committee supervising the Maoists
combatants can reduce, for example, the burden of
around-the-clock monitoring of eight weapon storage
areas.

Meanwhile, UNMIN has been working closely
with the United Nations country team to ensure the
transfer of functions and experience at the end of this
mandate period or, as early as possible within the
period of any extension.

I must be frank in expressing my concern about
how rapidly the new government will be able to move
forward in implementing the 25 June agreement, which
depends greatly on the degree of multi-party
cooperation that survives the current disagreements
over the sharing of posts. The agreement requires that
the special committee will be formed and start work
within 15 days of the formation of the Council of
Ministers. Past experience suggests that an agreement
on the full Council of Ministers may itself take some
time after the election of the prime minister. The
agreement then envisages a period of six months for
the special committee to reach and implement
decisions regarding integration and rehabilitation and
provide that "the country will not bear any
responsibility for verified combatants who have not
been reintegrated or rehabilitated after six months".

At the same time, it will be recalled that the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement requires an action
plan for the "democratization" of the Nepal army to
include determining its appropriate size, training the
army in the values of democracy and human rights,
ensuring its democratic structure and building its
national and inclusive character.
08-42878

One contentious aspect of the recent negotiations
with the Madhesi parties was the precise nature of the
commitment to greater inclusion of Madhesis in the
Nepal army, which, in the constitutional amendment,
has taken the form of a guarantee of the entry of all
historically marginalized groups to the army on the
basis of equality and inclusiveness.

The debate about the responsibility of for the
Nepal army under new constitutional arrangements has
drawn attention to the fact that, following the abolition
of the monarchy, which in the past had exercised de
facto control of the army, Nepal lacks the machinery
for the effective accountability of the army to an
elected government.

Two recent mutinies of lower-ranks against
officers of the Nepal police and the armed police force
have also highlighted the potential volatility of the
security sector in the new political and social climate.
Ideally, decisions about the future of the Maoist
combatants should be taken in the context of broader
decisions about the security sector.

However, these issues will require attention far
beyond the next six months, in which the future of the
Maoist combatants is to be decided. In this context, the
Council will want to review progress, in order to
ensure that good use is being made of the limited
further presence of UNMIN being requested.

The Secretary-General thus recommends a review
after three months, which would focus on further
downsizing and other steps towards the end of the
mandate, in the context of the new government's
progress in deciding the future of the Maoist
combatants. The Council will no doubt expect this to
include a report that the minors and others excluded by
UNMIN's verification have belatedly been discharged,
with appropriate support to their reintegration.

This is by no means the only challenge facing
Nepal before it can be said to be enjoying conditions of
sustainable peace essential for the economic and social
progress its people expect and deserve. I said to the
Council in May that the lack of progress in delivering
on compensation for victims of the conflict,
investigation of disappearances, and return of property
and displaced persons to their homes remains a source
of deep grievances. The 25 June agreement makes
fresh promises in these respects, including the
establishment of commissions long ago required by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and other
agreements.

The CPN(M) pledges in the agreement that the
paramilitary functioning of its Young Communist
League will be completely terminated and that it will
fully comply with the laws of the land, while no
mechanisms are to function in parallel to the
government. The dangers of the vacuum of effective
State authority at the local level have become
increasingly evident during this period of protracted
national-level negotiations. The constitutional
amendments now provide that until local elections are
able to be held, interim bodies will be formed at the
district, municipality and village levels, with the
participation and consensus of those political parties
active at the local level.

Meanwhile, the disruption and boycott of the
Constituent Assembly by the Madhesi parties and the
strikes and demonstrations by those opposing their
demands have shown how difficult may be the path to
decisions regarding the form of federalism appropriate
to Nepal.

Some Nepalis say that their peace process cannot
be regarded as complete until a new constitution has
been adopted and the first elections held accordingly;
all are agreed that it is not complete while there are
two armies in the country. It is to assist Nepal in
reaching beyond that still dangerous condition that its
main political actors all believe that a limited further
presence of UNMIN is necessary and the Secretary-
General supports their request.

