Mr. Al-Rumaihi (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure at the outset, Mr. President, to
extend to you our appreciation for the manner in which
the delegation of your friendly country, Slovakia, has
been conducting the work of the Council, and to thank
you for the initiative of holding this meeting on the
maintenance of international peace and security: role of
the Security Council in supporting security sector
reform.

It is no surprise that such an important initiative
was launched by you after the efforts you personally
exerted in various international posts in the past,
seeking to draw attention to the major importance of
the question of security sector reform.

On this occasion, the State of Qatar supports the
ideas put forward by Slovakia to advance the issue of
security sector reform and recognizes therein an
integrated, multifaceted process. Those ideas have
systematically and pragmatically included the
objectives of the reform process and the means needed
to achieve it. Therefore, we will not repeat them here.

The question of security sector reform is
multidimensional and multifaceted. It does not fall
within the purview of the Security Council alone. It
involves several organs, both within and without the
United Nations. The attendance of Her Excellency the
President of the General Assembly and His Excellency
the Secretary-General at this important meeting is but
an affirmation of the magnitude assumed by the
question.

It is our belief that security sector reform should
be viewed in the wider context of building State
institutions as a whole, specifically in post-conflict
situations, and with a view to achieving a successful
result for the reform process. The reform process must
also be subject to the same requirements of
accountability as any other public service. The State of
Qatar believes that at the forefront of security sector
reform lies stabilization of the security sector and the
achievement of comprehensive political and economic
development, including the establishment of an
effective judiciary capable of upholding justice that
will complement the executive branch.

The overall objective of security sector reform is
to ensure the discharge by the security institutions of
their statutory functions, including providing security
and justice for the people efficiently and effectively in
an environment consistent with the principles of
democracy, good governance and the rule of law, in
order to achieve a state of laws.

A suitable strategy must be drawn up and
elaborated so as to respond to the national conditions,
requirements and concerns in each individual situation,
in order to strengthen national ownership of the reform
process, since there is no single model that can be
applied in all situations.

The United Nations bears a special responsibility
in elaborating a strategy for security sector reform,
especially in countries where the United Nations has
peacekeeping missions. It should, therefore, pay due
attention in those cases to the particularities of the
country concerned, in order to play an effective role in
creating substantive circumstances that are conducive
to reform. This requires, first of all, national
reconciliation after conflict. National political forces
must be allowed to play a principal role in drawing up
the principles of security sector reform.

In view of the fact that security sector reform
may be a long-term process in some cases - especially
when the necessary elements for State-building are not
available, or in the case of prolonged conflict - the
international community should double its efforts to
bridge the gap between the peacekeeping operation and
peacebuilding, when the State concerned is referred to
the Peacebuilding Commission in the future. In such a
process, the Peacebuilding Commission has an
important role to play in ensuring operational
continuity.

It is indisputable that recognizing the sovereign
rights of States and national ownership of the security
sector reform process is critical to guaranteeing the
success and sustainability of such a process. However,
the contribution that can be made by regional

organizations is yet another element in ensuring a
coordinated effort, especially in view of the pioneering
role that can be played by regional and subregional
organizations, as they are in a better position to assess
the optimum manner to deal with a conflict in their
own region. That underscores the importance of
consulting those organizations when formulating
policies for security sector reform.

It almost goes without saying that all such efforts
require sufficient ongoing support by the United
Nations and other international actors, including
bilateral, international and other donors, as well as
regional organizations. That will ensure the success of
a reform process aimed at consolidating peace in
countries emerging from conflict, strengthening
democratic institutions and creating the conditions
necessary for justice and development. Those high
objectives indicate that ensuring that this process
continues is of enormous importance for the promotion
of human rights.

I wish in conclusion, Mr. President, to thank your
delegation for its efforts in the preparation of a draft
presidential statement on this item. We look forward to
its adoption at the conclusion of today's meeting.

