Mr. Osman (Somalia): I ampleasedto be addressing
members of the Security Council today at this meeting
on Somalia's behalf. At the outset, I would like to thank
Ambassador Umarov for his efforts, as Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea, to advance
its work since he took office. We broadly support

resolution 2385 (2017), on Somalia, and commend the
British Government, as penholder of the resolution, for
its engagement, as well as all members of the sanctions
committee for their work.

We welcome the steps taken to strengthen and fully
implement the ban on the charcoal trade, which provides
significant funding for the terrorist organization
Al-Shabaab. Al-Shabaab remains the most pressing
threat in Somalia and causes serious security problems
in the country and indeed in the region. In this regard,
I would like to remind the Council that, shortly after
his inauguration, His Excellency President Mohamed
Abdullahi Farmajo offered grace and amnesty to the
members of these terrorist organizations. However, his
offer was declined by those terrorists.

As a result, the strengthening of our security
capabilities and architecture through the reform
of the security sector and a robust disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme continue
to be the main priority for the Somali Government. We
firmly believe that this reform will be achieved only
through the increased coordinated assistance of the
international community to the Somali security sector,
strengthening the Somali national army, and a more
robust African Union Mission in Somalia force, while
enforcing the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Somalia. I should like to emphasize the following
three points.

First, while the resolution underscores the
importance of working to prevent the destabilizing
effects of the regional crisis from spilling over into
Somalia, it does not specifically identify the impact
of the Gulf crisis on Somalia, be it from a political
disintegration perspective or otherwise. It was our
hope that the resolution would be more explicit about
the need for respect for the political independence,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and, above all, unity
of Somalia.

Secondly, while the resolution calls on the
Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea to further
investigate the use of chemicals in the manufacture of
improvised explosive devices, our Government would
like to see recommendations adopted by the Security
Council to curb such fatal tactics, especially given
the fact that six of the last seven Al-Shabaab bombs
contained chemicals, and in view of the scale of the

14 October bombing, in which over 350 innocent lives
were lost.

Thirdly, the arms embargo has been in effect in
Somalia for over 20 years, with multiple modifications,
including that of a partial lift. Although the resolution
calls for the implementation of a national security
architecture for Somalia that would integrate regional
and federal forces, the existing arms embargo framework
on Somalia supports a dis-integrated supply of
weapons and ammunition to multiple different security
sector entities and may contribute to fragmenting our
country in the worst possible way. There may be a
rationale for limited specific exemptions, but the arms
embargo framework must be closely aligned with the
architecture of Somalia's national security sector. The
Monitoring Group, in its Implementation Assistance
Notice No. 2 of 2016, recognizes these concerns and
provides recommendations to the Security Council that
have, to date, been ignored.

I accept that my Government needs to do more
to fully comply with the partial-lift requirements,
including the improvements we must make to our
weapons management and command-and-control
systems. I confirm that my Government will work
on enhancing compliance over the next year. In this
regard, we ask the Council to consider developing
clearly defined benchmarks for the full lifting of
the arms embargo, as well as updating the arms
embargo framework on Somalia to reflect our national
security architecture.

Finally, we express our great concern regarding the
fact that the Eritrean Government has not accounted
for the 13 remaining Djiboutian prisoners of war who
are detained incommunicado in Eritrean prisons. We
urge Eritrea to release them immediately, to comply
with Security Council resolutions and to negotiate in
good faith the settlement of the border dispute with
Djibouti, which the Federal Government believe to be
detrimental to the stability of the security situation in
the Horn of Africa.

