Mr. Salame: I would like to congratulate Italy on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am privileged to see Minister Alfano presiding
over this meeting, which is a reflection of Italy's strong
commitment to supporting the United Nations effort to
end the crisis in Libya.

It has been two months since the launch ofthe action
plan for Libya. The action plan is made up of a number
of ingredients which the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has simultaneously started
working on, including amending the Libyan Political
Agreement, organizing a national conference, preparing
for elections and providing humanitarian assistance.

The Libyan case may appear simple. As a nation
without stark ethnic or sectarian divides, but with a good
educational system and a wealth of natural resources,
many challenges faced elsewhere are not found there.
But what might be mistaken for a homogenous nation is
actually a country divided at the atomic level. Sparked
by the 2011 conflict and fueled over the subsequent
years, the national polity has imploded. In its place,
there has been an explosion of competing individual
agendas, often masquerading as representing regions,
cities or tribes. Reconstituting the Libyan national
polity is a must, for without it effective institutions
cannot form, and rebuilding a State can only be a
Sisyphean endeavour.

I am pleased to report that over the past two
months, the action plan has made significant headway.
The United Nations convened two sessions of the
joint drafting committee, composed of members from
both the House of Representatives and the High State
Council, to agree on a set of amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement in UNSMIL's offices in Tunis.
For the first time, with these meetings article 12 of the
Libyan Political Agreement has been implemented. I
welcome the mutual recognition of the two assemblies
and their acknowledgment of the Libyan Political
Agreement as the sole available framework for ending
the crisis in Libya.

Since the meetings, the two bodies have been in
constant contact. Though much progress has been
made, a few remaining points are still to be agreed. I
am quite confident that we are close to a consensus. We
will not tailor a process to pick particular candidates,
and any mechanism to select a new Presidency
Council and Government must be transparent and
fair. I am pleased to report that the Libyan public has
overwhelmingly welcomed this principled approach.
It is expected that politicians are overexcited by the
question of "who", but for us, what is important is the
question of "how" - by which we mean, there must be
a fair, open and competitive process.

Work is also ongoing on other aspects of the action
plan. UNSMIL is well into preparations for the national
conference - al-Multaqa al-Watani - which is to take
place in February 2018. We are currently exploring the
possibility of hosting it inside Libya, and I welcome
the many Libyan offers of assistance that we have
received. The national conference will give Libyans
from all across the country the opportunity to come
together in one place for the first time, to renew their
common national narrative, and to agree on the tangible
steps required to end the transition. I insist that the
conference be inclusive in order to allow the adoption
of a true national charter and provide guidelines for
the legislation needed to end the transition. Such a
conference is needed now more than ever in the light
of renewed threats to national unity issued recently by
parallel authorities.
As for elections, we are intensively trying to
establish the proper political and technical conditions
for their occurrence. Elections should not take place
until we are certain that they will not add a third
Parliament or a fourth Government. Libyans deserve
uncontested national institutions.

To ensure preparedness, the High National
Electoral Commission is working to initiate a voter
registration update before the end of the year, which
will be the first such exercise since 2014. The
international community stands fully ready to support
the process. On its part, the House of Representatives
must assume its duty to pass the requisite electoral
legislation. There must also be a clear constitutional
framework. The Constitutional Drafting Assembly was
elected and mandated to produce a new constitution,
and it has completed its draft. I salute its fortitude for
the pressure it has faced and condemn the threats made
against Assembly members.

The constitutional process must now move forward.
While we work together to implement the various parts
of the action plan, no vacuum is acceptable. The Libyan
Political Agreement of 2015 must therefore stand,
amended or not, as the framework for the conclusion
of the transition.

As part of the action plan, the United Nations is
also working to create a more secure and normal life
for all citizens so that Libyans can go about their daily
lives free from fear and want. We are intensifying our
engagement with armed groups and developing our
strategy for their gradual reintegration into civilian
life. In Tripoli, our experts are working closely with
State security forces to empower them to secure the
capital more effectively. Moreover, we continue our
engagement with military leaders across the country
on the future shape of Libya's defence institutions. The
sustainable delivery of human security in Libya also
needs an empowered judiciary and professional law
enforcement and security agencies. The United Nations
is working with the Ministry of Justice and other
Libyan actors on initiatives, in particular reforming the
appalling detention system.

The Mission continues to work to facilitate dialogue
between local communities and institutions, such as
the preliminary agreement recently reached between
Tripoli and Zintan. In this context, I commend the
decision of the Presidency Council to create a national
reparations fund for all victims of the conflict.

We cannot ignore the dire humanitarian situation
in Libya. In the past, the country has been a donor to
much of Africa; now, 25 per cent of the population has
humanitarian needs. In particular, Libya's health sector
is in crisis. Only a fraction of the country's public
hospitals is functioning. Medicines are in short supply
and modern equipment is often left in disrepair. Foreign
staff, the traditional backbone of Libya's health-care
system, have fled. Some Libyan practitioners warn
that the country is vulnerable to a potential epidemic
outbreak. We plan to call a high-level coordination
meeting among local and international stakeholders
early in 2018.

It is outrageous that a country that stands upon such
vast wealth has so much suffering. However, it does, and
so we must help it to tackle the most urgentconcerns.

Our humanitarian strategy seeks to help to address
the acute needs of the most vulnerable groups. I hope
the the Council can consider supporting our programme
for 2018, not to mention the now critical two-year-
old Stabilization Facility for Libya, which has brought
tangible benefits to communities in Ubari, Benghazi,
Sabha, Sirte and Kikla. Encouraged by the success, the
Facility is expanding to Bani Walid and the greater Tripoli
area. Owing to the Stabilization Facility, hospitals have
been reopened and children have classrooms.

Yet that is not enough. Much more remains to be
done. On migrants and refugees, despite emergency
assistance, we have seen an increase in the number
of people arbitrarily detained in a system with no
accountability or due process. Migrants continue
to be subjected to extreme violence, forced labour,
extortion, killings and other grave abuses inside
and outside official places of detention. We urge the
Libyan Government to address that challenge directly
and comprehensively in order to find a solution that
respects the rights of migrants and host communities
across the country. The United Nations stands ready
to work with the Libyan authorities and their northern
and southern neighbours to develop innovative and
sustainable solutions.

Beyond the action plan, three very serious
challenges have appeared on our agenda: impunity for
grave crimes, the economy ofpredation and the erosion
of frozen assets.
First, impunity and lawlessness continue to prevail
across the country in the face of increasingly heinous
crimes committed every day. A few recent examples
include the fact that, on 26 October, 36 corpses were
found in Al-Abyar, near Benghazi. The corpses
showed signs of having been tortured before they
were executed. That example is one in a long series
of discoveries of corpses being dumped in and around
Benghazi over the past months. Days later, a fighterjet
bombed a family in the outskirts of the city of Derna.
Fourteen civilians, most of whom were children, and
including some women, were killed in an appalling
incident tantamount to a war crime. On 20 October,
in Tripoli, the bodies of three men were handed over
to families hours after having been taken alive during
clashes in the Al-Ghrarat area, raising concerns of
extrajudicial killings. We are still investigating the
recent events that led to the death of numerous fighters
in the Warshafanah area, in western Libya. There are
suspicions that a number of those fighters may have
been killed in a manner that violates international law.

Events such as these shake popular faith in the
political process. I once again call on the Libyan
authorities to investigate those incidents and to hold
the perpetrators to account. However, I cannot ignore
that such events take place across the country with
alarming regularity and I cannot accept that repeated
calls for justice go unheeded. If Libyans alone cannot
combat impunity for war crimes, it is time for the
international community to consider mechanisms,
including possibly joint tribunals, that can help them
to do so.

The second challenge is that politics in Libya
are strongly shaped by economic predation. In an
environment of protracted insecurity and a lack
of accountability, the shadow economy has been
flourishing. Billions of dollars are lost every year in
illicit money transfers. The gap between the official
exchange rate, set at 1.4 Libyan dinars to the dollar,
and the black-market exchange rate, at 9 dinars to the
dollar, provides ample opportunities to earn huge profit
margins. Brokers benefit from the selling of letters
of credits and cheques. The traffic of subsidized fuel
to foreign countries robs the country of hundreds of
millions of dollars every month. Other measures include
the issuing of overvalued government contracts. The
result is that Libya's financial reserves are depleting
rapidly. Libya is a textbook example of the appearance
of instant millionaires and of the extremely rapid
pace of middle-class impoverishment. It is the Libyan
people who pay the highest price for that. Two of every
five Libyan youths are now unemployed.

The third challenge, beyond predation, which
robs the country of many dollars, is that hundreds of
millions more dollars are being silently lost due to the
poor management of Libya's frozen assets. Freezing
the assets is one thing. However, their mismanagement
is another. We should revisit how Libya's external
wealth and investments are managed so that they are
not silently and gradually lost for future generations.

The relaunch of the political process has created a
new momentum. I am pleased to see many constructive
and peaceful debates on the future of the country. It is
testimony to the commitment of the Libyan people that,
on a daily basis, I receive new ideas and suggestions
about the political process from ordinary citizens
who are keen and free to participate in shaping their
country's future. Those citizens are not prepared to
sacrifice their rights for security - and they do not
need to do so. In a society based on institutions, neither
rights nor security must be compromised.

I am committed to doing my utmost to assist the
Libyans to resolve their political crisis. The United
Nations is ramping up its presence in Libya and
has already significantly increased its footprint in
the country.

Allow me to end by thanking Council members
for their commitment and support to our efforts to
resolve the crisis in Libya. I would also like to thank
our Quartet partners: the African Union, the League
of Arab States and the European Union. Their unified
efforts are key to the success of the action plan and the
better future that it promises for the people of Libya.

