Mr. Adeniji: Thank you very much, Mr.
President, for your comments, and I thank members of
the Security Council and those who have been invited
by the Council to participate in this open meeting for
the comments they have made.

As I said earlier, the support of the Security
Council has been very instrumental in bringing us to
where we are today.

A few questions were posed, and I will try to
quickly answer those questions.

Several questions were posed by the
representative of Norway. One was on the quantity of
weapons that have been collected as compared with the
number of disarmed combatants. I think it should be
borne in mind that the weapons that were collected
represented both the personal weapons of combatants
and group weapons: weapons that were used by a group
of combatants, not just by individuals. Because of that,
the number of weapons will not really be very great as
compared with the number of combatants who were
disarmed. Basically, our requirement for anyone to
enter the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme is that he or she either must
produce a personal weapon or must belong to a group
that had used a group weapon - and that the group
weapons must be produced along with the combatants
who had used them. We intend to stick with that
requirement, with some flexibility in some cases as we
go along.
With respect to the quality or the nature of the
weapons that were submitted under the programme, I
would say that they range from personal weapons, to
machine guns, to mortars, to artillery weapons, and
even to anti-aircraft guns.

A question was also raised about the possibility
of crime among ex-combatants. While that has not yet
reached an alarming state, particularly because of the
numbers involved in the disarmament process - just
about a quarter of the total declared number of
combatants who have to be disarmed - nevertheless
the alarm has to be sounded right now, from the
beginning, that the greatest danger that could result
from disarmed combatants who are just left on their
own is certainly that of crime. They might take to
criminal activity as a means of sustaining themselves.
That is why great emphasis is being placed on
reintegration programmes, and that is why it is
absolutely essential that those reintegration
programmes be well funded: in order to make sure that
ex-combatants are equipped for a productive, useful
life in the future, a life which would contribute not
only to their own sustenance and that of their families,
but to the overall development of Sierra Leone.

A question was raised about the fate of child
combatants. Just as reintegration programmes are being
developed for adult combatants, so also in the case of
child combatants. As a matter of fact, once those child
combatants are delivered by the fighting forces, they
are taken to centres which are run by various
humanitarian agencies. These agencies have formed a
group called the Sierra Leone Child Protection
Network. The children are given counselling to let
them know that they no longer belong to fighting
forces, but that they are now normal children, and to
help them readjust to their new status as normal
children. They receive psycho-social counselling; they
also receive educational support. In fact, most of them
indicate that their one ambition is to go, or go back, to
school. The arrangements are made by the Child
Protection Network, in collaboration with the National
Commission for Reconstruction, Resettlement and
Rehabilitation. The National Commission also helps
ensure that school facilities are provided for them.

The next question concerned information on
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants. There
had been something of a lacuna in the past between
what was available on the one hand and knowledge on
the part of disarmed combatants about the availability
of such facilities on the other. But that has been
addressed through a joint effort by the secretariat of the
National Commission for Reconstruction, Resettlement
and Rehabilitation and the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We are now ensuring that
adequate information is provided to disarmed
combatants in the disarmament and demobilization
camps before they are finally demobilized, during the
four-week period or whatever other period they choose
to stay: all the information about the options that are
available to them, so that once they are demobilized
and go back to their villages, they can make up their
minds about precisely which reintegration projects they
want to enter.

The last question that was asked - I believe by
the representative of Colombia - was whether it was
the duty of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to collect funds for the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. That is what exists in the
enabling instrument for the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. I think it was put there because of the
record on raising resources for issues that concern
human rights by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. I think it is a task that is
taken very, very seriously. What is required, of course,
is support and encouragement for the High
Commissioner by donors, as set out in the concluding
part of the tenth report of the Secretary-General on
UNAMSIL. The Secretary-General, of course,
recognized the fact that many calls are being made on
the resources of donors for the peace process. But these
are all essential ingredients in ensuring a lasting peace
in Sierra Leone, so we hope that donors will not show
any fatigue at this stage of the process, and that the
response to the campaign to launch the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission will be not only adequate
but also prompt, so that, as has been said here by
several speakers, the Commission and the Special
Court, which are meant to assist the people of Sierra
Leone in addressing the events of the past and
therefore in being able to look forward to a life of
national reconciliation and national forgiveness, can be
put in place. One must certainly not be at the expense
of the other, and one must certainly not be far away
from the other.

