Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council. We know the significance of today's
date and that it coincides with a momentous occasion.
We are also grateful to the two Secretary-Generals for
their participation in today's meeting. I am very happy
to see Mr. Ban Ki-moon among us.

We thank you, Mr. President, for organizing today's
meeting. The topic that you have proposed is extremely
relevant within the context of the current state of
international relations and the role that the United
Nations and Security Council play in that regard.

The purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations - the independence and
sovereign equality of States, non-interference in
their internal affairs, and the peaceful settlement
of disputes - represent the basis for neighbourly
relations among States and their mutually beneficial
and constructive cooperation for the benefit of all.

Unfortunately, throughout the history of the United
Nations, the world has witnessed numerous examples
of open disregard for the Charter, right up to the
illegal use of force, blatant interference in the affairs
of States, destruction by outsiders of traditional social
principles, violent regime change and the imposition
of alien cultural and social norms. In order to achieve
those ends, we often see the manipulation of concepts
such as the responsibility to protect, the rule of law,
human rights up front and other intrusive instruments
that do not necessarily enjoy consensus support. As a
result, the burden on the Security Council, which is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, never lessens. Conflict situations, often
provoked from outside, arise with remarkable regularity.
At the same time, however, instead of efforts to solve
all these problems together, through professional
dialogue based on mutual respect and equality, we
often see the artificial pumping up of an atmosphere
of tension and mistrust. Instead of collective action, we
see unilateral measures, economic pressure and threats,
including threats of force, none of them methods that
are compatible with international law and order.

The reason, as we see it, is quite clear. Some states
are finding it difficult to accept the obvious fact that the
era of the Cold War, along with the world's post-bipolar
stage, is over. The world is in the process of establishing
a new, more just, democratic, polycentric world order.
Its essence lies in the emergence and strengthening of
new centres of economic power and political influence.
The fact is that this multipolarity is the embodiment of
the cultural and civilizational diversity of the modern
world, ofpeoples' desire to determine their own destiny
and of their natural yearning for fairness. We should be
reconciled to the fact that States want to build their own
lives without others' prompting or unsolicited advice.
Incidentally, I would like to remind Mrs. Haley that
there is no regime in Russia. What we have is a legally
elected President and appointed Government. I would
like to ask the United States delegation to observe at
least the most basic diplomatic conventions in future.
And, also incidentally, Syria is also a legal Government,
whether one likes it or not.

We have seen Yugoslavia and Libya bombed
in gross violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions and the occupation of Iraq on
false pretences. No one took responsibility for any
of those criminal acts, despite the international
criminal tribunals established by the Council and the
experiments whereby cases were transferred to outside
structures that preferred to turn a blind eye, shamefully,
to all of this, whether the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia or the International Criminal Court.
The chaos sown in the Middle East and North Africa
enabled the rise of international terrorism and led to
the creation of Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, and Jabhat Al-Nusra. Ultimately, the world
found itselfup against an entire terrorist quasi-State that
has brought terror and incalculable suffering. Its final
defeat, at enormous cost, has yet to be achieved. And at
the same time the question of Syria's sovereignty and
territorial integrity continues to be a bargaining chip in
the geopolitical aspirations of a slew of external players.
The chaos created in Libya has severely exacerbated
the terrorist threat in Africa. When we recall where
this crisis originated and who brought democracy to
that country with its bombs, they look away in shame.
We must consider the consequences of our actions, not
live by slogans. We must settle protracted crises and
conflicts such as the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, not
provoke more and more new ones.

Open incitement from outside led to unconstitutional
regime change in Ukraine and the rampant spread of
nationalism and neo-Nazism, and to internal armed
conflict and huge numbers of casualties in the south-
eastern regions of the country. Why, I wonder, did we
not hear at the time, in 2014, about the importance of
conflict prevention, a subject that is so popular today
with a number of delegations? By the way, this very
day, 21 February, marks the fourth year since President
Viktor Yanukovych and the leaders of the opposition
signed an agreement on a political settlement in
Ukraine. I would like to remind the Council that the
agreement was defied by the opposition members who
seized power in Kyiv the very next day, with the silent
acquiescence of its guarantors. Russia has a direct
interest in ending the conflict in Ukraine as soon as
possible and is ready to do everything in its power to
achieve that. We are working actively in the contact
group in Minsk, in the Normandy format, and we have
put forward various initiatives in the Security Council.
However, while Kyiv continues to sabotage the Minsk
process and sell the world its story of what is happening
in Ukraine, and while the Kyiv authorities continue to
exploit the support of their patrons, there is little hope
for constructive developments.

Today we are witnessing a new phenomenon, on
a historically unprecedented scale, of indiscriminate
accusations of countries' interference in internal
affairs and processes. That is a very convenient way of
justifying unlawful acts without bothering to produce
evidence, and at the same time making the world forget
about one's persistent interference in the affairs of
sovereign States.

I would like to remind the Council that in
December of last year the General Assembly adopted
resolution 72/172, on the promotion of a democratic and
equitable international order, which clearly outlines
the inadmissibility of interference in the internal
affairs of sovereign States, the non-recognition of
coups d'etat as a method of regime change, and the
necessity of banishing attempts to exert unlawful
pressure, including the extraterritorial application of
national legislation, from international relations. An
overwhelming majority of the States Members of the
United Nations voted in favour of the resolution. It is
time to start implementing it, to reject double standards
and show a genuine commitment to the system-defining
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
is more essential than ever in today's increasingly
complex international relations.

Today a great deal has been said about eastern
Ghouta and about the concerns that Member States and
the Secretary-General himself have expressed about the
situation there. We have a concrete proposal. We would
like to ask the presidency to convene an open meeting of
the Security Council tomorrow to discuss the situation
in eastern Ghouta. I think that it is essential, in view of
the concerns that we have heard today and so that all
sides can present their views and understanding of the
situation and propose solutions to it.

