Judge Agius: I am deeply honoured to have been
elected President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) at a crucial time in
its history, with the ultimate responsibility to guide
its closure in 2017. In many ways, this task will be
extremely challenging, but it is a challenge that I
willingly accepted, having served as Vice-President for
the past four years and as a Judge of the Tribunal since
2001. It is also a responsibility that has been entrusted
to me by my colleagues, and I intend to accomplish it
with determination and to the very best of my abilities.
In this regard, I am looking forward to working closely
With my colleague from China, Judge Liu Daqun, in his
capacity as Vice-President of the Tribunal.
Please allow me to firstpay tribute to my predecessor,
President Theodor Meron, for his outstanding work
during the past four years. His endeavours have been
vital in preparing the Tribunal for its last biennium. In
this regard, I wish to point out that the written report
being presented today (see S/2015/585) reflects the
work of the Tribunal over the last reporting period
under President Meron's guidance. I also would like to
underscore that cooperation between the Tribunal and
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is ongoing and will continue, in order to
ensure a smooth transition of remaining functions
and services to the Mechanism, in compliance with
resolution 1966 (2010).

Before turning to my report on the work of the
Tribunal, I wish to congratulate the United States on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. I
would also like to express my gratitude to the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, with which
I had the honour to meet two days ago. In particular,
I should like to recognize the exceptional leadership
of Chile over the past two years. Further, I wish
to recognize the invaluable support and assistance
provided to the ICTY by the Office of Legal Affairs
and the Legal Counsel. Finally, I wish to pay tribute
to my colleague President Vagn Joensen, and to
recognize the immeasurable contribution he has made
to international criminal justice as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), an
institution that will close its doors at the end of this
year.

I am pleased to report that the Tribunal has
continued to make progress in completing its work.
During the reporting period, four trials, involving four
individuals, and three appeals, involving 10 individuals,
were ongoing. One of the appeals, in the Prosecutor v.
Jovica Stanisie and Franko Simatovie case, is scheduled
to be finally disposed of in a few days, on 15 December.
In addition, the day before that, on 14 December, the
Appeals Chamber will deliver its judgement in one of
the largest appeals cases ever, the Butare case, which
is an appeal from a judgement of the Rwanda Tribunal
and will signal the end of that Tribunal's judicial work.
That will leave four trials and two appeals pending
before the Tribunal of which I am President.

While the Tribunal continues to make every effort
to meet the targets of its completion strategy and
the forecast judgement delivery dates, it has faced a
number of challenges, which to my great regret have
caused delays in some cases. The specific lengths and
causes of these delays are outlined in the written report
that has been submitted to the Security Council in
document S/2015/874.

In the trial of Mr. Goran Hadzie , on 26 October
the Bench rendered a decision in which it stayed the
proceedings, considering by majority that while the
accused is still fit to stand trial, his health condition
precludes his detention at the United Nations Detention
Unit in The Hague. The decision to stay has been
taken for an initial, renewable period of three months.
An appeal of this decision has been lodged by the
Prosecution and I will deal with it over the next couple of
months. I am sure that Council members will agree with
me that challenges such as the health of the accused are
beyond our control and require ongoing assessment on
a case-by-case basis. The health situation of Mr. Hadzie
is being closely monitored.

The Tribunal continues to make significant progress
notwithstanding the ongoing challenges it is facing.
However, this progress has unfortunately suffered
some setback in that both the Karadzie and the Seselj
trials will not be decided by the end of 2015, as had
been forecast. That having been said, the drafting ofthe
judgement in the extremely complicated Karadeie trial
is at a very advanced stage, and the Presiding Judge has
assured me that proceedings will definitely come to an
end before the end of March 2016. I am also hopeful
that the Seselj trial will be concluded by the same
date. I have the commitment of the Presiding Judge
and his two colleagues that every effort will be made
to observe that deadline. In particular, the Presiding
Judge, on behalf of the bench, has now advised that a
written judgement is planned to be delivered during the
first quarter of 2016.

Further, I am pleased to report that the Mladie trial,
and the appeals in Prosecutor v. Mic'o Stanisie and
Stojan Zupljanin and Prosecutor v. Jadranko Prlic et a].
remain on target. Regarding the Prlic' appeal, I wish to
highlight that this case is the most voluminous appeals
case in the history of the Tribunal and will require not
only time, but adequate uninterrupted resources. While
it will certainly be a challenge to meet the projected
time frame, the Appeals Chamber remains committed
to completing this case by November 2017. I will make
sure that, with the Security Council's help, all measures
are taken in order to ensure an efficient and timely
completion of the case and to prevent any slippage.

It should be noted that the responsibility for
meeting a projected time line is that of the Presiding
Judge of a case. Nevertheless, as President I remain in
constant dialogue with the various Presiding Judges
to seek to identify potential delay factors and to work
towards early solutions, as far as possible. I can assure
Council members that all possible measures are being
implemented to prevent and address causes of potential
delay that are within the control of the Tribunal. Judges
and staff are working diligently to complete judicial
work as rapidly as possible, while maintaining our
commitment to guaranteeing procedurally just trials
and appeals. It is therefore expected that the Tribunal's
judicial work will be completed on time. However, while
the Tribunal is currently on track, there are challenges
that must be managed if the Tribunal is to meet its
ultimate goal of closure in 2017. These challenges are
not new and have been brought to the attention of the
Security Council by my successive predecessors.

Most critically, there is the perennial and endemic
problem of staff attrition. The increasingly alarming
drain of experienced staff constitutes a serious threat
to our efforts to complete the mandate within the
projected timeline. This issue has been, and continues
to be, addressed in the proceedings of the Prlie appeal,
Mladic and $65te by increasing the number of staff on
the teams and allowing for the possibility of promotion
as a staff-retention measure. The Seselj case in
particular suffered continuous departures of members
of the Chambers support team during the last reporting
period. The team has subsequently been reinforced.

The other challenge facing the Tribunal remains that
of staffmorale. To ensure that staffmorale is maintained
as much as possible, the Registrar has developed a fair
and transparent downsizing process in consultation
with the Staff Union, and dialogue between staff and
management is ongoing. In addition, the Registrar has
implemented other measures, including the services of
a career transition adviser to assist staff in transitioning
to other areas of employment. Of course, it is clear that
the Tribunal must continue its efforts to adopt strategies
that reduce any delays in ongoing cases to a minimum;
this obligation impacts both the fundamental rights of
the defendants and the resources of the international
community.

I wish to recall that this year was marked by the
twentieth anniversary of Srebrenica and the twentieth
anniversary ofthe Dayton Peace Accords, as well as the
seventieth anniversary of the United Nations. I note also
that today is the International Day of Commemoration
and Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of this Crime. Anniversaries
provide us with an opportunity to reflect on what has
been achieved and to take stock of what remains to be
done. Further, remembering the events of the past and
paying tribute to those who suffered should strengthen
our resolve to prevent such events from ever happening
again. While the Tribunal is doing everything in its
power to address challenges to the timely completion
of its work, the obstacles it continues to face should not
overshadow its enormous achievements.

The Tribunal has been at the forefront in the
fight against impunity for international crimes, and
it continues to serve as a symbol of the international
community's commitment to ensuring accountability
for grave crimes, such as those committed in the former
Yugoslavia, and to the laudable aim of preventing such
crimes from being committed again in future. It is also
important not to forget the pivotal role that the Tribunal
has played, and continues to play, both in setting global
standards for international criminal law and justice
and in helping strengthen the rule of law at the local
level. In this respect, critical to the broader success
of the Tribunal is an understanding of its work by the
broader international community and in particular by
the countries of the former Yugoslavia.

I wish also to thank the European Union for its
generous funding in support of the outreach projects in
the region, which are a vital tool we have to ensure that
the legacy of the Tribunal remains a priority. We indeed
have a responsibility towards the legacy that we will
leave behind. We also have a responsibility towards
victims and their families.

Despite the serious challenges that the Tribunal
is facing, we stand committed with the Security
Council to ensuring the efficient and orderly closure
of this institution by the end of 2017. We are now at a
crucial moment in the Tribunal's history. I believe that
the Security Council and the Tribunal share the same
goals and aspirations, namely, to bring to a successful
conclusion this first big experiment in international
criminal justice after the Second World War. With the
support and encouragement of the States Members of
the United Nations, the ICTY, under my leadership,
will strive to make all of the progress required in order
to fulfil its mandate and will continue to serve as the
concrete manifestation of a commitment to ending
impunity.

