Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the convening of this meeting, and thank
Mr. Jan Kubis for his comprehensive briefing on the
situation in Iraq and for the valuable work he carries
out with his team. We particularly appreciate the
briefings delivered by Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and
Ms. Michele Coninsx.

Peru congratulates the Government and the
people of Iraq on the successful holding of democratic
parliamentary elections. We would also like to
highlight the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to that end, especially in
facilitating the participation of internally displaced
persons. We believe, however, that it is important that
the special electoral commission be able to respond to
the complaints raised about the process, primarily in the
city of Kirkuk, as soon as possible. We encourage and
look forward to the early formation and establishment
of the new Government, which should form a unified
and strong front to address the threats still facing Iraqi
society, especially terrorism. We must express our
concern about the presence of Da'esh remnants in Iraq.
We condemn the recent attacks in Baghdad on civilians
and during Ramadan.

We highlight the recent visit to the country by
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) Executive
Directorate to assess Iraqi capacities and needs.
Based on the work of the (CTC), we encourage greater
coordination and complementarity by the United
Nations system in its support for the efforts of Member
States in the fight against terrorism. In that regard,
we welcome the decision of the Iraqi authorities to
share the assessment of their requests for technical
assistance, with a view to guiding cooperating partners
towards projects for the prevention, investigation and
prosecution of terrorism, thereby promoting synergy
and complementarity. We underline the need to utilize a
regional approach, in particular on the challenge posed
by foreign terrorist fighters.

We believe that the international community's
support for Iraq should also be directed towards
the reconstruction and revival of its economy. The
International Conference for the Reconstruction of
Iraq, held in Kuwait in February, is an important step
in that direction. We encourage the new Government
to promote policies and programmes of assistance and
social development aimed at addressing the root causes
of violent extremism. In that regard, we wish to join the
Secretary-General's call for international support for
the Iraq recovery and resilience programme.

We consider it urgent to prioritize addressing
the issue of the nearly 9 million people in need of
humanitarian assistance, including the 2 million
displaced persons registered by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in April. We also
encourage the promotion of greater participation by
women and young people in the political, economic and
social spheres. We support the recommendations made
by UNAMI and UN-Women in that regard, including
the strengthening of the intersectoral working group of
the national plan of action and its adequate funding.

I will conclude by highlighting the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kubis and his
team. My country will continue to closely follow the
Iraqi process, especially at this crucial time to move the
country towards sustainable peace.

