Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank President Robinson and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefing on the work of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). I would also like to thank
President Byron and Prosecutor Jallow, on the behalf
of the Chinese delegation, for their briefing on the
work of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR).

We have noticed that, during the past year, the
work of the two Tribunals has continued to progress.
We appreciate the efforts of the two Tribunals to
implement the completion strategy. We also appreciate
the support provided by the relevant countries in this
respect.

Since the start of the completion strategy, the two
Tribunals have worked to improve their working
methods and procedures to accelerate their work. These
efforts deserve our recognition. However, as we
approach the first deadline for the completion strategy,
neither Tribunal has been able to complete the trials of
all the cases on schedule. We do not believe that either
Tribunal desires this outcome. While we can
understand the pressure that the two Tribunals face, we
hope that it will motivate them to speed up and be
more effective in their future work.

On the one hand, the Tribunals should continue to
explore the possibility and feasibility of improving
their working methods and make full use of all the
available resources to enhance the efficiency of trials
and do what they can to avoid delays for any reason;
on the other, the Tribunals should continue to transfer
cases to the national jurisdictions concerned, which is
also a core element of the completion strategy. All
work concerning the transfer of cases and fugitives
should be strengthened and be given priority.

The issue of the legacies and residual tasks of the
Tribunals is already on the agenda. The Security
Council's Informal Working Group on international
tribunals has been working on this issue for a year and
has made some progress. During this process, the

Tribunals have issued several commentaries on this
matter. In particular, this autumn they invited the
Informal Working Group for a Visit for an important
face-to-face exchange of views. While we welcome the
participation of the two Tribunals in studying the
relevant issues, we also believe that the question of
legacies and residual tasks should be studied and
settled in a pragmatic manner.

In this regard, while the difficulties of the issues
and the work involved should not be minimized nor
dismissed, neither they nor the workload should be
exaggerated. On this basis and on the basis of the
schedule of the completion strategy, solutions should
be arrived at judiciously in a feasible, economic and
proper manner.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank my
colleague from Belgium for his efforts in chairing the
Security Council Informal Working Group.

We expect that the two Tribunals will continue
towards the target of the completion strategy set by the
Security Council and make further efforts to reach this
target. During this process, we are prepared to consider
any feasible or reasonable proposal for the speedy
realization of the completion of the strategy.
