Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Mr. President, at the outset I would like to congratulate
you on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I also thank the Ambassador of Japan for his
work last month.

I thank the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy of the European Union
(EU), Baroness Ashton, for her presence with us here
today and for her statement concerning cooperation
between the EU and the Security Council in the area of
peace and security.

China attaches great importance to working with
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
January, the Security Council, under the Chinese
presidency, organized a thematic debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security (see S/PV.6257), following which
the Council adopted a presidential statement
reaffirming the importance of and need for reciprocal
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations (S/PRST/20lO/ 1).

China highly appreciates the active role played by
the EU in defending peace and security in its own
region and throughout the world. We have always felt
that dialogue and consultations are the best way to
resolve differences and prevent and settle conflicts.
The EU has great experience in the area of preventive
diplomacy. Currently, some dozen special
representatives of the EU are working throughout the
world to find solutions to various conflicts through
mediation and good offices, and we support the
European Union in its efforts to continue to make its
contribution in this way.

We agree with Baroness Ashton that, as indicated
in her statement, the African Union and African
subregional organizations are currently working
actively to settle conflicts in Africa through their
peacekeeping missions, but that they are facing
funding and capacity problems. The European Union,
by participating in United Nations peacekeeping
missions deployed, inter alia, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Chad and the Central African
Republic, is also helping the African Union and
countries of Africa to reinforce their capacities. We
welcome these efforts and are prepared to work with
the United Nations, the EU and other parties concerned
to make a greater contribution to strengthening the
capacity of the African Union and African subregional
organizations.

China attaches importance to and very much
supports the constructive role played by the EU on the
international stage. We are convinced that, with the
entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the deepening
of the European integration process, the EU, the United
Nations and the Security Council will be able to enjoy
more pragmatic and effective cooperation in
maintaining international peace and security.

