Mr. Mrkic' (Serbia): First of all, let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting of the
Security Council under resolution 1244 (1999). I also
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Farid
Zarif for his engagement and for the positions expressed
in his statement.

I have carefully read the Secretary-General's
report on the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the
period 16 July to 15 October (S/2012/818), which is,
for the most part, factographic. We had expected it to
contain some substantial assessments concerning the
development of the situation in the region, primarily
bearing in mind the Secretary-General's visit to the
region in July.

The Republic of Serbia is committed to contributing
to building peace, security and stability in the region, as
well as to developing a platform for a common European
future. During the reporting period, we once again
confirmed our readiness to contribute to overcoming
outstanding issues and problems. Our continuing efforts
are aimed at a peaceful resolution of the problems in the
region, including the issue of Kosovo and Metohija, as
mandated by resolution 1244 (1999).

We continue to oppose unilateral actions by any
party, In that respect, I wish also to underline once
again the unacceptability of the unilaterally declared
independence of Kosovo and Metohija. Let me say
it once again: we shall not recognize the so-calied
Republic of Kosovo thus proclaimed.

I would like to express my country's sincere
gratitude to the majority Member States that continue
to respect Serbia's sovereignty and territorial integrity.
We urge them to maintain their principled stance, as
that is the most important contribution they can make
to the ultimate success of the dialogue.
Adhering to the principles of international law, as
well as the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, we support the continuous
building and promotion of mutual confidence, while
respecting the legitimate interests of both Albanians
and Serbs living in Kosovo and Metohija.

The Serbian side continues to promote and pursue
the policy of finding peaceful solutions in a constructive
dialogue with Pristina. The Republic of Serbia sees the
dialogue as the only way ofovercoming the current crisis
and arriving at sustainable solutions for the problems
facing the population in Kosovo and Metohija on a daily
basis. The new Government of the Republic of Serbia
recently entered into the follow-up to the dialogue
with the wish of making concrete progress between
Belgrade and Pristina. During the last meeting between
Mr. Daeic', the Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Thaci,
held in Brussels on 7 November, a wide range of issues
was discussed. We insisted that the executive control
powers at the crossing points in northern Kosovo be
vested in the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We also recalled that an agreement
had been reached to start implementing integrated
control by 10 December, Within the framework of pilot
projects at the administrative crossing points. Also,
agreement was reached that the Kosovo Police Service
should set up a special unit for the protection of Serbian
cultural heritage that will be made up predominantly of
Kosovo Serbs. We are determined to fully implement
the arrangements reached thus far and are open to
discussions on all issues, except the dismantling of
Serbia's institutions in Kosovo and Metohija.

Serbia wishes to move forward towards its
European future and is fully committed to the process,
which should result in lasting peace between Serbs and
Albanians.

We believe that UNMIK should have an important
role to complement the dialogue, so that an effective
exchange of information and reporting to the Security
Council can be ensured. The Security Council
remains indispensable in securing the legitimacy of a
comprehensive settlement.

The role of the United Nations in the stabilization
of the situation in the region is irreplaceable. The
mandate of UNMIK must therefore remain unchanged,
and it should continue to enjoy our full support. We
would like to see more efficient cooperation among
UNMIK, the Kosovo Force and EULEX. Both UNMIK
and EULEX should be active on the ground and act
in accordance with their mandates, in a status-neutral
way, under the auspices of the United Nations.

I would like to stress that the role of EULEX,
especially at this moment, must not be changed. Its
executive role remains crucial, especially as far as the
implementation of agreements reached in the dialogue
is concerned. The Republic of Serbia will insist on
the implementation of agreed solutions on integrated
border management through the presence and executive
role of EULEX at the administrative boundary line.

It is important that UNMIK continue to perform
its mandate related to the external representation of
Kosovo, unless otherwise agreed within the framework
of some regional gatherings and initiatives. In addition,
the United Nations should ensure that the missions in
Kosovo and Metohija operate solely in a status-neutral
framework, as envisaged in resolution 1244 (1999). The
United Nations should further continue its key role as
coordinator of all international organizations that act
under its auspices.

Of special significance for the Republic of Serbia
is the continued financing of the United Nations
Administration in Mitrovica. It is unacceptable to
us to additionally limit the responsibilities of the
Administration as a result of the lack of financing
and the takeover of UNMIK's responsibilities by the
creation and functioning of a parallel body based in
Pristina. We would like to point out that UNMIK is the
only legitimate international presence in which people
in north Kosovo still have full confidence.

Despite the long-standing international presence,
there is no significant improvement on the ground. The
lives and property of Serbs and other non-Albanians
continue to be threatened; there are no basic security
conditions or freedom of movement and employment;
safe return to their homes in Kosovo and Metohija has
not been ensured for Serbian refugees and displaced
persons; no major infrastructure facilities have been
rebuilt; and violence against the Serbian population and
their cultural and religious sites by Albanian separatists
continues. The human rights situation in Kosovo and
Metohija, especially as it pertains to Serbs and other
non-Albanians, continues to be deplorable.

Concern for security and safety, as well as limited
freedom of movement, are definitely the most important
factors having an adverse effect upon the quality
of life of Kosovo and Metohija Serbs. The relative
diminishing of inter-ethnic violence is not a result of
improved inter-ethnic relations, but the consequence
of the growing isolation of the Serbian population as a
result of their retreat into enclaves or isolated villages.
According to the information available to us, in the
period from July to October, more than 70 attacks that
could be described as ethnically motivated were carried
out. The result is that there are ever fewer Serbs living
in the territory of Kosovo and Metohija. In the period
under review, additional concern, lack of security and
disquiet were also caused by further arrests of members
of the Serbian community without any explanation as
to the legal grounds for issuing controversial warrants
against them. In that way, added pressure is being put on
the Serbian community living in Kosovo and Metohija.

I take this opportunity to emphasize once again
that the systematic destruction and demolition of
houses deserted by Serbs and other non-Albanians has
continued. I would also like to point out that the activities
of local authorities are aimed at the expropriation or
forced dispossession and demolition of houses in the
historical parts of towns like Pee and Bakovica.

At a time when the international community is
making efforts to provide lasting housing solutions
for refugees and displaced persons in the territory
of the former Yugoslavia, the return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo and Metohija is a slow
process characterized by a low level of sustainability.
According to the latest figures for 2012, a mere 285
Serbs returned to Kosovo and Metohija, which testifies
to the continuing downward trend in returns.

The way in which the Kosovo Privatization Agency
is privatizing enterprises in Kosovo and Metohija
is alarming, especially since January. Of particular
concern is the privatization of public and social
enterprises in Serbian communities. The consequences
of selling such enterprises to Albanian nationals are
an additional factor forcing the exit of the Serbian
population.

I take this opportunity to draw the Council's
attention to the ever more frequent problem of the
limitation of the freedom of movement of private
persons due to technical changes in the established
procedure of organized police escorts, usually in
cooperation with EULEX police. A particular problem
is the constant prevention of visits and freedom of
movement of officials of the Republic of Serbia, despite
the fact that they duly inform EULEX of their visits
to Kosovo and Metohija in accordance with established
procedure. Even humanitarian aid has been denied
entry to Kosovo and Metohija.

In Kosovo and Metohija, Serbia is constantly faced
with attacks on its cultural and historical heritage.
Attempts to replace and rename the Serbian cultural
identity in Kosovo and Metohij a as Albanian, Byzantine,
Illyrian and so forth are continuously taking place in
spite of the relevant recommendations and decisions of
UNESCO.

I would like to emphasize once again the importance
of full and effective investigation of allegations of
killing for the purpose of organ trafficking contained
in the report of Mr. Dick Marty, Rapporteur of the
Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly. The
Republic of Serbia is ready to continue its cooperation
with the EULEX investigation team in order to help
establish the truth, trace the missing and achieve
justice for the victims. The truth must be established in
a professional and serious manner, particularly bearing
in mind the information regarding the destruction by
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) of evidence gathered by UNMIK. Serbia
will continue to call for a United Nations role in the
investigation.

After many years of conflict and tensions in the
Balkans, the region has entered a new era ofcooperation,
confidence-building and dialogue. The Republic of
Serbia has played a significant role in that process and
is committed to resolving all problems peacefully. I
wish to reaffirm our strong commitment to continuing
the process of reconciliation, which is a key element for
the consolidation of peace and stability in the region.

In that regard, I take this opportunity to point out
the negative consequences for the reconciliation process
of the latest judgement by the ICTY Appeals Chamber
concerning the two Croatian generals. That judgement
has stunned not only the whole of Serbia but also many
legal experts around the world. We maintain that such
an injustice must never happen again.

Achieving lasting peace in the region requires
a comprehensive solution to be found for Kosovo
and Metohija. Reconciliation between Serbs and
Albanians requires tough decisions on both sides. The
following words of the former Secretary-General Dag
Hammarskjold may serve as inspiration to us: "The
pursuit of peace and progress cannot end in a few years
in either victory or defeat. The pursuit of peace and
progress, with its trials and its errors, its successes and
its setbacks, can never be relaxed and never abandoned".

