Mr. Boubacar Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting. I would also like to take this
opportunity to reiterate my delegation's congratulations
to you on your country's accession to the presidency of
the Council for the month of May 2003. I assure you of
our full cooperation. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, Mr. Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, and his entire
team for the excellent job they did during Mexico's
presidency of the Council. In addition, I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Jose Maria Aznar, Prime
Minister of Spain, and to convey to him our gratitude
for the valuable information he has just given us.

The Prime Minister's important statement serves
to further enlighten us as to the various manifestations
of terrorism and about the measures to be taken to
eradicate it. The suggestions he made in that regard
deserve our attention.

The new nature of this scourge, as well as the
means required, have called for further measures,
which have taken form through the adoption of a
number of General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. The initiatives taken by other actors,
including international, regional and subregional
organizations and institutions, are in line with that
approach.

I would like to reiterate our appreciation to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) for the very
valuable results it has already achieved. We encourage
it to continue in the same vein. We would also like to
take this opportunity to reiterate our congratulations to
Spain, which assumed the chairmanship of the
Committee on 4 April, and to assure it of our full
support.
My delegation continues to believe that the
struggle against terrorism is a long-term endeavour
whose scope and complexity require the cooperation of
all members of the international community. In that
connection, my delegation - which attaches particular
importance to the issue of assistance - once again
calls upon donors to better coordinate their efforts with
the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

We are convinced that the views expressed here
this afternoon will help us to further engage in
collective thinking about how to fight terrorism. I
would like to conclude by saying that my country,
whose counter-terrorism policy has been made known
on several occasions, will continue to make its modest
contribution to the international community's efforts to
combat and ultimately eliminate this scourge.

