Mr. Gaspar Martins: Mr. President, I am
pleased and wish to thank you and the Russian
presidency for the opportunity to participate in this
meeting on the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
in my capacity as Chairman of that Commission. This
is indeed an important occasion to reflect on the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission with one of the
principal bodies that created it, through its resolution
1645 (2005).

I am equally pleased that the General Assembly
has scheduled for 6 February a similar debate, which I
hope will provide an opportunity for the wider
participation of the membership of our Organization -
a fact which we in the Peacebuilding Commission
welcome.

Although the Peacebuilding Commission has
been in existence for less than a year, questions are
already being asked about the results it has achieved
during that period. That is a legitimate concern and it
speaks to the high expectations that the international
community, in particular the Member States, have for
that new organ of the United Nations. Yet, we should
recognize that peacebuilding is by nature a complex
and long-term process which requires persistent and
long-term commitment by all. This debate today will, I
hope, contribute to mobilizing the commitment needed
so that we can move faster, providing more clarity in
the discussion of some outstanding procedural issues in
the workings of the Commission. Let us all agree that
our theoretical differences in New York are
meaningless to those who are directly suffering from
the consequences of conflict on the ground. What
matters for them are concrete actions and not just
eloquent statements.

The Peacebuilding Commission will be relevant
and succeed only if it paves the way for an engaged
partnership and practical actions by its members, as
well as by the donor community, regional
organizations, multilateral financial institutions and the
Governments, civil society and private sectors of
countries under consideration by the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is that active partnership that will
produce the incremental and tangible results we are
seeking. Our common efforts are and should be aimed
at reinforcing confidence in post-conflict communities,
ensuring that countries do not relapse into conflict and
that they move swiftly on the path to stability, recovery
and development.

The fact that allocations were made from the
Peacebuilding Fund for both Burundi and Sierra Leone
is an important first step in underlining international
commitment and attention. That will certainly have a
catalyzing effect, but we do need a long-term
commitment from donors to remain engaged with the
countries throughout the peacebuilding effort. Equally,
07-22632
the two countries need to make greater efforts to lay
the foundations for sustainable peace.

I am particularly pleased that we are about to
decide on country-specific plans of action and a
programme of action for the Organizational
Committee, which I believe will allow the Commission
to review and monitor the implementation of its
decisions on a more regular basis. The recent staffing
of the Peacebuilding Support Office is also a welcome
development. The Office should continue to be given
the necessary attention and resources, as it constitutes a
vital instrument for the functioning of the Commission.

I am pleased by the contributions recently made
to the Peacebuilding Fund. That is an encouraging
trend, though the amount available is still insufficient
when compared to the needs of the two countries and
the urgency of meeting those needs.

The Peacebuilding Commission is a body to
which the Council has dedicated much valuable time to
establishing. It is the Council's body, and it will
perform only in accordance with the means that the
Council and the international community put at its
disposal in order to meet the high expectations of the
populations of countries emerging from conflict. In
order to meet the objectives expected from it on the
ground, the Commission must be a real bridge for all
stakeholders to marshal resources and to advise on and
propose integrated strategies for post-conflict
peacebuilding and recovery, in conformity with the
decision made by the heads of State at the September
Summit.

I would like to seize this opportunity to commend
the Governments of Burundi and Sierra Leone for
providing a legal and political framework by
establishing national bodies and a suitable environment
to facilitate the work of the Commission on the ground.
That is their primary responsibility and the role of
national ownership. As stated by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan,

"[w]here peacebuilding succeeds it is always the
leadership of domestic actors that is the essential
ingredient of success. No amount of international
engagement can substitute for domestic political
leaders shouldering their responsibilities and
leading their people towards peace and
development" (A/6l/l, para. 76).
07-22632

Finally, I want to acknowledge the fact that the
new body has a number of issues to address in order to
improve its effectiveness and enhance its impact.
While we have to acknowledge that the Peacebuilding
Commission is still in the early phase of its existence,
we also need to be decisive in tackling some of the
critical challenges in relation to its working methods
and strategic vision. That requires a collective
commitment, and I hope that, as we move forward, all
members of the Commission and of the United Nations
will contribute to that effort.

