We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and we listened carefully to Ms. Amany Qaddour's presentation. I would also like to wish Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve all the best in his new assignment in Geneva. Next time, we would like to hear information on the repositioning of the United Nations humanitarian deliveries to the north-west of Syria in accordance with the new format of work under the cross-border mechanism. We would be interested to receive more details in the future and hope that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) will be able to organize the second United Nations inter-agency mission to that part of the country so as to conduct a first-hand assessment of the situation on the ground. Since the beginning of the year, many changes have taken place in the north-west, and those need to be reflected through reliable information. With regard to the difficulties the United Nations is facing in accessing the territories previously supported through the Bab Al-Salam border crossing, we have the following question. As the board of inquiry revealed, some armed opposition groups in north-western Syria have signed a declaration of commitment on compliance with international humanitarian law and humanitarian assistance under OCHA's auspices, and the declaration helped to structure the engagement of humanitarian actors with armed opposition groups. We want to learn more about the declaration, cooperation with those armed groups, how fruitful the cooperation is and how it helps OCHA facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance to the north-west of Syria, especially under new technical circumstances. We believe that it is the right of donors to expect a degree of accountability as to the effectiveness of their financial resources in terms of the final beneficiaries of the humanitarian aid. We expect that by the next Security Council meeting on the humanitarian situation in Syria we will see progress in cross-line assistance to the north-west - but not only to the north-west. It is high time to engage fully with the Syrian authorities on increasing cross-line deliveries throughout the country. We also expect OCHA to report to us on what measures will have been undertaken in this regard. We once again want to draw attention to the fact that cross-line deliveries of humanitarian aid are growing, and that should be properly acknowledged. On 4 July, the World Health Organization provided a new cross-line supply of humanitarian aid by road to the province of Al-Hasakah. In total, since the beginning of 2020, when Al-Yarubiyah was closed, more humanitarian aid has been delivered to the north- east of Syria than in previous years, including through the aforementioned border- crossing. It is a fact that speaks for itself. At the same time, humanitarian deliveries, approved by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, go both to areas and medical facilities under its control and to those managed by the Kurdish authorities. It proves that the Syrian Government observes the principle of non-discrimination in the provision of humanitarian assistance. That fact should not be perverted in an attempt to blame Syrians for their reluctance to cooperate openly and fruitfully. In the north-east, aside from the situation in Al-Hol camp, we are seriously concerned about the high risks of environmental disaster that would impact the overall humanitarian situation and the well-being of the people living there. During the Council's meeting last week on Syria (see S/2020/743), we mentioned already the news spreading in the media about the oil spills. Such spills from the Al-Rmeilan oil field alone have amounted to 60 barrels per day for the last two years. A total of 50,000 barrels have already leaked into the environment. From a damaged storage facility, oil is getting into nearby streams, poisoning the Euphrates. According to experts, it is an ecological time bomb, not only for Syria but also for Iraq. As a result, the area to the east of the Euphrates - a well- known granary of Syria - cropland is decreasing and harvest volumes are falling each year. The negative consequences on human health are also obvious; the number of miscarriages and birth defects - including haemophilia, anaemia and hypothyroidism - acute respiratory and oncological diseases, meningitis and skin inflammation has increased sharply. It is noteworthy that the United States, which is occupying Syrian oil fields, does not provide either financial or technical assistance to solve that problem. Some 100,000 barrels are being produced per day, amounting to $30 to $40 million a month, yet nothing is being done to protect the environment. We regret that despite the obvious relevance of this topic to today's discussion, our request to have an additional briefer from the Secretariat was not treated appropriately. Such reluctance raises a lot of questions and may force us to ask for a separate video teleconference on this topic. The responsibility for the humanitarian situation in Syria les with those countries that deliberately and discriminately introduce unilateral coercive measures and sanctions against Syria and pretend that this does not have any effect on the lives of ordinary Syrians. In addition to the deepening shortages of food and medicine in local markets and growing inflation, which undermines the purchasing power of ordinary Syrians, such requisition of national resources undermines the ability of the legitimate Government to overcome the socioeconomic crisis. We find this approach inhumane and hypocritical. We must register our dissatisfaction with the way the co-penholders conducted the extension of the cross-border mechanism. They put their interests above the Security Council's common interests, thereby making us struggle for over a week, and enjoyed seeing us exercise our veto instead of ensuring a swift adoption of the resolution. We also regret that our Western colleagues chose to ignore the obvious; the increase in cross-line assistance and the need to speed up efforts to make cross- line operations more effective in reaching all parts of Syria. The same applies to mentioning the need to assess the impact of unilateral coercive measures in the Secretary-General's reports. The French Ambassador today referred to resolution 2532 (2020), which mentions the appeals and calls of the Secretary-General. However, they failed to concur with it in the resolution that we adopted on the cross- border mechanism. That is again an example of double standards. Some of our colleagues would rather sacrifice the resolution itself than have these important clauses included in it. I agree - accountability will come. However, those who may be held accountable in the end may not be those whom some consider to be the usual suspects. Not all is measured in American dollars, but we regularly - almost on a daily basis - provide bulletins on what we send to Syria in humanitarian assistance. I hope the members read the bulletins from time to time. But what is more important is that we have been saving the country from those who were or are still trying to ruin Syria, including from the outside, as some here once did with Libya. With one hand they provide humanitarian assistance; with the other they are trying to strangle the country. Those members' reassurances that it does not affect ordinary people convince no one. At least, they do not convince us or Syrians.
