Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this Security Council debate almost a year
after the first meeting of the Council (see S/PV.7268)
devoted to the Ebola epidemic, held in September 2014.
I would also like to thank all the speakers for their
briefings.

At the outset, France would like once again to pay
tribute to the victims and the local and international
personnel who were intimately committed to the sick
since the beginning of the epidemic. If the situation has
clearly improved in the three countries most affected, it
is the fruit of the work on the ground of a solid strategy,
endowed by significant human and financial resources.
In that regard, we commend the work of the United
Nations, Whose related teams played a key role at the
strategic and operational levels. We equally commend
the exemplary response of the African Union.

In spite of those encouraging results, the Ebola
epidemic has not ended. The international community
must remain mobilized to conquer the virus. It
is essential to pursue our efforts in maintaining
strengthened epidemiological surveillance and a
response capacity beyond the zero-Ebola objective. The
complete eradication of the virus in the three affected
countries remains our priority.

Since the beginning of the Ebola crisis, France has
been fully committed to the countries affected, notably
in support of the efforts of the Guinean authorities.
We have mobilized more than €220 million, including
€160 million from contributions raised from the State
budget. In Guinea, our support for the authorities
includes in particular the training and protection of the
actors involved in the crisis by setting up two training
centres in France and in Guinea. Our support also
includes medical leadership through the establishment
of four Ebola training centres, a centre for treating
nursing staff and the financing of four laboratories.

In addition to these efforts to overcome the
epidemic, we have already focused our attention on
the recovery of the countries involved. Just as it was
at the forefront of the emergency response to the
epidemic, France has actively participated in those
recovery efforts by mobilizing more than €150 million
in additional funding. Overall, France will have raised
approximately €350 million in response to the epidemic
and to help the affected countries in recovery.

The Ebola crisis has highlighted the fragility of
the health-care systems of the affected countries.
Recovery efforts should focus on strengthening those
systems based on a regional approach. France is already
implementing several projects with our African and
international partners. We support the establishment
in Guinea of regional alert-and-response teams to the
epidemic. We are also establishing a network of public
health institutes to monitor the risks of epidemics in
West Africa. This project will be connected to a network
of laboratories led by the Pasteur and Institut Merieux
Institutes, and will be supported by strengthening
hospital hygiene at the regional level.

Not only does the epidemic not recognize
borders, but it has affected all sectors of society of
those countries - education, economies and political
processes have been disrupted. French support for
the most affected countries covers all those areas.
We intend to strengthen our cooperation in the region
with our local and international partners. We need to
work together both to put an end to the epidemic and to
ensure the resilience of health-care systems and their
capacity to prevent similar health crises in the future
and to support sustainable development in the region.

In conclusion, further consideration mustbe given to
how to improve the response of the international system
as a whole to health crises, both through multilateral
forums and on the ground. The epidemic should be taken
as an opportunity to build our capacities to cope with
significant health challenges. The epidemic reminds us
that we need to have robust early warning and response
capacities, and in particular how badly we need the
International Health Regulations of the World Health
Organization. France will organize on 29 October in
Paris a high-level meeting on lessons learned by the
many actors involved the response in West Africa.
