Ms. King (Australia): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA).

Allow me to focus first on the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), which has been committing human rights
abuses that are appalling in both scale and brutality
since its formation in 1987. Others have already stated
the well-known figures of deaths, abductions and
displacements caused by the LRA, and we all know that
the LRA has continued its horrific crimes over the past
months. By some estimates, as many as 275 separate
attacks were reported in 2012.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) arrest
warrants issued in July 2005 against Joseph Kony and
other senior LRA leaders remain unexecuted eight
years later. We fully support the Security Council's
draft presidential statement on the LRA and its call on
all States to cooperate with relevant national authorities
and the ICC in order to execute the ICC arrest warrants
and bring to justice those responsible.

Enhanced regional and international efforts to
combat the LRA have yielded positive results. We
know that the LRA has been weakened and that
defections have risen. We commend the African Union
(AU) Regional Cooperation Initiative against the
LRA and the progress made in operationalizing the
AU Regional Task Force (AU-RTF). But despite those
important efforts, the LRA continues to terrorize and
victimize populations across Central Africa, exerting
a disproportionate humanitarian impact on civilians,
particularly women and children, because of the extent
of its brutality. More must therefore be done to seize
the current opportunity to put an end once and for all to
that abhorrent group.

First and foremost, the crisis in the Central
African Republic must be addressed. We know all too
well that the LRA thrives in security vacuums and in
environments of weak or, in the case of the Central
African Republic, absent State authority. It is therefore
all the more concerning that the Ugandan contingent of
the AU Regional Task Force was forced to temporarily
suspend its operations in that country. As AU Peace and
Security Commissioner Lamamra told an AU support
forum meeting in Addis Ababa recently, the LRA
has been able to go out on a picnic since the Seleka
coalition seized power by force in the Central African
Republic. It is vital that the AU-RTF be able to resume
its activities as soon as possible.

We welcome the efforts of AU Special Envoy
Francisco Madeira and Prime Minister Tiangaye of
the Central African Republic to reach agreement in
that regard. We hope that that will lead to an early
resumption of operations. The United Nations, the
AU and the Economic Community of Central African
States should also strengthen their coordination to
help resolve the current crisis in the Central African
Republic. Australia stands ready to consider ways in
which the Security Council can support those efforts.

Secondly, we must enhance the implementation
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA. The
release of the United Nations regional strategy almost
a year ago helped to focus attention on the threats
posed by the LRA. We welcome the submission by the
Secretary-General of the implementation plan for the
strategy, which provides a useful overview of the action
undertaken to date and the way forward. UNOCA has an
important coordinating role to play in helping translate
the United Nations strategy into tangible results on the
ground. The successful implementation of the strategy
also requires the full commitment of all stakeholders,
the LRA-affected countries, which have primary
responsibility, regional organizations, the entire United
Nations system and international partners. Additional
efforts are clearly still needed.

Coordinated and enhanced action by United Nations

peacekeeping and political missions in the region - the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo, the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan,
the African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in
Darfur and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic - is a further
integral element to the efforts under way to address
the LRA threat. These include protecting civilians,
sharing information on LRA activities, developing
standard operating procedures, and implementing
effective disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
resettlement or repatriation programmes.
As the LRA's tactics evolve, cross-border
coordination and information-sharing are all the more
important. As the report of the Secretary-General notes,
for example, the possible use of funds from the illegal
ivory trade as an important source of financing for LRA
activities needs to be addressed. More must be done
to develop a common operating picture of the LRA's
capabilities, its areas of operation and the sources of
funding and support it uses to carry out attacks.

Now more than ever, UNOCA has an important
role to play in conflict prevention, early warning and
mediation efforts in Central Africa. As the report of
the Secretary-General notes, economic growth, while
sustained, is not yet inclusive. Youth unemployment
is high, women's participation in key political
decision-making is low in all but a few countries, and
piracy and cross-border criminal activity, including
elephant poaching, have increased.

We therefore welcome the regional efforts to
address those issues and the assistance that UNOCA
is providing to support them. We look forward, for
example, to the upcoming regional regional Summit
of Heads of State and Government later this month
on maritime piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea, and to the regional forum on youth
employment, political stability and peacebuilding to be
held in the last quarter of the year.

Allow me to conclude by expressing our full
support to Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
for their important contribution to conflict prevention
in Central Africa.

