Mr. Takht-Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): May
I begin by expressing our sincere sympathy and
condolences to the people and the Government of Lebanon
and the bereaved families over the deaths of so many
innocent civilians in southern Lebanon, who perished as a
result of the deliberate attack of the Zionist army.

Three days ago, the Security Council convened to
discuss the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and its brutal
bombardment of civilian targets in that country. During that
meeting, my delegation elaborated on our position with
regard to the issue before the Council and warned that, if
the Security Council were not able or willing to take the
necessary steps in response to violations of international
law by the Zionist regime, the aggressor would be
encouraged to continue its aggression.

The crime committed by Israel today in southern
Lebanon is, unfortunately, the natural consequence of the
inaction of the Security Council. Had the Council avoided
double standards and reacted promptly and resolutely
against Israeli crimes a week ago, the Zionist regime would
not have dared to commit further crimes of this magnitude
with impunity.

Today's barbaric act against a United Nations base in
Lebanon has resulted in the martyrdom of more than 100
civilians sheltering in that base, including many women
and children. Who is to blame? The Zionist regime,
which has been deliberately targeting civilian population
centres and economic installations in Lebanon, or those
who, through their acquiescence and silence towards
Zionist crimes or even blame of the victim rather than the
aggressor, have in fact given Israel the green light to
continue its barbarism?

The dangerous dimensions of the Israeli crimes in
Lebanon are so great that they require an urgent reaction
from the Security Council to prevent further massacres by
the Zionist regime in Lebanon. It is incumbent upon the
Security Council to condemn in the strongest terms the
continued Israeli aggression against Lebanon, which is the
primary reason for the continuation of the crisis in that
country, resulting in a high toll of civilian casualties. The
Council should also take effective measures to deal with
Israeli terrorism. Finally, the Security Council should
adopt the measures necessary to implement resolution 425
(1978). Any attempt to disregard or distort this resolution
is tantamount to legitimizing the occupation and therefore
detrimental to the credibility of the United Nations in
general and the Security Council in particular.

