Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I wish to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Annadif, as well as the
Chair of the sanctions Committee, Mr. Olof Skoog,
for their respective briefings. We are pleased to note
the presence among us of His Excellency Minister
Coulibaly. As the Minister is aware, there is a deep
friendship between the peoples of our two countries,
a friendship forged by 35 years of development
cooperation and our participation in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) since 2014. I pay tribute to the
soldiers of this peacekeeping operation who laid down
their lives, including in particular Dutch soldiers, in
previous years.
Two weeks ago, the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
during its presidency of the Security Council, convened
an open debate on collective action to improve United
Nations peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.8218).
Today's meeting affords the Council an opportunity to
translate the ambitions voiced during that debate into
concrete measures. Such measures are imperative in the
light of the plethora of problems facing Mali, including
terrorism, drug and weapons smuggling, human
trafficking and the threat of escalation and spillover to
the entire Sahel region and beyond, even to Europe.

In that context, I wish to focus on three elements:
first, the primacy of politics; secondly, performance;
and thirdly, the prevention of impunity.

My first point concerns the primacy of politics. As
was acknowledged by all those who participated in the
open debate, United Nations peacekeeping operations
must above all support the political process. Only with
a negotiated political settlement can lasting peace and
security come within reach. The support provided by
MINUSMA for the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has proved essential
and remains so today.

The international community has invested heavily
in Mali. In return, we expect of all Malian parties that
they shoulder their responsibility to implement the
Peace Agreement. We join other colleagues today in
urging all signatories to renew their commitment to the
peace process. In the absence of an inclusive process,
peace will elude us. During the aforementioned debate,
Ms. Fatimata Toure noted that only 3 per cent of those
formally involved in the peace process are women.
We must see to it that all Malians are adequately
represented, as my Swedish colleague mentioned.

The most urgent steps that need to be taken
to implement the peace agreement include, first,
decentralization; secondly, security-sector reform; and
thirdly, the demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants in the Malian armed forces. We expect all
Malian parties to deliver on this. These measures are
critical to restore the legitimacy of the State in the north
and to regain people's trust. Progress has been far too
slow for too long. We must not shy away from imposing
sanctions on spoilers of the peace process, including
trafficking networks.
My second point relates to performance. Action
for Peacekeeping, an initiative launched by the
Secretary-General during the open debate I mentioned,
emphasizes the fact that all of us bear the responsibility
to act. We must also dare to engage in an honest
process of reflection on MINUSMA's mandate and on
the capacities necessary for it to be implemented. The
shifting conditions in Mali require MINUSMA to be
flexible and innovative. Last Thursday's and Friday's
attacks must serve as a reminder for Member States
of their responsibility to provide MINUSMA with
the appropriate equipment in terms of both troops
and capacities. Also crucial is the need to foster a
genuinely integrated approach among the military,
civil and police pillars, specifically when it comes to
information-sharing and intelligence-led planning.
With a view to the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate,
in June, it would be advisable that the Security Council
receive the strategic plan requested in its resolution
2364 (2017).

The third point I wish to raise is the prevention of
impunity. Lack of accountability for the perpetrators
of human rights violations in Mali promotes instability
and jihadism. The restoration of State institutions,
including the security forces, is a basic condition for
achieving stability, but that stability can be sustainable
only within the framework of the rule of law, which
means that impunity is impermissible. The recent
discovery of a mass grave in central Mali unfortunately
shows the extent of the problems that the country is
facing. We call on the Malian Government to ensure that
the guilty parties are held accountable for their actions.

In conclusion, the only way to achieve the Malian
people's trust is by demonstrating an unwavering
commitment to the rule of law. In that context,
the Netherlands welcomes the fact that the Malian
authorities recently handed over Mr. Al Hassan Ag
Abdoul Aziz Ag Mohamed Ag Mahmoud to the
International Criminal Court in The Hague. Given the
friendship between the peoples of our two countries, we
would like to see justice and sustainable development
for the people of Mali as soon as possible.

