Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation commends Kazakhstan's initiative to
convene this important debate on security, development
and regional partnerships in Afghanistan and Central
Asia. We welcome your presence, Mr. Minister, as
well as that of the Ministers from the Central Asian
region. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
presentation this morning.

As has been noted, we have just returned this week
from a visit to Afghanistan that has made it possible for
us to better grasp the issues facing the country and their
regional and global implications in an increasingly
interdependent world. Here we would like to thank
the people and the Government of Afghanistan for
their hospitality and to reiterate to them our support
in the achievement of sustainable peace in the country.
Based on our national experience, we underscore the
importance of linking security and development in the

framework of a broad and integrated approach, with
the support of the international community, especially
neighbouring countries.

Here I should like to make three points.

First, tackling the deep-rooted causes of the
conflict in Afghanistan is a task that goes beyond the
realm of peace and security. It involves investing in
the sustainable development of a country with a very
young population, with an average age of 18 years, and
a poverty rate of approximately 39 per cent, a state of
affairs that is exploited by extremist groups and various
criminal organizations. In this respect, we support the
conclusions of the strategic review of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan on the need to
concentrate efforts, in addition to maintaining internal
stability, on achieving sustainable peace and reducing
the external dependence of Afghanistan. International
and regional cooperation can do a great deal in this
respect by supporting the efforts of the Afghans
themselves to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Investment in infrastructure projects
and regional connectivity projects given priority by
the national authorities could have the potential of
preventing greater conflicts.

We believe that, in accordance with SDG 16,
the rule of law and the consolidation of transparent,
accountable and inclusive institutions are key elements
in promoting a peaceful society. In that connection,
we underscore the consensus of the members of the
Council regarding the importance of complying with
the electoral programme established for Afghanistan,
including the election of an inclusive and representative
parliament in 2018 and a new Government in 2019.

Secondly, it is vital to confront terrorism on the
basis of a broad and comprehensive approach that, in
addition to focusing on its root causes, takes account
of its links with transnational organized crime and the
global issue of drugs from a regional perspective. We
are concerned that, according to the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan's production
of opium and poppies has increased 87 per cent and
63 per cent, respectively, compared with the previous
year, which channels additional resources to groups
that promote violence.

It is imperative to confront this issue at its various
stages, including the eradication of illicit crops, access
to precursors, the social implications of consumption,
and prevention programmes. International cooperation
is required, including triangular and bilateral regional
cooperation with neighbouring countries. Our
experience in dealing with similar challenges has
shown that alternative development programmes have
been particularly effective for those segments of the
population involved in drug production. We are prepared
to share our experience with the Afghan authorities.

Thirdly, regional partnerships in their various
forms can do a great deal to enhance the collective
security, development and stability of their members.

I should like here briefly to refer to the experience
of the Latin American region, which could be useful for
other developing regions. With the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
we were pioneers in declaring ourselves a zone free of
nuclear weapons. It is also the first zone of peace in
the world. Thanks to peace and various integration and
partnership processes, in recent decades our region has
registered significant rates of growth and a considerably
reduced poverty rate.

Integration with neighbours and cross-border
development have given the process added impetus,
especially with the periodic bilateral meetings between
the respective Heads of State, with the participation
of ministers. We therefore welcome the fact that
Afghanistan and the States of Central Asia are moving
in a similar direction, with a view to transforming the
area into a zone ofpeace, cooperation and prosperity, as
reflected in the Treaty declaring Central Asia a nuclear-
weapon-free zone. In addition, we believe that the
trade integration and territorial connectivity promoted
by the Afghan Government and the States of Central
Asia will become pillars of stability and prosperity for
the subregion, as was the case at the time of the Silk
Road. As the old Eastern proverb says, alone you can go
quickly, but together you can go farther.

