Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank His
Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Implementation Panel on
Darfur, for his briefing and for the Panel's highly
commendable work. I also thank Mr. Gambari, Joint
Special Representative for Darfur and head of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID); Mr. Menkerios, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS);
and Mr. Bassole, the Joint African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator, for their commendable work
and for their briefings on the situation in the Sudan.

Uganda welcomes the progress that has been
made towards peace and stability in the Sudan. The
recently concluded national elections, the ongoing

implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and efforts to resolve the Darfur
conflict through the Doha peace process are significant
developments. We salute the good work by the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel and we
welcome the progress being made through a widely
consultative and inclusive approach. We also commend
UNAMID and UNMIS, under the leadership of
Mr. Gambari and Mr. Menkerios respectively, for the
contributions they are making to resolving the issues in
the Sudan.

My delegation welcomes the commitment
expressed by the Government of the Sudan to work
jointly with the Panel on all steps to be taken towards
advancing peace, justice and reconciliation.
Furthermore, we welcome the commitment by the
Government to agree to a joint implementation and
monitoring mechanism, both on Darfur and on the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

While we commend the progress made, we must
acknowledge that the Sudan is entering a critical stage.
There are still key outstanding issues that need to be
addressed to ensure the restoration of peace in Darfur,
the full implementation of the CPA and agreement on
post-referendum arrangements. We are concerned
about the recent upsurge of incidents of violence in
Darfur. We call upon the parties to respect the ceasefire
and to commit themselves to the peaceful resolution of
the conflict through the Doha peace process.

It is important to ensure the full and timely
implementation of the CPA. We call upon the National
Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM) to adhere to the
timelines for the remaining tasks. The holding of the
recent national elections, in spite of their shortcomings,
attests to progress towards democratic transformation
in the Sudan.

Given the fact that, according to the CPA, the
referendum in Southern Sudan should be held by
9 January 2011, there is an urgent need to expedite the
establishment and operationalization of the
Referendum Commission and the demarcation of the
north-south border and of the Abyei border. It is
therefore critical that the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and the wider international community
render greater support towards accomplishment of the
remaining tasks. That will entail UNMIS, among
others, providing technical and logistical support to the
Referendum Commission to ensure that the referendum
is held as scheduled and that it is free, fair, transparent
and credible.

Finally, it is incumbent upon the leadership of the
NCP and the SPLM, as parties to the CPA, to maintain
their political goodwill and commitment to the full and
timely implementation of the CPA.

Uganda supports the elements of the President's
remarks to the press prepared by the delegation of the
United Kingdom.

