Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to begin my statement by thanking Mr. Shearer,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing today and for his efforts
as Head of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) during the past reporting period in
circumstances we know to be difficult.

Egypt will not go into the details relating to the
humanitarian and security situation in South Sudan and
our deep concerns about the suffering of civilians, who
alone pay the price of the conflict. What the civilian
population expects of the Security Council goes beyond
statements of condemnation. Accordingly, we would
like to emphasize the following points.

First, Egypt looks forward to seeing extensive and
intensive efforts being made by the relevant international
envoys in South Sudan to communicate with the
Government, opposition and regional stakeholders
so as to develop a time-specific operational plan of
action aimed at achieving the cessation of hostilities
and reviving the peace agreement. Further delay in
achieving that will lead to increased complications
and a deterioration of the situation on the ground. The
lack of progress provides the parties to the conflict the
argument that they need to continue fighting without
political or legal constraints.

Secondly, the political situation and the Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan
require a unified front of opposition that would
renounce violence, become a serious political partner
representing all factions without narrow, tribal
prejudices, and practice peaceful political opposition in
the modern sense of the term.

Thirdly, Egypt hopes that yesterday's declaration of
a ceasefire by President Kiir and the launch ofa national
dialogue represent a real beginning to overcoming the
current political crisis. We also hope that the dialogue
will involve a real platform for truth and overcoming
narrow political differences. We hope that it will be a
genuine beginning for new commitments to the peace
agreement. In that context, we look forward to an
inclusive dialogue that will include all factions of the
opposition, as well as youth and women.

Fourthly, in parallel with the efforts to revive
the political track, we must support efforts aimed at
national reconciliation on the local and grass-roots
levels, address the impact of the war and ensure
achieving sustained peace. We therefore emphasize the
importance of supporting the work of a number of civil
society organizations in that regard.

Fifthly, Egypt looks forward to the implementation
of the measures taken recently to restructure the
Sudan People's Liberation Army as a step in the right
direction towards building a professional national army
capable of protecting all the citizens in South Sudan
regardless of their political or tribal affiliations, subject
to the law and held accountable to national authorities.
The Security Council shoulders the responsibility
of preventing a collapse of the State in South Sudan
and preserving and supporting it in the future. In its
experience addressing other conflicts, the Security
Council knows very well that the vacuum left by such a
collapse would only be filled by chaos.

Lastly, the parties have an urgent, moral, legal and
human obligation to end all forms of violence, abide
by international law and relevant international norms,
shoulder their responsibilities with regard to civilians
and ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.

In conclusion, we reiterate Egypt's support for
UNMISS and Mr. Shearer, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, in their efforts to achieving
peace in South Sudan.

