Mr. Niehaus (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): It has been more than 10 years since the United
Nations began what we might call its long, frustrating and
exhausting presence in Angola. The many resolutions,
presidential statements and statements to the press have
yielded absolutely no positive results. Today we face an
extremely grave situation in which there is not even a
focused political dialogue. There have been martyrs, such
as Maitre Beye, who devoted and indeed gave their lives
to the noble cause of the reconciliation of the Angolan

 

people. I take this opportunity to express our undying
thanks to Maitre Beye and his colleagues.

The international community has been involved
throughout this long period, during which there have been
attempts to establish a government of national unity and to
help the Angolan people to become an active member of
the international community. Despite the international
community's constant threats and measures, this has not
been possible. Responsibility for this negative result lies
with UNIT A and with those from outside the country who
support UNITA activities through the trade in precious
minerals.

The terms of the most recent sanctions, imposed by
resolution 1176 (1998), state clearly that no financial
assistance should be given to UNITA. For positive results
to be obtained, it is imperative that these sanctions should
be implemented and fully observed by all States Members
of the United Nations.

My country firmly believes in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, but we know that this is possible only with
political will and trust among the parties, which
unfortunately is absent in the Angolan situation. The
situation is deteriorating daily; we have gone from having
simply to condemn UNITA to having also to condemn
violations of human rights perpetrated by the Angolan
National Police. This results from the increased violence
and the continued refusal of UNITA to negotiate, to
implement the Lusaka Protocol and the "Acordos de Paz",
or to extend state administration to remaining areas. My
country has frequently joined the rest of the international
community in calling upon the parties to the Angolan peace
process to live up to their agreements; the refrain, while
repetitive, remains relevant, and it is our duty today to call
upon UNITA and its friends abroad immediately and
unconditionally to comply with the Lusaka Protocol and the
"Acordos de Paz".

The humanitarian situation in Angola continues to be
of concern to my delegation. The level of violence has
given rise to a larger number of internally-displaced persons
and is making it very difficult to provide humanitarian
assistance, because the international organizations
themselves are threatened and harassed, which hampers
their humanitarian efforts.

The main job of the international community is
strongly to encourage a dialogue that will lead the parties
to engage in direct talks that will make possible a solution
of the Angola crisis with respect for human rights and in
conformity with the fundamental principles of the
Organization. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-
General has appointed a new Special Representative, Mr.
Issa Diallo, and we hope that he will succeed in his work
and that the efforts and devotion of Maitre Beye will not
have been in vain. In any case, such success will depend
on the parties, particularly UNITA, adopting a frank,
constructive attitude and a determination to achieve a
solution to the conflict in Angola.

Costa Rica supports the recommendations of the
Secretary-General and will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us, by which the Council would extend
the mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Angola (MONUA), as currently composed, until 15
September 1998.

