Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Developments in Israel
affecting the occupied Arab territories are once again being
debated in the Security Council in an atmosphere of

 

persistent uneasiness over the future of the Middle East
peace process. The archaeological excavations in the area
of Burj al-Laqlaq, the establishment of civil guards in
settlements in the West Bank and the expansion of the
municipal authority of Jerusalem have contributed, above
all else, to raising the level of international apprehension.

As noted recently in an editorial published by The
New York Times,

"any abrupt changes in the city's delicate status quo,
particularly in the absence of negotiating progress
with the Palestinians, can be explosive." [24 June
I 998, p. 24, "Jerusalem's Boundaries" ]

It is clear that the concerns of those who have called for
this special meeting are very widely disseminated.

Until not long ago, we witnessed a series of
impressive strides towards the establishment of a lasting
basis for regional harmony in the Middle East. In the
absence of the courage and determination displayed then
by the leaders of the region, those bold steps would not
have been possible. There were many historical
milestones along this path, from the Madrid Conference
of 1991 to the redeployment of Israeli troops from
Hebron. The Brazilian Government followed this
evolution attentively, moved by the sincerest hopes that a
new pattern of cooperation in the Middle East would
herald a new era of understanding among all its
residents, irrespective of their ethnic or religious
affiliation, whose positive impact would be felt far
beyond the region.

We remain convinced that in spite of the setbacks
suffered by the peace process, the great majority of the
Middle Eastern population is committed to honouring the
religious traditions that have sprung from their region to
enlighten the four corners of the world by living together
in a spirit of tolerance and mutual respect.

At the same time, the international community
cannot fail to express its disquiet as agreements freely
entered into seem to be taken lightly and disenchantment
is allowed to spread among those in many quarters who
had not only invested their political and diplomatic
resources in the peace process, but had also placed their
honest faith in its viability. To those around the world
who remain attached to a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East it is simply unacceptable to
contemplate a scenario in which mutual confidence is
being eroded by episodes that are being perceived, at the

 

very least, as an expression of lack of commitment to the
peace process.

As was stressed by the Foreign Minister of Brazil, Mr.
Luiz Felipe Lampreia in a recent statement,

"The Brazilian Government considers that only
through the continuation of the peace process in the
Middle East and the renewal of mutual trust among
the parties, in accordance with agreements that have
already been signed, will it be possible to reach a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region,
fulfilling the aspirations of all peoples and States
concerned."

