Mr. Danon (Israel): Today is a dark day for the
Security Council. Resolution 2334 (2016), which
members just voted on, is the peak of hypocrisy. While
thousands are being massacred in Syria, the Council
has wasted valuable time and efforts condemning
the democratic State of Israel for building homes in
the historic homeland of the Jewish people. We have
presented the truth time and again to the Council,
and implored it not to believe the lies presented in
the resolution. By voting in favour of the resolution,
members of the Council have in fact voted no. They
voted no to negotiations. They voted no to progress and
a chance for better lives for Israelis and Palestinians.
And they voted no to the possibility of peace.

Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon addressing the
Council one week ago said that the United Nations had

"created a disproportionate volume of
resolutions, reports and conferences criticizing
Israel" (S/PV. 7839, p.4).

The resolution today will be added to the long and
shameful list of anti-Israel United Nations resolutions.
Instead of charting a course forward members are
sending a message to the Palestinians, that they should
continue on the path of terrorism and incitement; that
they should continue to hold their own people hostage;
thatthey should continue to seek meaningless statements.
The sad truth is that today's vote will be a victory for
terror; it will be a victory for hatred and violence. By
continuing to provide excuses for the Palestinians to
avoid recognizing our right to exist, Council members
are only maintaining the status quo.

The world is undergoing great change, and the new
Secretary-General will soon assume office. I call on the
Council to take this opportunity to turn a new page,
put an end to the bias and obsession with Israel, stop
such endless attempts to blame all the problems of the
Middle East on the one true democracy in the region
and make clear to the Palestinians that the only way
forward is to end the incitement and terror and enter
into direct and meaningful negotiations with Israel.

Just two months ago, UNESCO approved an absurd
resolution, denying the connection between the Jewish
people and Jerusalem. Today the Council, including
many of the world's leading democracies - the
beacons of liberty - voted to condemn the State of
Israel. Members voted to condemn the Jewish people
for building homes in the land of Israel, members voted
to ban us from building in our historical capital of
Jerusalem, the heart and soul of the Jewish people, with
the resolution. Tomorrow night, Israel and the entire
Jewish community around the world will celebrate the
holy day of Hanukkah. Over 2,000 years ago, King
Antiochus banished the Jewish people from our temple
in Jerusalem and issued decrees trying to sever us from
religion and our heritage. But we prevailed; the Jewish
people fought back. We gained our independence and
we relit menorah candles in the temples.

I ask each and every member of the Council who
voted for the resolution: Who gave members the right
to issue such a decree, denying our eternal rights in
Jerusalem? Would the Council have had the nerve to
condemn the countries of Council members for building
homes in their capitals? Would members ban the
French from building in Paris? Would members ban the
Russians from building in Moscow? Would members
ban the Chinese from building in Beijing? Would
members ban the British from building in London?
Would members ban the Americans from building in
Washington, D.C.?

We overcame such decrees during the time of the
Maccabees and we will overcome today's evil decree.
We have full confidence in the justice of our cause and
in the righteousness of our path. We will continue to
be a democratic State, based on the rule of law and full
civil and human rights for all our citizens, and we will
continue to be a Jewish State, proudly reclaiming the
land of our forefathers, where the Maccabees fought the
repressors, and King David ruled from Jerusalem.

This holy book, the Bible, contains 3,000 years
of history of the Jewish people in the land of Israel.
Absolutely no one can change that history.

