The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. John Danforth, Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
November 2004. I am sure I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Danforth for the great diplomatic skill
with which he conducted the Council's business last
month, in particular during our meetings in Nairobi.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Burundi

Second report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Burundi
(S/2004/902)

The President (Spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nkingiye
(Burundi), took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on Burundi, contained
in document S/2004/902. Members of the Council also
have before them document S/2004/930, which
contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council's prior consultations.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in Arabic): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1577 (2004).


