Mr. Babaa (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
congratulate you at the outset, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We also wish to extend a word of
congratulations to you on the assumption of a new post
in your country and to wish you every success. We are
confident that, thanks to your great wisdom and skill,
the Council deliberations this month will be successful.
I also wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, my brother
Mr. Said Ben Mustapha, for his impressive and
judicious stewardship of the Council during the past
eventful month.

The question of Palestine, its causes and
outcome, are well known to the Council members and
to the world. There is no need to recall that the Jewish
problem was a European problem throughout history. It
was never an Arab or an Islamic problem. The manner
in which that problem was brought to the Arab region,
to be disposed of, resulted in the uprooting and
displacement of the Palestinian people from their
homeland.

There is no need to recall the United Nations
resolutions that still need to be implemented and that
the Palestinian problem cannot be resolved without the
return of the Palestinian people to their homeland and
the establishment of their independent and sovereign
State on their national territory. The Palestinian people
have faced oppression and displacement for more than
eight decades, and it continues to endure the brutality
and horror of occupation. Now, they face the tanks of
the occupying Power and its missiles and airplanes.
Unarmed, they face that Power in defence of their
rights, land, dignity, holy sites, history and future.

We know very little about what happens in the
Palestinian territories, because the army of occupation
tries to impede coverage of events there. The
Committee for the Protection of American Journalists
has recently addressed a letter to the occupying Power,
expressing its concern about the safety of media
representatives in the occupied territories. It expressed
in a letter published by The New York Times its deep
concern about the brutality committed by the Israeli
army against journalists, adding that 12 journalists
have been wounded by Israeli army bullets and beaten
by internal security forces. Settlers still attack
journalists, especially from Reuters and Agence France
Presse, with impunity. In fact, some Israeli newspapers
have started to talk about collective punishment and the
tragedies endured daily by the Palestinians. Yesterday,
Ha 'aretz, the Israeli newspaper, published an article by
the International Committee of the Red Cross
condemning the collective punishment carried out by
the army of occupation against the Palestinian
population. This punishment is in violation of
international and humanitarian laws, which require an
occupying country to ensure normal living conditions
for the occupied population. The newspaper said that
the Israeli practices have become untenable and
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity. It
further said not only that the daily killings occur as a
result of confrontations between Palestinian
demonstrators and the army of occupation, but also that
Palestinians are killed every day in their beds, on the
doorsteps of their homes or on their way to their house,
work or farm.

Every day we see reports of the killing of a
mother or a child or an elderly man in cold blood by
Zionist snipers. These practices are similar to Nazi
practices. They take the form of confiscation of
Palestinian lands, house demolitions, the uprooting of
trees and restriction of the movement of Palestinians
living near settlements. Highways and bypass roads are
built to serve, according to the Red Cross, Israeli
settlements.

I would also like to cite something from
yesterday's edition of the Israeli newspaper, Yediot
Aharonot:

"For some five months now, in the
territories" - that is, the occupied Palestinian
territories - "there has been a slow but
systematic and calculated process of annihilation
of the Palestinian people. Soldiers who have been
trained meticulously to target human beings aim
their guns at eyes and knees to injure but not to
kill, and they cannot discriminate between a
demonstrator and a passer-by. At least 12,000
Palestinian civilians have been injured, become
blind or incapacitated, and many have suffered
the amputation of their arms. These injured will
die slowly, away from the cameras. Some will die
because they cannot find a hospital to treat them;
others will not be able to survive hunger and the
destruction of the infrastructure inflicted upon
them."

If the Zionist occupation forces claim to be
defending themselves, and that they do not kill in cold
blood, why do they refuse to receive international
inquiry commissions, and why do they not cooperate
with such commissions? The Palestinians are expected
to accept the peace of slaves and to live in less than 15
per cent of their historical homeland. They are
expected to be confined to their homes and to observe
curfews while settlers frolic and uproot their trees and
confiscate their land under the protection of the
occupation forces, as is now happening in Hebron.

The Council should not expect any response from
the Zionist occupation army or any halting of their
Nazi-like practices in occupied Palestinian territories,
because the leaders of Tel Aviv are, in the majority,
war criminals. This is a well-known fact. Indeed, there
are calls within Israel itself to put General Mofaz, the
Israeli Army Chief of Staff, on trial as a war criminal,
because he leads daily criminal practices as his forces
carry out assassinations of Palestinians and destroy
thousands of acres of farmland in the Palestinian
territories. Other practices include preventing
Palestinians from leaving their villages for work, or to
run errands, purchase food and medicine or visit a
doctor, because of the closing of exit points with rocks
and trenches.

The hands of General Sharon are stained with the
blood of Arabs and Palestinians, and he is proud of
that. Now he is in a powerful position at the head of the
Tel Aviv regime, resuming his mandate of imposing
faits accompli and scorched-earth policies. A professor
of sociology and political science at Johns Hopkins
University published an article in The Chicago Tribune
last month in which he analysed Sharon and described
him as a war criminal. He cited many criminal acts and
massacres that prove beyond any doubt that Sharon is a
war criminal. The author also cited bloody crimes and
massacres that irrefutably prove, even to his
supporters, that Sharon is a war criminal. The author
also referred to bloody events planned and executed by
Sharon against the Palestinians, such as the massacres
of Kibya, Sabra and Shatila, in addition to his
desecration of Al-Aqsa Mosque in occupied Jerusalem.

What is paradoxical is that at the time the
international community practices double standards,
the world remained silent when the butcher Sharon was
elected as chief of the bloody military institution in Tel
Aviv under the pretext that the elections took place in a
free and democratic atmosphere. But in the case of the
election of a right-wing politician in a European
country where democracy prevailed, there was an
outcry and a condemnation of it in the United States
and in Europe. Diplomatic and trade relations with that
country were threatened to be severed.

The sight of boys and young men who bravely
face one of the mightiest military machines in the
world, one supported by many hegemony-minded
countries, affirms one thing: the Palestinian people
insist on pursuing their resistance to an alien, settler,
colonialist system that is unique in history. The
Palestinians confirm that the usurpers and invaders will
not enjoy their lives because of the usurpation of their
land. They will not forget or forgive the usurpers for
their horrific crimes against them.

As it is debating the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories, the Council should not forget
that the Palestinian people have lived under the longest
term of military occupation in modern history, except
for the Japanese occupation of Korea, and the Council
should not forget its resolutions in order to redress the
injustices suffered by the Palestinians and to uphold
their legitimate and inalienable rights. It must not
forget how the Zionists continue to violate the Geneva
Conventions and to carry out systematic ethnic
cleansing, and it must remember the massacres
committed in Deir Yassin, Sabra and Shatila and the
massacres that are taking place in broad daylight.

In conclusion, we call upon the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibility towards maintaining
international peace and security along the following
lines. First, the Council must take the proper measures
to provide full protection for the Palestinian people
under international law and the Geneva Conventions.
Secondly, the Council must agree to form an observer
force under the aegis of the United Nations and deploy
that force in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, in order to provide adequate
protection. Thirdly, there must be condemnation of the
Nazi-like practices committed by the Zionist
occupation forces in the form of blockades, starvation,
land confiscation, destruction of farmland and cold-
blooded assassination through the use of internationally
prohibited armaments.

Failure by the Council to take a decision now,
under the pretext that it should provide the butcher
Sharon an opportunity for discussion with the
Secretary-General or delay in taking the proper
decision, as one super-Power is doing at present, would
mean that the Council is sending a message of
encouragement to the occupation forces to continue
their Nazi-like practices against Palestinians and is
encouraging them to pursue their policies of
occupation, annexation and confiscation of land,
blockade and starvation and perpetuation of suffering.

