Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation will vote against the
humanitarian troika's draft resolution S/2019/961, on
the cross-border assistance mechanism in Syria.

The draft resolution, which has been renewed year
after year, is obsolete and does not take into account
the changes that have occurred in Syria since 2014,
when resolution 2165 (2014) was first adopted. At the
time, the mechanism was established under urgent
circumstances, when objectively speaking there were
no other ways to deliver humanitarian assistance to
areas of the Syrian Arab Republic that were not under
Government control.

The Syrian authorities have now restored control
over the greater part of their territory, so cross-border
assistance to those areas is no longer necessary. The
crossing at the border with Jordan has not been used
since July 2018. According to United Nations reports
the deliveries through the checkpoint at the Iraq border
are insignificant and could be made through official
checkpoints under Syrian army control or from Syrian
territory itself. Incidentally, I would like to point out
to my German colleague that according to information
in the Secretary-General's report on humanitarian
assistance to Syria (S/2019/949), it is 1 million people,
not 4 million, who are using the cross-border assistance.

I also want to remind the Council that a key
paragraph of resolution 2165 (2014), on United Nations
humanitarian agencies' direct access to the area of
operations, has not been implemented for the entire
existence of the resolution. The militants who still
control some parts of Syria do not allow humanitarian
personnel to enter, preferring to control the process of the
delivery and distribution of assistance independently.
As a result, a significant part of it is not being used
as it was intended. I will say it again. The mechanism
was created as a temporary emergency instrument.
Given the dire situation at the time, it enabled the
informed delivery of humanitarian assistance at a time
when according to international law - article 70 of
Additional Protocol 1 to the Geneva Conventions and
General Assembly resolution 46/182 - humanitarian
assistance was to be provided with the consent of the
official authorities of the recipient country.

Considering the current situation in Syria, it is
essential that we revert to the established parameters
for humanitarian assistance. The second preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution proposed by
the co-penholders contain a reference to the firm
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria. In that case it is
important to also consider the views of Damascus, the
recipient country, as set out in a letter dated 10 December
from Mr. Faisal Mekdad, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, addressed to
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock - and here
it is - which clearly outlines the Syrian Government's
position that keeping the mechanism in its current form
is unacceptable. We cannot all disregard the position of
the recipient country.

From the beginning, the humanitarian troika's
draft proposal has assumed its automatic renewal every
year without providing for its review or adaptation.
It contained, and still contains, provisions that have
nothing to do with the humanitarian component. In
our View, that approach is dictated by purely political
motives. We indicated our overall concerns about the
text in the first stage of the consultations. When we
saw that we could not work with the document as it was
presented to us, we proposed our own version of the
resolution. Our draft resolution (8/2019/962) focuses
exclusively on the humanitarian aspects while reducing
the unused paragraphs on the passage of humanitarian
assistance. I especially want to emphasize something
that we have said repeatedly, which is that our document
does extend the cross-border mechanism. In the past
we did not support it but we did not block it either, in
acknowledgement of the humanitarian needs of the
Syrian population. This year we are willing to support
it. It provides for access to humanitarian assistance in
north-western Syria, where such aid is still essential.
For our part, we have made an effort to meet our
colleagues' concerns.

In response, we received a second and then a third
draft from the humanitarian troika, which still include
provisions that are divorced from reality. This approach
is dishonest. We are obliged to repeat this yet again since
our arguments were clearly not heard by our colleagues
during the preparatory stage for today's vote. However,
we have the impression that our arguments have been
deliberately disregarded. For the sake of humanitarian
goals, we agree to extending the cross-border assistance
mechanism to the areas where it is needed. The six-
month extension will enable all of us to consider what
we can and should do to ensure the effective use of this
humanitarian assistance. And that should not become a
justification for those of our colleagues who are willing
to block the provision of humanitarian assistance for
the sake of the mechanism's mandated timeline.

For the reasons I have cited, we cannot support the
humanitarian troika's draft resolution, and we therefore
call on all who are genuinely interested in preserving
humanitarian assistance in Syria rather than pursuing
political aims to support our draft.

