Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate and by commending the initiative of the
Burkina Faso delegation, which has always defended
the most vital interests of Africa during its terms on the
Security Council. Through the action of the delegation
of Burkina Faso, African Union (AU) decisions have
been assured resonance in the Council.

We would also like to thank other African
members of the Council, Libya and Uganda, for all the
efforts they have made to achieve the same resonance
of African Union decisions in the Council.

We reiterate our thanks to the Council, which has
always dealt with African issues. A case in point would
be today's meeting on the Cote d'Ivoire.

We also commend Mr. Antonio Maria Costa for
his very instructive briefing, which painted a very clear
picture of Africa. There is no need to go back over that
information.
The production and abuse of drugs in many
African countries, which are used as a transit point for
their trafficking and stockpiling, is a great challenge
for Africa. Youth is exposed to serious risks as the
result of trafficking and drug abuse, as well as crimes
associated with that problem such as money-laundering
and human trafficking.

Excessive violence and crimes against humanity
in conflict situations are, to a large extent, exacerbated
by drug abuse. Given that situation, Africa is fighting
incessantly to play its role in combating that scourge.
In fact, the very first ministerial conference of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on the fight
against drugs in Africa, held in Yamoussoukro, Cote
d'Ivoire, had as its primary objective the review and
updating of the action plan that had been adopted
during the thirty-second Summit of OAU Heads of
State and Government in Yaounde, Cameroon, in July
1996.

The conference adopted a new 2002-2006 OAU
action plan to combat drugs. Since that time, the
African Union has followed up on its efforts and the
third regular session of the Conference of Ministers of
the African Union on fighting drugs and preventing
crime was held in Addis Abbas, Ethiopia, in December
2007 on the topic of the renewed commitment in Africa
to combating addiction and drug trafficking and to
preventing crime.

The major result of that session was the revised
action plan of the African Union on trafficking and
drug abuse and crime prevention, as well as its follow-
up mechanism, to be implemented in partnership by the
interested parties at all levels. That plan is fully
integrated as well in the strategic African Union plan for
2009-2012. Priority areas and recommendations listed
and included in the plan clearly place the responsibility
for its implementation on the AU Commission, member
States, regional economic communities, international
organizations, non-governmental organizations and civil
society.

The African plan also includes a multi-disciplinary
approach, one that is coordinated and balanced so as to
resolve the problems of drug abuse and trafficking,
which must be dealt with in the context of African
development beyond the narrow framework of simply
curbing it.

In doing our utmost to find a solution to
addiction, drug trafficking and related phenomenon,
09-63874
the African Union is also emphasizing the principle of
integration, putting the fight against drugs into all
aspects of planning and the implementation of
development, which includes the fight against poverty,
the empowerment of women, alternative development
strategies and HIV/AIDS programmes.

In the light of this fact, a new partnership was
established with the competent organizations, with the
participation of the Organization of American States,
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United
Kingdom and the German agency German Technical
Cooperation, which has launched cooperation by
sharing experiences and best practices in the
framework of alternative development programmes to
eradicate coca and opium and the illegal cultivation of
cannabis.

The African Union also emphasizes the
importance of strengthening institutions, information
on policymaking, research, the establishment of
networks, national capacity-building, oversight and
implementation of the law, regional legislative control
measures and international cooperation. We are pleased
to note, as a number of speakers have emphasized
today, that African countries are undertaking a variety
of legislative measures or capacity-building to
implement legislation on the ground in order to honour
Africa's commitment to combating this phenomenon.
We call on the Security Council and the international
community to support these efforts. We therefore
welcome the presidential statement that was adopted
today (S/PRST/2009/32).

A number of delegations referred to the problem
of regional partnership. We think that such partnerships
are a solution that we should build upon.

As with climate change, we assert that Africa is
once again the victim of a situation - in this case,
drug trafficking - for which it is not responsible. In
fact, as many have noted, the drugs are produced
elsewhere. They come through Africa and are for the
most part consumed elsewhere.

There is one mechanism that we believe we may
be able to continue to develop. The African Union, for
example, in the framework of its cooperation with
South America, has made the issue of fighting drugs
one of its priorities. We also have the South Atlantic
Peace and Cooperation Zone. It is clear that the Luanda
Plan of Action sets out important measures that could
be implemented to facilitate cooperation with South
09-63874
America, and in particular those countries of the
continent where the drugs come from.

We also say to our European friends, with whom
we have very close cooperation and ongoing dialogue,
that drugs are consumed in their countries, so we all
need to join in partnership to address this problem,
which is of concern not only to Africa, but the entire
world.

