Mr. Kim Sook (Republic ofKorea): On this solemn
day, the tenth anniversary of the bombing of the United
Nations offices in the Canal Hotel in Baghdad, I wish
to pay tribute to all those who have lost their lives while
serving the Organization.

At the outset, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for your presence here today and for having
convened this significant debate. I would also like
to express my sincere appreciation to the Secretary-
General; Ms. Pillay, of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights; Ms. Amos,
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs; and Mr. Spoerri, ofthe International Committee
of the Red Cross, for their informative and insightful
briefings.

International humanitarian law requires all parties
to conflict to spare civilians from the effects of armed
conflict. The Council, in its presidential statement on
the protection of civilians (S/PRST/20l3/2), adopted
last February (see S/PV.6917), reiterated its call for
strict compliance by parties to a conflict with their
obligations under international law. However, civilians
continue to account for the vast majority of casualties
in many conflict situations around the world.

The situation in Syria in particular poses a serious
challenge to the protection-of-civilians agenda of the
Council. According to the findings of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab
Republic, murder, torture, rape, forcible displacement,
enforced disappearance and other inhumane acts are
widespread in Syria, and civilians are bearing the brunt
of the tragic hostilities.

Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to
underline the following key points.

First, accountability is the key to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. Those who commit war
crimes, crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable. Impunity
should not be an option. While the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other international tribunals
play a crucial role, the Security Council must also
do its part, including through the referral of relevant
situations to the ICC. In that vein, the Republic of
Korea has declared its support for the referral of the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

Accountability requires verification, investigation
and documentation of allegations of serious violations
of international human rights law and humanitarian law.
My delegation recognizes the significant contribution
made by the international commissions of inquiry and
fact-finding missions, under the auspices of the Human
Rights Council or the Secretary-General, and reiterates
its full support for them. Timely recourse to the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
established by Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions
should also be encouraged with a View to ensuring
more credible information.

Secondly,theimplementationofprotectionmandates
by United Nations peacekeeping missions should be
further enhanced. Valuable progress has been made
in that field since the open debate held last February,
including the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, with a strong protection mandate. In order to
further improve the protection of civilians in conflict,
we need to encourage effective interaction and better
coordination among protection-mandated missions,
host States and humanitarian organizations undertaking
protection efforts in a spirit of cooperation. One step
towards that end will be the increased use of training
modules on the protection of civilians, developed by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, by States
sending personnel to protection-mandated missions.

In that regard, I would like to recall that the
presidential statement adopted in February requested
the Secretary-General to include in his next report, due
in November of this year, an assessment of the concrete
measures taken by peacekeeping missions to implement
their mandates in protecting civilians and the impact of
such measures. I hope that the Council's next debate will
be a valuable occasion to enhance the implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping missions.

Thirdly, the use ofexplosive weapons with wide-area
impact should be avoided in densely populated areas.
My delegation is deeply concerned about the appalling
civilian suffering that explosive weapons cause. It is
disturbing that, as research has shown, more than 34,000
people were killed or injured by explosive weapons in
2012, and 78 per cent of those affected were civilians.
The study found that 58 countries were affected by the
use of explosive weapons, and the most severely affected
countries include Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. My
delegation believes that the international community
needs to intensify its consideration of that issue through
more focused discussions. The starting point should be
gathering and analysing data on the use and impact of
explosive weapons in populated areas.

The Arms Trade Treaty, adopted in April, presents
a timely opportunity for the international community
to address the human cost of the poorly regulated arms
trade by prohibiting the transfer of arms that would be
used in the commission of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and attacks directed against
civilians. The Republic of Korea signed the Treaty in
June and looks forward to its early entry into force.

Before concluding, my delegation would like to
reaffirm the need for continued attention to vulnerable
groups, including women and children. It is deeply
disturbing that sexual violence continues to be a
prominent feature of conflict and remains widespread,
even in many current situations on the Council's
agenda, including in the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Afghanistan,
Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and Syria. As
resolution 2106 (2013), on women and peace and
security, adopted in June, emphasized, accountability
should be ensured for perpetrators of sexual violence
in conflict, and women's political and economic
empowerment should be further encouraged for the
long-term prevention of sexual Violence. To that end,
the Council needs to strengthen its cooperation with
all the relevant bodies in the United Nations system,
including UN-Women and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

