Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC).

I wish to begin by expressing my deep appreciation
to the United States delegation for convening this
critical open debate on children and armed conflict. We
also express out thanks to the Secretary-General for his
latest report (S/2014/339).

Before proceeding further, I would like to just
mention how Islam teaches us to treat children. Like
all major religions and faiths, Islam sees children as
a blessing from God, and they must be received with
joy and gratitude. They are to be loved, nurtured and
safeguarded with great care. Islam accords children
certain rights that must be observed by their parents
and the community. Among the most sacred of these
rights are the right to life and the right to be educated
properly. These teachings resonate strongly in the
Charter of our organization, which calls for the creation
of conditions conducive to the sound upbringing of
children and the youth. Following these teachings, it
is thus deeply appalling to acknowledge that civilian
populations, in particular children, tend to bear the
heaviest consequences of armed conflicts.

It is in this context that I reiterate the OIC's firm
opposition to violence as a way of settling disputes.
We repeat our consistent objection before the Council
over the deliberate targeting of and indiscriminate
or disproportionate attacks against civilians, in
particular children. The perpetrators of such violations
must be held accountable. It is pertinent to note that
the Secretary-General's latest report contains the
opportune message that more must be undertaken at
all levels of cooperation to ease the impact of armed
conflict on children. It should be noted, however, that
global efforts to eradicate violence against children in
times of armed conflict rest upon our ability to settle
conflicts in an expeditious and peaceful manner.

The OIC resolves to continue to play an important
role, together with the international community, in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts. Guided by
its own charter, the OIC stands ready to strengthen
its partnership and to enhance cooperation with the
United Nations, aimed at identifying early warnings
for potential conflicts and to respond effectively to
such identified situations. On its part, the OIC has
made persistent efforts for the maintenance of peace
and security, as well as conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, in its member States. In that respect, we
are pleased to mention our close cooperation with
the United Nations in the efforts to restore peace and
security in such places as Somalia, Afghanistan and the
Sudan.

In 2013, the OIC opened a peace, security
and mediation unit with a view to increasing the
organization's capacity to deal with the increasingly
challenging issues of peace and security. The OIC is
grateful to note that this unit was set up with United
Nations assistance. In the context of the promotion
and protection of human rights, the OIC is steadfastly
committed in its support for its Independent Permanent
Human Rights Commission. That support is an
unequivocal signal of our determination to consolidate
the political, security, economic, social and cultural
concerns of our members.

As the Security Council plays an instrumental
role in ensuring States' compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law, it should step up
its efforts to ensure accountability for violations. It
is clear that observing the principle of accountability
strengthens the protection of children in armed conflict,
as it deters the occurrence and recurrence of violations
and crime.

The OIC therefore reiterates its call on the Security
Council to uphold its responsibilities pertaining to
the children victimized by the Israeli occupation in
Palestine. The Secretary-General's report describes
how Palestinian children continue to be affected by the
prevailing military occupation. Similar accounts and
reports issued by various United Nations mechanisms,
especially the Human Rights Council, continue to
document serious violations of the human rights
of Palestinian children. As witnessed by the entire
world during Israel's recent military aggression in
Gaza, the brutality that was inflicted on families,
including children playing in the open, was self-
evident. That demands robust international attention,
accountability and political resolve. The OIC considers
these highly serious incidents to be part of a failure
of the international community to ensure the broader
protection of civilians, including children, in armed
conflict.

International conflict resolution depends primarily
on the ability ofthe Council to fulfil its responsibilities,
as mandated by the Charter of the United Nations. The
OIC therefore reiterates its call on the Security Council
to act decisively on situations posing a threat or already
impinging on international peace and security. It is
incumbent upon us and the Council to ensure that the
basic rights of children are fulfilled. That also means
that there must be zero tolerance for children being
recruited or dragged into warfare or killed and maimed
in hostilities. It is high time that the international
community made the protection of children in armed
conflict a priority issue for every Government and all
multilateral organizations. The OIC is committed to
this challenge.

I shall end my statement by re-emphasizing the
importance and urgency for all countries, in concert
with the Security Council and relevant United Nations
entities, to fully uphold the protection of children and
their rights in armed conflict. Since the preferred
approach is to ensure that violence does not occur in the
first place, the peaceful settlement of disputes must be
enforced consistently in accordance with the Charter,
as well as established international human rights and
humanitarian law.

