Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We wish, Mr. President,
to express our satisfaction at the way in which you, the
representative of the People's Republic of China, are
guiding the work of the Security Council during the
month of January. We thank you for having organized
this meeting to consider the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

The Permanent Mission of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to the United Nations fully
supports the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We consider that the report by the Secretariat on
the critical situation in the Middle East, in particular in
Palestine, is most timely. This situation is a result of
the systematic refusal by the Israeli governing class to
respect international law or the Palestinian people's
right to peace and territorial integrity, or to respect the
rights of Syria and Lebanon. The Government of Israel
does not seem to realize that by practicing its malicious
policies it is ignoring its own history and showing
disrespect for it.

We believe in peace built by peoples. Peace is not
imposed by force, by threats or by war. In our capital,
two major houses of worship are separated by a few
metres: a mosque and a synagogue. There, the faithful
gather to practice their religion. That scene is
duplicated in many countries around the world. But it
does not seem to be the case in the Middle East. We
have to ask ourselves why.

We wish to stress before the Security Council that
Governments of goodwill are demanding the
achievement of a lasting peace in the region. Within its
mandate under the Charter, the Security Council must
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, comply with
General Assembly resolutions on the Middle East and
withdraw from all the occupied territories. It is crucial
that Israel put a permanent end to the policy of
extermination against the Palestinian people that it has
been carrying out. It must also put an end once and for
all to settlements, blockades, the detention of
Palestinians, the demolition of homes and evictions.
This policy of genocide has been heightened in East
Jerusalem, including through the revocation of identity
cards for Palestinian residents, who have been forcibly
removed.

As the Council knows very well, it is a crime
under international law to force the relocation of
thousands of Palestinians from their own city. In that
context, it is scandalous, to say the least, that some are
trying to ignore the legitimate right of Palestinians to
defend themselves in the face of brutal aggression by
Israel - a regime that even possesses weapons of mass
destruction.

It is important to reiterate that the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela does not recognize Israel's
annexation of East Jerusalem or its effort to have
Jerusalem considered as a unified whole by declaring it
eternal and indivisible.

Also of great concern are the letters from the
Permanent Representatives of Lebanon and Syria to the
Secretary-General in December 2009 and January of
this year (S/2009/686 and S/2010/4 respectively)
informing him of the ongoing violations committed by
Israel on their respective territories. Syria has even
condemned an Israeli plan to occupy additional Syrian
territory in the Arab Golan and to Judaize its population.

It is right to ask why, in other conflict situations
and even in those outside its purview, this body acts
with such speed, and even disproportionately. Why is
there this complicit silence, this inaction when Israel's
failure to observe all norms of international law and
the Charter of the United Nations is so obvious? We
should ask the Council what importance it attaches to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice on the wall, or to the conclusions and
recommendations of the Human Rights Council's Fact-
Finding Mission on Israel's terrible and aggressive
policies of extermination against an innocent people, or
even to the Security Council's own report on Israel's
responsibility in that horrendous situation.

Some of the victors of the Second World War
sacrificed the Palestinian people without a second
thought. Without consulting them, they decided that the
Palestinians had to share their land with people of
various nationalities who had only their religion in
common. The United Nations owes an historic debt to
the Palestinian people. As a Member State of the
United Nations, we demand that the Security Council
consider the implementation of Chapter II of the
Charter of the United Nations.

Given the record - which has been thoroughly
considered over the decades in meetings of this
Council as well as of the General Assembly - of grave
violations of international law in general, to the
detriment of the Palestinian people and of the countries
of the region, like Syria and Lebanon, we should ask
whether, if the State of Israel is mom propio capable of
complying with the obligations of the Charter of the
United Nations, it is prepared to do so. We should also

ask whether the Security Council has taken the
necessary preventive or coercive steps to limit the
privileges of the State of Israel as provided for under
Article 5.

We ask the Security Council to look into the
implementation of Chapter II of the Charter and to
recommend to the General Assembly some of the
actions provided for under it. This body's silence in the
face of the Israeli Government's daily massacre of
innocent Palestinians has cast doubt on its role as
guarantor of international peace and security. We urge
the Security Council to regain its legitimacy in dealing
with the issue before us today, to carry out its functions
and to adopt the decisions that, under the Charter of the
United Nations, are necessary to definitively restore
peace to the Middle East.

