Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We have returned to this
Chamber once again to discuss a specific and grave
aspect of the disturbing situation in the Middle East.
Pakistan believes that the construction of the separation
wall in the occupied Palestinian territories is illegal. It
entails enormous humanitarian suffering for the
affected Palestinian people and seriously undermines
the prospects for a just and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute.

A fundamental principle of international law
flowing from the United Nations Charter is the
illegality of the acquisition of territory by the use of
force. Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
resolution 338 (1973), and all subsequent international
agreements on the Middle East, have been based on
this principle and require Israel's withdrawal from
Arab-occupied territories.

The Quartet's peace plan is also based on the
principle of Israeli-withdrawal from occupied
Palestinian territories, in exchange for the
establishment of a durable peace.

The separation wall being built in the occupied
Palestinian territory, in effect, incorporates substantial
areas of the occupied West Bank into Israel. The wall
does not follow the Green Line. There is a contention
that the wall is a temporary measure being constructed
to enhance security for Israel against terrorism. This is
not a tenable argument. There would be no terrorism if
there were no foreign occupation. The objective we
fear is indeed to pre-empt a solution of the Middle East
conflict on the basis of the principle of land for peace.

The Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights, John Dugard, in his 30 September 2003
report to the Commission on the situation of human
rights in the Palestinian territories occupied by Israel
since 1967 states:

"The wall has all the features of a
permanent structure. The fact that it will
incorporate half of the settler population in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem suggests that it is
designed to further entrench the position of the
settlers. The evidence strongly suggests that
Israel is determined to create facts on the ground
amounting to de facto annexation. Annexation of
this kind, known as conquest in international law,
is prohibited by the Charter of the United Nations
and the Fourth Geneva Convention."
(E/CN.4/2004/6)
Article 47 of the Fourth Geneva Convention
clearly stipulates:
"Protected persons who are in occupied
territory shall not be deprived, in any case or in
any manner whatsoever, of the benefits of the
present Convention by any change introduced as
a result of the occupation of a territory ...."

The 1995 Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement
on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip states that neither
party will "change the status of the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip pending the outcome of the permanent
status negotiations" and that the integrity and status of
the West Bank and Gaza Strip territory "will be
preserved during the interim period". (Article XXX], final clauses 7 and 8)

Apart from being illegal from the perspective of
these international and bilateral legal instruments, the
separation wall is inconsistent with Israel's
commitment under the road map.

The road map obligates the Government of Israel
to immediately dismantle settlement outposts erected
since March 2001 and "Consistent with the Mitchell
report freezes all settlement activity (including natural growth of settlements)". This commitment is
both clear and non-negotiable. The wall spurs, not
stems the growth of settlements and outposts.

The separation wall will bring enormous suffering
to the Palestinian people living in the West Bank. The
special rapporteur has calculated that more than
210,000 Palestinians will be seriously affected by the
wall. According to him,

"Palestinians living between the wall and the
Green Line will be effectively cut off from their
farmlands and workplaces, schools, health clinics
and other social services. This is likely to lead to
a new generation of refugees or internally
displaced persons." (E/CN.4/2004/6)

There is little doubt that the wall separates the
Palestinians from their own cities and resources. It
isolates, fragments and in some cases impoverishes
those affected by its construction. In order to obtain the
land on which the wall is being constructed in the West
Bank, private Palestinian property has been
requisitioned pursuant to military orders. This is in
flagrant violation of humanitarian as well as human
rights law.

Politically, the wall will pose yet another and
probably the most daunting challenge to the
implementation of the Quartet's road map. The
Secretary-General recently described the separation
wall and the settlements as "serious obstacles to the
achievement of the two-State solution." (SG/SM/8913)

In Security Council consultations, some members
earlier have cautioned that construction of the wall
amounted to pre-empting the final settlement
agreement under the road map and creation of realities
on the ground. We agree with this assessment.

A viable Palestinian State, as envisaged in the
Quartet's road map, cannot be established in the
bantustans that will be created by the separation wall.
The peace which Israel seeks will not result from the
continuing illegal occupation and suppression of a
Palestinian population in these lands which is hostile
and aggrieved.

It is imperative to recognize that the separation
wall is an unlawful annexation of occupied Palestinian
territory. It must be declared illegal by the Security
Council, and the Government of Israel must be asked to
cease, and reverse, its construction. We do not believe
that terrorism is an excuse for the construction of that
wall; certainly, it will not stop State terrorism against
the Palestinian people.

The security situation in the Holy Land is grave
and threatening. It warrants immediate attention and
urgent action by the international community, and
especially by the Security Council. The taboo of
terrorism should not be misused to circumvent the
peace process. The peace process, which we have all
supported, must be rescued. The parties must be
brought back to full and faithful implementation of
their commitments under the road map, which should
lead to the realization of our vision of two States, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security within recognized borders.

