Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): At the outset, since this
is the first time that we are speaking under your
presidency, Sir, allow me to congratulate you on your
assumption of your duties. I should also like to
congratulate the previous President, the representative
of Pakistan, on his excellent work.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding countries Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia, the
associated countries Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey,
and the European Free Trade Association countries
belonging to the European Economic Area Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway declare that they align
themselves with this statement.

We welcome Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi's briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We
should like to stress that the continuous and unabated
interest and involvement of the international
community - especially through the Security
Council - is of paramount importance if that area is to
finally achieve peace, stability and prosperity.

On this fourth anniversary of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), let me reiterate that full
implementation of that resolution remains the
cornerstone ofthe European Union's policy on Kosovo.
Building a democratic, multi-ethnic and multicultural
Kosovo with full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights is our stated course of
action. The "standards before status" policy provides
the agreed framework for achieving those objectives.

Terrorism and violence - be they ethnically,
politically or criminally motivated - will not be
tolerated. We unequivocally condemn incidents such as
the recent killing of two 80-year-old Kosovar Serbs
and their son in the village of Obilic. We welcome the
condemnation by all parties in Kosovo of that act of
violence, as well as Prime Minister Rexhepi's visit to
Obilic. We expect all parties to do their utmost to
ensure that the perpetrators are soon brought to justice.

A Kosovo where members of minority
communities are oppressed will face a bleak future of
self-imposed isolation. Our efforts should aim to
establish appropriate security, economic and legislative
conditions that will allow minorities to be - as they
should be - an integral part of Kosovo's political,
economic, social and cultural life, while making the
return of refugees feasible and sustainable.

Organized crime is the single most urgent
challenge that we must address in the region. Coupled
with extremism, and with deep roots in the area's
political and social life, organized crime threatens the
very foundation of the principles and values that we are
trying to instil in the new institutions formed there,
thus rendering our efforts fruitless.
Political stability in Kosovo requires the building
of stable institutions through the establishment and
strengthening of local democracy. We fully support the
process of transfer of competencies to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government, as set out in chapter 5
of the Constitutional Framework, and taking into
account the capacity of those institutions to handle
them. Building effective, transparent and accountable
institutions for the benefit of all communities, while
adhering to the obligations arising from Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework, and not prejudging the final status should
be our main objectives.

The European Union is strongly committed to
securing peace, security and the right conditions for
political and economic development in the region by
enhancing its European perspective through the
Stabilization and Association Process. The
Thessaloniki Summit, to be held on 21 June, will focus
on precisely that European perspective, which is aimed
at promoting both regional ownership and regional
cooperation, including dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina.

