Mr. McNee (Canada): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this important debate. Let me also join
others in thanking the Secretary-General for his
important report (S/2009/304) and warmly welcome
his personal commitment to peacebuilding. I should
also like to thank the representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank
for their insightful contributions earlier in the day.
09-41816

Canada has a long history of contributing to

United Nations peacekeeping and peacemaking. That

underpins Canada's strong commitment to

peacebuilding, which is also reflected in Canada's

chairing the country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Sierra Leone.

In that vein, we welcome the Secretary-General's
report on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict as an important step forward for peacebuilding
at the United Nations. The report is a call to action that
points to areas in which the United Nations and the
international community have been either unresponsive
or disjointed.

Over the past decade, the international
community has come to recognize that the fragility of
States in the immediate aftermath of crisis represents
both a central development challenge and a potential
threat to global stability. Failure to adequately address
the early recovery needs of fragile States threatens to
deepen poverty, increases the risk of a relapse into
violence, and poses real threats to regional and
international stability.

At the same time, attention to the early recovery
agenda does not and must not occur in a vacuum. In
this regard, it is significant that this debate comes after
the recent publication of the Secretary-General's report
on conflict mediation (S/2009/189) and during ongoing
discussions about the future of United Nations
peacekeeping.

The benefits of investing in peacebuilding are
increasingly clear, and Sierra Leone is an excellent
example of the real progress that is possible when the
international community works in unison to support
strong national leadership.

Peacebuilding is a complex, multifaceted task.
While the focus of peacebuilding will vary from case
to case and across time, the key pillars remain the
same. The first is restoring the capacity of the State to
provide public goods to its citizens, including justice
and the rule of law, basic social services and an
enabling economic environment. The second is
rebuilding the legitimacy of the State by ensuring the
democratic accountability of political leaders to their
citizens. The third challenge is to bring about social
reconciliation through proactive efforts to heal the
wounds left by conflict. Fourthly, rapid economic
revitalization must provide jobs and a future to weary
populations and ex-combatants. The final and perhaps
most important component is visionary political
leadership that puts the interests of the country and its
people above all else.

Given this context, the report's critical
contribution is to emphasize cooperation, coordination
and coherence. International actors must pursue
common priorities based on an agreed assessment of
the situation and a clear understanding of roles and
responsibilities. Special effort must be made with the
World Bank to clarify respective responsibilities for
core peacebuilding sectors. Strengthening leadership
teams in the field is an important step towards
improving the United Nations contribution. Canada is
also encouraged by the emphasis placed on the Post-
Conflict Needs Assessment as a unified and inclusive
assessment tool.

Establishing durable peace and prosperity is
difficult without a functioning State. Building peace is
the primary responsibility of national actors. Canada
welcomes the recommendations of the report to urge an
initial assessment of existing national capacity, bolster
capacity for development efforts, and support national
oversight of international assistance. Canada also urges
peacebuilding actors to consider how the expertise
resident in diaspora communities can be better
mobilized during post-conflict recovery. During this
critical period, more can be done to utilize the
strengths of regional organizations, and to encourage
greater South-to-South cooperation in support of
peacebuilding.

This raises an important issue, that is, timely
access to effective technical assistance. The Secretary-
General's report (S/2009/304) offers useful
recommendations for improving support to United
Nations personnel in the field. Existing experience
with models such as the Standing Police Capacity, the
Mediation Support Unit, and the Justice Rapid
Response mechanism should also be applied to other
areas of need. Closer cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations also offers great promise.
The international community should also re-examine
how bilateral and multilateral civilian response
mechanisms such as expert rosters can be better
coordinated and respond more quickly to crises.

(spoke in French)

The Secretary-General has identified core
peacebuilding objectives, including support for basic
security, political processes, essential services,
governance and economic revitalization.

Questions of transitional justice and national
reconciliation are central for post-conflict
peacebuilding. Local populations must have access to
formal and informal structures that facilitate communal
healing and address abuses committed during the
conflict. An effective justice system is also critical for
fostering accountability, building trust in national
institutions and establishing basic security. Above all,
international assistance must help establish legal
institutions that embrace transparency and respect for
human rights. In this respect, Canada warmly
welcomes the report's emphasis on the full
participation of women and children in the
peacebuilding process and on the protection of their
human rights.

Improved financing is crucial. The creation of the
Peacebuilding Fund was an important step in this area,
and work is also under way in the Development
Assistance Committee of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), to
clarify best practices in post-conflict assistance.
Canada also welcomes both the recent revision of the
Peacebuilding Fund terms of reference and the
Secretary-General's recommendations for the Fund.
Rapid and flexible financing now may help prevent the
need for more expensive interventions later.

The report also has significant implications for
the Peacebuilding Commission. In our opinion, the
Commission remains underutilized, and it is important
to reconsider its role in the immediate post-conflict
period. Greater ambition with respect to the nature and
scope of the work of the Commission is warranted. The
Commission has the potential to be a central and
effective actor with respect to the prioritization,
coordination and support of peacebuilding strategies.
We should not be willing to settle for less.

In conclusion, it is now up to the United Nations
system to implement the recommendations in the
report. It will be important to provide regular updates
to Member States on progress being made. In other
areas - notably national capacity-building, civilian
rapid response and financing - Member States must
also take the lead. As a committed member of the
Peacebuilding Commission and a major donor to the
Peacebuilding Fund, Canada stands ready to support
these efforts.

