Ms. DiCarlo: Less than a month ago, when I last
briefed the Security Council on the situation in Ukraine
(see S/PV.8386), I brought to the Council's attention the
reports of increased tensions in the Sea of Azov and
underlined the need to avoid any risk of escalation,
provocation or miscalculation. Regrettably, a serious
security incident took place yesterday near Crimea,
close to the Sea of Azov. I wish to underline that the
United Nations currently cannot independently verify
the circumstances surrounding the incident. However,
reports indicate that an incident involving three
Ukrainian vessels and at least one Russian vessel took
place on 25 November near the Kerch Strait when the
former attempted to enter the Sea Azov. Although the
exact number remains unclear, several Ukrainian sailors
were reportedly injured in the event. Ukraine claims
that it had previously notified the Russian Federation
of its intent to sail those vessels to the Ukrainian
port of Mariupol in the Sea of Azov, which requires
entry through the narrow Kerch Strait. Meanwhile,
the Russian Federation claims that Ukraine provoked
the incident and that Russia acted in accordance with
international law. According to media reports, the
Ukrainian ships and their personnel are currently being
held by the Russian authorities. Ukraine's National
Security and Defence Council has since recommended
the declaration of martial law. We understand that
the decision remains subject to ratification by the
Verkhovna Rada, which is meeting today.

The waters of the Sea of Azov were claimed as
being historically internal waters of both Ukraine
and the Russian Federation where vessels of the
two countries have enjoyed freedom of navigation.
However, tensions have risen in and around those
waters since the annexation of Crimea in 2014, which
has been the subject of several General Assembly
resolutions. In September 2016, arbitral proceedings
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea (UNCLOS) were instituted by Ukraine against the
Russian Federation with regard to

"a dispute concerning coastal State rights in
the Black Sea, Sea of Azov, and Kerch Strait".

The Russian Federation argues that the Sea of Azov
and the Kerch Strait are not subject to the UNCLOS
arbitral tribunal.

The United Nations is deeply concerned about
this escalation of tensions, which is taking place in
the broader context of the conflict in eastern Ukraine
and the annexation of Crimea. During our previous
briefing to the Council we urged all parties to avoid any
unilateral steps that could deepen the divide or depart
from ofthe spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements. In
that context, I wish to reiterate that the United Nations
fully supports the lead role of the Normandy Four, the
Trilateral Contact Group, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and other key actors to find
a peaceful settlement. I also wish to reiterate our call for
renewed and constructive action by all those concerned
to overcome the apparent impasse in diplomatic
negotiations. The United Nations underlines the need to
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions.

Regrettably, yesterday's incident only threatens to
cause the situation in and around Ukraine to deteriorate
further. We strongly urge both the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to refrain from any ratcheting up of actions
or rhetoric. We remind both of the need to contain this
incident so as to prevent a serious escalation that may
have unforeseen consequences. At this juncture, the
immediate de-escalation of tensions in the Sea of Azov
and the Black Sea is required. It is critical that earnest
attempts be made to find a peaceful settlement to the
situation, based on the diplomatic and legal means
available and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.

