Mr. Dinh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to thank this afternoon's three briefers for their informative and important statements. In the period under consideration, there were positive developments in Somalia that have given rise to hope for greater security and stability. Viet Nam welcomes this and believes that with sustained efforts from the Government and regional and international partners, this progress will contribute to better promoting security and the livelihoods of the people. Cautious optimism is required, however, and more efforts are needed. Traditional and non-traditional threats to stability and development remain a significant concern, mainly due to the unrelenting terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab. Better synchronization between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states is also needed in the interests of the implementation of the ambitious national priorities and, as Mr. Smith just noted, the country continues to be vulnerable to the adverse impact of climate change and various shortages. National food security and livelihoods are at risk amid the recent surge in desert locusts. In this regard, wish to make _ the following observations. we First, we support the efforts by the Government and other political leaders of Somalia for national unity and reconciliation. We join the call upon all parties concerned to make further efforts to engage in a constructive dialogue, for the sake of security, sustained stability and development in Somalia. We therefore commend the recent meetings between President Farmajo and other political leaders and look forward to their continued efforts and specific follow- up actions. Secondly, we commend the progress made in the preparations for national elections in 2020, with the signing of the electoral bill on 21 February by the President of Somalia. It is significant that the bill allows all people and political parties, especially the political representation of women and minorities, to take part in the electoral process, including at least a 30 per cent minimum quota for women parliamentarians. Thirdly, we strongly condemn all forms of violent extremism and terrorist attacks by Al-Shabaab in Mogadishu and the region against civilians, Government officials and international forces. We emphasize the need to step up efforts to counter the continued threats from terrorism and tackle the flow of illegal arms to terrorist groups. In addition, more effective security measures are needed to protect civilians, especially women and children. In this regard, we also welcome the recent engagement between the Government of Somalia and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, and the Panel of Experts on Somalia. Fourthly, the rapid shifts from severe drought to flooding have negative impacts on populations that are already vulnerable due to chronic poverty and conflict. We support the flood-response plan launched by the United Nations and the Federal Government of Somalia in December 2019, and we call on international partners to support the Federal Government in mitigating current and future risks and alleviating the suffering caused by weather-related crises. In that connection, wecannot emphasize enough the need to address the deep- rooted economic issues facing Somalia, especially in agricultural development. Only by doing so can we help the Government and the people of Somalia overcome long-term challenges and maintain sustained stability and security. Last but not least, we reiterate the importance of assistance from and coordination with regional and international partners in these important undertakings by the Somali Government. We commend the work of and reiterate our support for the African Union Mission in Somalia, the European Union Training Mission for Somalia, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United Nations country team and Special Representative to continue their support for Somalia in maintaining peace and stability and ensuring further development.
