Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon) (interpretation from Arabic): I wish on behalf of my delegation to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of September. I wish also
to pay tribute to the efforts of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Germany, as President of the
Council last month.

We wish to express our appreciation of the fact that
members of the Security Council promptly consented to
hold this meeting to consider the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The events of recent days, which
have left scores of dead and wounded, undoubtedly
constitute a grave turning point in the situation in the
region. We were not surprised by this Israeli escalation: on
several occasions we have warned that the leaders of Israel
are not interested in peace, that their expansionist aims in
various guises - such as security - stand above all other
Israeli interests. They wish to impose new principles
incompatible with the peace process that began in Madrid.

We had hoped, during the holding of the Madrid
Conference in 1991 and the development of the principles
and foundations of the peace process, to see a new era in
our region in which a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
would prevail. The Arab parties took part in this process in
good faith, but Israel's relentless colonialist aims and its
policy of expansion and seizure of territories have dashed
these hopes. Indeed, the new Israeli Government dealt a
nearly fatal blow to these hopes when it expressly declared
that it was reneging on the commitments underlying the
peace process, resumed the settlement process, refused to
resume peaceful negotiations that had continued despite all
obstacles, and took measures to annex East Jerusalem. The
opening of the tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque threatens
not only the security of the Mosque itself, but also
international peace and security in the region and in the
world.

We have repeated on several occasions that the Holy
City of Jerusalem is crucial to the peace and security of the
region because of its religious, emotional and historical
significance and its importance to Palestinians, Arabs,
Muslims and Christians of all ages throughout the world.
Strengthened by this conviction, we would like to state the
following.

First, we are in full solidarity with the Palestinian
people. What is happening today confirms once again that
this people rejects occupation, no matter the occupation
force.

Secondly, the current problem is not a chance
development; it is the result of Israeli policies and the
Israeli mentality. Consequently, in order to face these
problems, we must adopt a position in the international
community, as represented by this Council, clearly
reaffirming to Israeli leaders that we reject attempts to
annex East Jerusalem as well as colonization or settlement
activities in other occupied Arab territories. In asking for
this, we are in fact serving future peace in the region:
Showing indulgence to the Israel leaders could result in
violence against Israelis and Arabs alike. Our position is
in accordance with Security Council and all international
resolutions, as well as with the principles of international
law, which remains the very basis of the civilized world
today.

We believe that the Council is duty-bound to act to
ensure the implementation of the provisions of the Charter
and resolutions it has adopted in the past, in accordance
with one standard and as it has done in other areas of the
world. Resolutions 242 (1967), 267 (1969), 271 (1969),
298 (1971) and 476 (1980) have all declared null and
void Israel's administrative and legislative measures and
its attempts to annex Jerusalem.

Thirdly, the pretext of security put forward by
Israelis to justify their settlement and expansionist
measures, which underlay the events that just took place,
has proven misguided, since those steps have led to an
escalation of violence and a worsening of tensions. What
peace can exist under continued occupation? Faits
accomplis imposed by force are not viable and are
doomed to failure. True peace is at hand if we act on the
bases we all agreed upon. These bases, set out together in
Madrid - first and foremost the exchange of "land for
peace" and the implementation of international
legitimacy - reaffirm the need for Israel to return Arab
occupied territories, including Jerusalem and the Golan up
to the line of June 1967, pursuant to resolution 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), and for it to withdraw beyond
Lebanon' 5 internationally recognized borders, pursuant to
resolution 425 (1978).

We in Lebanon reaffirm that we shall never agree to
any proposal, new or old, that threatens our national
policy. Lebanon will continue to reject any attempts to
exclude other Arabs, especially Syria. Meaningless
slogans calling for peace and meetings should not allow
Israel to continue its settlement policies without the
criticism of international public opinion.

 

Fourthly, we call on both States that sponsored the
Middle East peace process to play their roles, not only in
calming things down in the occupied Palestinian territories
and convincing Israel to close the tunnel, but also in
revitalizing the peace process and resuming it at the point
at which it stopped and in accordance with the Madrid
principles and the principle of "land for peace", pursuant to
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978).

What is happening in the Palestinian occupied
territories is only one link in a large chain of continued
violence in our region. It is not enough to calm spirits.
Dozens of civilians were killed in southern Lebanon during
Israeli bombings aimed against one of the United Nations
posts and which caused the death of hundreds of people.
Violence is continuing every day in southern Lebanon
because of Israeli occupation and dozens of people are
being killed in Palestine today. We urge the sponsors of the
peace process to pursue it in accordance with the principles
approved in Madrid with a View to achieving a just, global
and lasting peace in the region.

Fifthly, the Security Council must shoulder its
responsibility to preserve peace in the region. We are
asking for the Council to adopt a resolution and to follow
up on its implementation. If this Council does not adopt
such a resolution, it will be forced to meet again very soon
because the violence will continue.

We are asking for a resolution that clearly expresses
the international community' s condemnation and opposition
to Israeli policy, to the annexation of Al-Quds and to the
expansion of settlements. This resolution should require
Israel to comply with the international rule of law.

We should also adopt a clear-cut position that reflects
the determination of the international community to
continue with the peace process on the basis of the Madrid
principles, especially the principle of land for peace.

The Security Council is called upon to shoulder its
historic responsibilities because time is short and is not
working in favour of peace. What is happening in the
region does not threaten only the people of the region. We
would also like to urge through the Council, all the parties
involved to act in a serious-minded manner and to take
steps to convince Israel to return to the Madrid principles.
