Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
add our words of thanks to the Under-Secretary-
General for his briefing. These humanitarian updates
are very welcome, and they serve as an important
reminder to the Council of the human cost of conflict.

The Under-Secretary-General's account today
shone a very sobering and much-needed spotlight on
two of the worst humanitarian crises that we face
today - one a new humanitarian emergency, and the
other a crisis that we must not forget, even as the
prospects begin to look potentially less bleak. The
United Kingdom has made both Somalia and Uganda
priorities in the allocation of our humanitarian
assistance, and we invite others to do the same.

I would like to make a few brief remarks on
Somalia and Uganda. First, with regard to Somalia, the
United Kingdom deeply regrets the deaths of Ugandan
peacekeepers in Somalia on 16 May. We remain
committed to providing financial and logistical support
to the African Union Mission in Somalia as it tries to
help to bring peace and stability back to a country that
has known little but conflict for so long. The Under-
Secretary-General's briefing set out in stark terms the
desperate situation faced by the displaced in south and
central Somalia, many of whom are vulnerable to

malnutrition and to diseases such as cholera. This
should only strengthen the determination of Security
Council members and partners to play our part. In
particular, we believe that we must make clear to those
in the region their responsibility for ending the
hostilities, initiating, as John Holmes emphasized, a
genuinely inclusive political process and facilitating
the free movement of aid and humanitarian workers
into, out of and throughout Somalia.

The United Kingdom is conveying these
messages - which were set out clearly in the Security
Council's presidential statement of 30 April
(S/PRST/2007/13) - to the relevant parties at the
highest level, and we again invite Security Council
partners to join us in doing so.

The United Kingdom welcomes the agreement
given by President Yusuf to the Under-Secretary-
General on a visit by a team from the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to investigate accusations of human rights violations.

Let me turn now to northern Uganda. The United
Kingdom welcomes the Under-Secretary-General's
early visit to an area where conflict has caused massive
humanitarian suffering for nearly two decades. The
security situation in northern Uganda has improved
significantly over the past few months, but well over 1
million people still live in very difficult conditions in
camps for internally displaced persons, and we should
not forget that. We welcome the Under-Secretary-
General's discussions with the Government of Uganda
on its obligations to communities in the north.

The prospect of securing a lasting peace
agreement is self-evidently a desperately important one
for the population of northern Uganda, and one that we
should do all we can to help deliver. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of the Special Envoy, President
Chissano, which played a pivotal role in securing a
resumption of the Juba peace talks on 26 April. It is
also encouraging that both sides agreed to an extension
of the cessation of hostilities agreement. The
international community must maintain political and
logistical support for the Juba talks and must urge both
sides to stay focused on delivering a comprehensive
peace deal. We believe that the Council must remain
engaged and supportive, given the scale of the
humanitarian and security implications across the
region. As the Under-Secretary-General said, the
challenge ahead is to move from conflict and
emergency relief to peace and development.

