Mr. Strommen (Norway): Let me congratulate
you, Mr. President, on convening this meeting
regarding the annual report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly. Norway continues to attach the
highest importance to transparency in the working
methods of the Security Council. The full sharing of
information and views with the wider membership of
the Organization on the issues before the Council is a
pivotal aspect of the Council exercising its mandate. In
this regard, let me also pay tribute to the delegation of
Singapore for its effort to enhance technical aspects of
the work of the Council, including the annual report.
Norway fully supports the draft report as presented.

Above all, the Security Council is a political
organ at the disposal of Member States to resolve
conflicts representing a threat to international peace
and security. This also implies that the working
methods of the Council may need a certain degree of
flexibility in order to facilitate creative approaches
suited to the challenges at hand.

During the past year the Council has dealt with a
vast number of issues. To a considerable degree, public
meetings have been used as a means of sharing
information and views on those issues. However,
Norway continues to believe and argue that an even
larger proportion of the briefings and material prepared
by the Secretariat could and should be made directly
available to the wider membership.

The positions of the Government of Norway on
the various issues on the Council's agenda are well
known through our earlier specific deliberations. I will
not spend our valuable time repeating those positions
here today. Rather, I will focus on areas in which the
Council has taken important steps through the use of
three particular mechanisms at its disposal.

First, to enhance the cooperation with troop-
contributing countries, the Council regularly convenes
consultation meetings prior to mandate considerations,
in accordance with resolution 1353 (2001).
Importantly, the troop-contributing countries assume
the political and personnel risk associated with United
Nations operations and must therefore be consulted
fully by the Council. It is imperative that this include
early consultations at the stage where plans are made
and proposals formulated in the system. To this end,
the Council in January of this year established a new
mechanism for more such informal consultations. As
the Chair of this mechanism, I encourage all major
troop-contributing countries to fully explore this
vehicle for engagement with Council members, as well
as with the Secretariat. Importantly, the new
mechanism allows for troop-contributing countries
themselves to raise emerging issues, as they see fit. We
saw this being played out in full in August when the
mechanism was utilized on the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone.

Secondly, the Council has on two occasions in
2002 visited areas of conflict or areas emerging from
conflict in Africa. In February, under the leadership of
Ambassador Kolby, a full Council met with Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia and President Isaias
Afwerki of Eritrea. The meetings took place on the eve
of the border decision, in accordance with the Algiers
Agreement. The border decision was subsequently
embraced by both sides and is currently being
implemented in close cooperation with the United
Nations. In May, under the leadership of Ambassador
Levitte, a full Council met with leaders of the Great
Lakes region in order to promote peace in the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Recently, we have seen steps in the right direction
taken by several of the involved parties, in accordance
with the encouragements provided by the Council. The
Council continues to be actively engaged on these
issues. The missions to Ethiopia and Eritrea and the
Great Lakes have illustrated that Council missions are
a useful tool for engaging the parties to certain
conflicts. Based on these useful experiences, we fully
support the concept of Council missions. At the same
time, cognizant of the concerns related to costs raised
by some non-members of the Council, we would be
favourably inclined to reduce the size of such missions
to a representative core consisting of some six to eight
members.

Thirdly and finally, the Council, in July of this
year, mandated a panel of experts to provide
independent information on violations of the arms
embargo on Somalia with a View to improving its
enforcement. Panels of experts can in certain instances
provide independent and authoritative information,
alerting the international community to activities that
undermine the quest for peace. As such, the panels may
play an important role in forcing actors to pay a
political price for actions that run counter to the
objective of peace.
Through membership on the Council, Norway has
consistently sought to raise the Council's attention to
the Somalia problem. The country has been without a
central Government for more than 10 years and the
arms embargo established by the Council in 1992 has
hardly been enforced. The steps taken by the Council
this year have thus been long overdue. These steps
must be further built upon in order to restore the
United Nations credibility Vis-a-Vis that wartorn
country. The ongoing efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to bring peace and order to
Somalia, through the conference facilitated by Kenya
on 15 October, has wide support from the international
community. Importantly, the United Nations must stand
ready to do its part to assist fully and actively in
Somalia's return to normalcy. Norway will continue to
contribute actively to the issue of Somalia as part of an
overall focus on African issues.

