Mr. Djinnit: It is a distinct honour and privilege
to introduce to the Security Council the report of the
Secretary-General (8/2010/324) on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), and
to brief the Council on the overall peace and stability
situation in the subregion during the past six months. I
am particularly pleased that this meeting is being held
under the auspices of Nigeria, the country currently
assuming the chairmanship of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

When I briefed the Council six months ago (see S/PV.6256), West Africa presented a mixed picture of
positive developments and less encouraging trends,
thus raising legitimate concern about the prospects for
consolidating peace and stability in the region. Indeed,
a presidential election was pending in Togo in an
2

atmosphere of deep anxiety and widespread tension. A
constitutional crisis was evolving in Niger with little
prospect for a consensual solution. The situation in
Guinea was deteriorating, while existing and emerging
challenges such as food insecurity, drug trafficking and
criminal activities, including terrorist acts, were
affecting the lives of large segments of the population
in the subregion.

Since then, West Africa has made significant
progress in crisis prevention and peacebuilding amidst
daunting difficulties and persistent challenges. Over
the past six months, the global economic recovery has
supported economic growth in West Africa. However,
this growth has yet to be translated into effective and
sustainable poverty reduction programmes, while
prospects for achieving the Millennium Development
Goals remain weak. In addition, the ongoing food
crisis is affecting millions of people in the Sahel,
particularly in Niger, where over 7 million people -
an estimated 60 per cent of the country's population -
face the threat of famine and are in the midst of a
serious food, nutrition and pastoral crisis.

On the political front, the holding of peaceful
elections in Togo and the subsequent formation of a
new Government with the participation of part of the
opposition, as well as the continued commitment of the
authorities of Niger to the transition programme
scheduled to end in March 2011, are encouraging signs
of progress.

During the reporting period, great emphasis was
also placed on addressing the crisis in Guinea, where
the process towards constitutional order has been
moving forward. Despite the numerous hurdles
encountered, the first round of presidential elections
was organized peacefully on 27 June. I am proud of the
collaborative efforts by different United Nations
entities in supporting the Guinean transition process,
including through the financial support of the
Peacebuilding Support Office and by initiating security
sector reform (SSR). Now that the country is preparing
for the second round of the presidential election, the
United Nations should continue to provide the much-
needed support for completing the electoral process in
a smooth and peaceful manner, and more importantly,
develop a framework for sustaining democratic
governance and promoting development beyond
elections.
10-44726

Needless to say, stable and peaceful democratic
governance in Guinea will have far-reaching
implications for regional stability, especially in
consolidating hard-won peace in Sierra Leone and
Liberia and in enhancing efforts to address the ongoing
crisis in Guinea-Bissau. I wish to seize this opportunity
to commend the International Contact Group on
Guinea for its valuable contribution to the transition
process, particularly the critical role played within that
Group by members of the Council.

The Office has also focused on key cross-cutting
and cross-border issues that are affecting peace and
stability in the subregion. In this regard, UNOWA
established a regional network of practitioners to assist
West African countries in the area of security sector
reform. This network has so far made a contribution to
the development by ECOWAS of its regional SSR
framework and to the preparation of the SSR
assessment process in Guinea. These are only initial
steps which need to be reinforced in order to respond
to the growing needs of the subregion in this field. That
is all the more important in view of the linkages among
SSR, democratic governance and the fight against drug
trafficking, another priority area in which the Office
has been working closely with ECOWAS and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

The recent seizure of two tons of cocaine in the
Gambia, with the assistance of the United Kingdom,
and the arrest of suspects in the United States who
were planning to smuggle four tons of cocaine to
Europe and North America through Liberia are
evidence of the increasing commitment of the West
African States to fighting the scourge of drug
trafficking and of the vital importance of international
cooperation. These developments are indeed very
encouraging, bearing in mind the continuing evolution
of drug trafficking methods and the possible
connections with other organized criminal activities,
including acts of terrorism, especially in the Sahel
band and beyond.

The Office pursued its efforts to promote the role
of women in consolidating peace and stability in the
subregion, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and all
subsequent resolutions. In particular, UNOWA engaged
women's associations and leaders in Guinea in support
of the transition process, including the conduct of
peaceful elections.
10-44726

Allow me to conclude by making four
observations. First, the recent progress made in
consolidating peace and stability in West Africa
highlights the role that UNOWA plays as an effective
regional tool of the United Nations for conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.

Secondly, this progress has been achieved, first
and foremost, thanks to the commitment and sacrifice
of the people of the region and its leaders. It has also
been effectively supported through the excellent
collaboration that UNOWA has forged with ECOWAS,
as the leading regional institution, and the African
Union, which in the case of Guinea has contributed to
galvanizing the international community into concerted
action to help move the transition process forward.

Thirdly, recent experience in the subregion has
shown that opportunities for crisis prevention and
sustainable peace are available now more than ever
before. Indeed, international assistance and capacity-
building programmes, such as support to SSR, electoral
assistance, the promotion of human rights and
cooperation in the fight against drug trafficking and
organized crime could provide, in my view, useful
entry points for conflict prevention.

Fourthly, despite significant progress in peace
consolidation, West Africa remains at a crossroads,
owing to the persistence of the root causes of conflicts
in the region, such as social disparities, ethnic tensions
and governance challenges, which risk undermining the
progress achieved. This requires the continued support
of the international community, including the United
Nations, to maintain the momentum for peace and
stability in the subregion.

Finally, I wish to thank the members of the
Council for their continued commitment to peace and
security in West Africa and their tireless efforts
towards addressing the challenges the subregion faces.

