Ms. Diallo (spoke in French): My name is
Assitan Diallo. I am President of the Association of
African Women for Research and Development, a
non-governmental organization working to promote
women's rights in Mali. 1 address the Security Council
today from a country that has suffered from bloody
conflict since 2012, but has been ravaged by violence
and instability for almost a decade. As I have learned
from my own work, it is women and young people who
pay the highest price when it comes to war.

My statement today will focus on three key issues:
first, access to justice for survivors of gender-based
violence; secondly, the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in all aspects of peace and
security; and, thirdly, ensuring that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) are able to respond to the security needs of
our communities.

As has been well documented, gang rape and
early and forced marriage, as well as the abduction of
women and girls to serve as sexual slaves, are part of
the broad panorama of gender-based violence in Mali.
Despite the overwhelming evidence available, none of
the key players in this regard - neither the authorities,
nor the armed groups that signed the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in Bamako in 2015,
nor the international community - have done enough
to ensure justice for those women and young people,
who face such abuses on a daily basis. The insecurity
that prevails in areas such as northern and central
Mali is currently preventing judicial authorities from
returning there, where some have been abducted,
tortured or killed. In addition, armed groups seek to
undermine basic human rights obligations by exploiting
religious laws at the local level, thereby undermining
State secularism and jeopardizing the provision of real
justice to survivors of gender-based violence.

There can be no peace or development in Mali
without gender equality. Despite the legal requirement
to ensure a 30 per cent representation of women
in all processes and institutions supporting the
implementation of the Bamako Agreement, this quota
is far from being respected. Similarly, the processes
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform must be gender-sensitive and
include an equal representation of women to guarantee
that their needs and experiences are truly taken into
account. The current underrepresentation of women
in the G-5 Sahel's defence and security structures
prevents Malian women from fully contributing to
peace and security in the region. Finally, the inclusion
and active engagement of women - especially young
women - is particularly important in countering the
risk of marginalized and disenchanted youth turning
to violence.

There is widespread frustration due to MINUSMA's
inability to effectively protect civilians, as well as
a general sense of insecurity, despite the presence of
United Nations and regional forces. Youth attacks on the
MINUSMA camps in Gao and the categorical refusal of
a Bamako district to allow the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
to establish a headquarters there - out of fear that
they would become targets of violence - demonstrate
the lack of trust that the local populations have in
international forces. It is clear that MINUSMA's
presence does not make people feel secure. In addition,
MINUSMA, like the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, is mandated
to mainstream gender across all aspects of its work.
MINUSMA still needs to do more to address the gender
dimensions of security, while the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
must ensure that its gender unit is capable of robustly
defending women's rights across the Sahel region.

Marginalization, inequality and poverty are the
root causes of the current conflict and compound the
pervasive insecurity gripping Mali. In order to address
these challenges, MINUSMA needs to provide stronger
support to the Government in order to enable it to
deliver basic public services to communities in need
and to ensure long-term security. That requires ongoing
political dialogue with armed groups and the active
participation of civil society, as well as the support of
the United Nations and other international actors. While
the neutrality of MINUSMA, which is at the heart of
its mandate, is crucial, most Malians also want to see
MINUSMA assume its role of protecting civilians and
guaranteeing their security in an effective manner.

Finally, as has been noted in the reports of the
Secretary-General and highlighted by other speakers
before the Council, the militarization of the Sahel is
not helping to establish peace in the region - and it
certainly cannot occur to the detriment of the security
of local populations, who are all too often trapped in
the middle of such operations. That only fuels cycles
of violence and mistrust, while making dialogue
more difficult.

I shall share all of my recommendations with the
Council in writing, but I would like to highlight just
one of them here today. I call on the Security Council
to hold the leadership of MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force accountable for the protection of civilians
and gender mainstreaming across all their operations.

The solution to the complex dynamics of the
conflict in Mali will not be found on the battlefield, but
must emerge from dialogue and genuine regard for the
concerns of ordinary people. I urge Security Council
members to use their power to make that happen.

