Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the delegation of
Greece for taking the initiative of organizing this
meeting. I also wish to thank Mr. Egeland for his
briefing. It is always with great interest that we listen
to him as he explains the situation on the ground.

At the outset, I would like to commend the
progress that has been made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The humanitarian response of
the United Nations and its partners is today more swift
than in was the past. But the improvement made should
not lead us to forget reality. The briefing just given to
us by Jan Egeland reminds us of the reality that the
situation in certain parts of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has produced one of the most lethal
humanitarian crises in world. That continues to be a
matter of great concern.

Given the scale of the movement of displaced
persons and refugees, I would first like to emphasize
the basic principle of the voluntary return of refugees
to their countries. That principle must always be very
closely monitored.

We are also concerned about the needs of local
populations that suffer the burden of large numbers of
displaced persons.

The involvement of children in the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is of particular
concern. It is my hope that Congolese authorities,
United Nations agencies and the main donors will
quickly implement the recommendations just made by
the Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict.

My delegation would like to reiterate its support
for the work of United Nations agencies in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as for the
United Nations 2006 Action Plan. We urge the
Congolese Government to become closely involved in
the implementation of the Plan of Action.

Of course, we must also strengthen the
coordination of international assistance and United
Nations programmes, so as to ensure that humanitarian
assistance can meet the needs of the entire country.

I also think we should welcome the return of
institutional donors to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including the European Commission and the
World Bank. I am pleased that donors are prepared to
reinvest following the transition that has taken place
with regard to infrastructure and basic services.

My country welcomes the ceasefire agreement
signed on 26 August between the Government of
Uganda and the LRA rebellion. That agreement is a
first step towards a final resolution of the conflict in
Uganda. However, the search for peace should be
reconciled with the need not to guarantee impunity,
especially for those responsible for the most serious
violations of international humanitarian law.

On the humanitarian front, France is dedicated to
the social reintegration of child soldiers - especially
those unfortunate girls who have been raped - as well
as to the provision of psychological assistance.

My delegation welcomes the work done by
UNICEF, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Ugandan Human Rights
Commission in accordance with resolution 1612
(2005).

