Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to sincerely thank our three briefers for their very
insightful statements, which highlight the attention
that the Security Council must continue paying to the
situation in the Central African Republic.

France is concerned about the ongoing acts of
violence committed by armed groups in Bangui and
in surrounding areas against civilian populations,
humanitarian workers and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA). We are also
concerned about efforts to incite hatred and violence and
to use religion for criminal purposes. We will continue
to closely monitor developments in the situation. In that
regard, we believe that it is essential that the Security
Council continue to show its full support for President
Touadera and the Central African authorities in their
efforts to foster national reconciliation and restore
State authority, which are both key to the success of
the process under way. It is also vital to continue to
encourage the Central African authorities to work
to restore justice, disarm armed groups and rebuild
the country's economy. As worrisome as the current
situation is, we should not disregard the fact that
progress has been made and that a solution to the crisis
is possible.

Violence perpetrated by armed groups continues
to destabilize the country. It is accompanied by
unacceptable human rights violations and causes the
humanitarian situation to continue to deteriorate. It is
therefore essential that all armed groups in Bangui and
in the rest ofthe country stop all efforts to destabilize the
country, as they are at variance with the commitments
made before the panel of facilitators of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic.

The Council's message to armed groups must be
extremely strong. They must lay down their weapons
and make an immediate and unconditional commitment
to the peace process. They should know that they will not
go unpunished for the Violence they perpetrate. I recall
that the Security Council has tools to impose sanctions
on those who seek to undermine the stability of the
Central African Republic and are responsible for inciting
violence and attacks against civilians, humanitarian
workers or MINUSCA. In that regard, I would also
like to underscore the urgency of implementing the far-
reaching African Initiative road map in order to reach a
comprehensive political agreement.

Following the two field missions to meet with the
armed groups, it is now vital to move towards direct
discussions with the Central African Government and
the armed groups within a framework of an inclusive
dialogue with other segments ofCentral African society,
in particular women, whose participation in the peace
process is crucial. To that end, we call upon the African
Union and all States of the region to continue providing
support at the highest level so as to ensure that the next
steps to implement the road map will be successful.

All efforts to bring about peace and stability
in the Central African Republic also depend on the
restoration of State authority in all administrative,
security or judicial areas. It is therefore more Vital
than ever to continue to provide support to rebuild the
Central African defence and security forces. We call on
our Security Council partners to support the option for
MINUSCA to assist the Central African forces trained
by the European Union Military Training Mission in
the Central African Republic (EUTM-RCA) in their
gradual and managed redeployment. That is an essential
point to restore the authority of the State, on which
all else hinges. Last November, in resolution 2387
(2017), the Council requested the Secretary-General to
prepare recommendations on the subject, and they were
provided on 15 May. It is now up to us to study those
recommendations in detail to then implement them. I
take this opportunity to commend the excellent work
carried out by EUTM-RCA.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reaffirming France's full support for MINUSCA and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for their exemplary
efforts. MINUSCA operates in a difficult environment
but plays an indispensable role, whether in protecting
civilians, supporting the peace and reconciliation
process, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
aid or supporting the Central African Republic's
recovery. Unfortunately, the Blue Helmets pay a
heavy price for their commitment; five have been
killed since the beginning of the year. I would like to
once again pay tribute to them and to all troop- and
police-contributing countries.

In that context, while new contingents have
arrived in the Central African Republic, and others
will soon follow, to strengthen MINUSCA, France
stresses the importance of using those additional
reinforcements, as authorized by resolution 2387 (2017),
to give MINUSCA greater mobility and manoeuvring
capabilities, particularly in the protection of civilians.
In that sense, with regard to the protection of civilians,
France welcomes the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA
to improve its performance and continue the work
already under way with troop-contributing countries
to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and abuse and
ensure that they do not go unpunished. Those efforts
must continue.

Lastly, France remains very attentive to the issue
of children in armed conflict in the Central African
Republic, and welcomes the progress achieved by
MINUSCA, especially with the signing of an action
plan by 1 of the 14 armed groups to put an end to grave
violations against children, including their recruitment
and sexual violence, and the release of several thousand
child soldiers since 2014.

I would like to conclude my statement by reiterating
the importance for the Council and the international
community to remain mobilized and united with a
View to achieving lasting peace in the Central African
Republic. Maintaining our mobilization and unity is a
precondition to a lasting solution to the crisis, which is
within our collective reach.

