Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin my statement with the
idea that Mr. O'Brien used to finish his statement.
Mr. O'Brien said that the humanitarian tragedy was the
consequence of a political failure. We can only agree
with that idea. Did they think of the consequences
when they invaded Iraq, which led to the formation of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)? Did
they think of the humanitarian consequences when
they created a spiral of violence in Syria, or when they
filled the country with weapons, not shying away from
giving support to terrorists, who turned into the main
anti-Government forces?

The humanitarian situation continues to be very
difficult. The Syrian Government, under very difficult
military conditions caused by a war that is being waged
by terrorist groups and other illegal armed groups
incapable, or unwilling, to dissociate themselves from
them, is doing everything it can to ensure that the
civilian population has a more or less normal life. It
is doing this despite the unilateral economic sanctions.

We can only call heroic the work of the Syrian
Red Crescent. Significant work has been undertaken
by specialized United Nations agencies and through
bilateral cooperation with new countries that have
become involved. Russia continues to provide active
humanitarian support to the Syrian people. Last
week, poor families in the town of Marmarita, Horns
province, received 2 tons of humanitarian aid, 6 tons
was given to a home for children in Aleppo and an
airdrop provided 17 tons of United Nations aid to the
town of Deir ez-Zor, which has been besieged by the
terrorists. Work is under way to define the parameters
for humanitarian pauses, including a 48-hour ceasefire
in Aleppo, together with the participation of United
Nations specialized agencies. Nevertheless, we strongly
believe that the humanitarian pauses must not be used
by fighters to replenish their resources and regroup, as
has taken place in the past. We hope that the sponsors
of the opposition will be able to ensure that those
groups show willingness to negotiate and respect the
conditions of any future agreements.

We continue to work for intra-Syrian reconciliation.
According to data from the Russian centre for
reconciliation of opposing sides in Hmeymim, the
number of towns that have joined the reconciliation
process has now increased to 444. In the past 24
hours, agreements were signed with representatives
of five towns in the provinces of Latakia and Homs.
The number of armed groups that have indicated their
commitment to the cessation of hostilities has remained
unchanged at 69. The agreement has been respected in
most provinces of the Syrian Arab Republic. However,
its full implementation continues to be impeded by
terrorist organizations such as Jabhat Al-Nusra, ISIL
and those cooperating with those terrorist groups.

It is still obvious to us that radically altering the
humanitarian situation in Syria will be impossible
unless we continue the fight against the terrorists. We
must ensure that the moderate opposition is uncoupled
from the ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra terrorists. Back in
February, our American colleagues promised to do
that, but they have not yet done so. Jabhat Al-Nusra
has changed its name to Jabhat Fateh Al-Sham, but
nothing has changed in substance. In that respect,
we are very concerned at the statement of the so-
called High Negotiations Committee welcoming
this step, which shows there are links between them
and terrorists. The Security Council has, on many
occasions, taken decisions according to which those
who are on the side of terrorists or support them should
themselves be considered terrorists. That is a basic
principle. We stress that focusing efforts on countering
terrorism does not mean that we should underplay the
importance of providing humanitarian aid or prevent it
from happening.

I would like to recall that, working with the Syrian
Government, we have established six humanitarian
corridors for the peaceful population, who, if they
wish, can leave eastern Aleppo. However, in order
to ensure a lasting resolution to the humanitarian
situation in Aleppo, it is vital not to allow the use of
the humanitarian channels to supply terrorists with
fighters, munitions and weapons. Unfortunately, we
have encountered such misuse in the past, when, during
pauses, extremists have resupplied and restocked their
stockpiles. Therefore, we also need to strengthen
control over freight movements across the Turkish-
Syrian border.

The difficult situation facing the civilian population
in Syria is the result of a long-running war, and it can
be ended only through political means. But how is
the situation any better for, for example, the civilian
population in Yemen? It is clear that weeping over some
tragedies while fuelling others is a deliberate approach
utilized by certain capitals. What have those who talk
loudly about the humanitarian situation in Syria done
in order to resolve it? We do not hear any accounts from
them of what has been done to achieve specific results
in that country. Where is the pressure on the opposition
to stop the use of such horrible methods for waging war
and the use of hellish explosive devices and suicide
bombers? When has the opposition been called upon to
enact a ceasefire, in Damascus for example? What work
is being done with supporters of Ahrar Al-Sham to have
them cease their actions and implement the Istanbul
four towns agreement and allow aid to enter areas that
are besieged? Have they demanded that the opposition
put an end to preventing civilians from leaving eastern
Aleppo through the humanitarian corridors set up under
the Russian initiative? The Islamists are not allowing
the civilian population to leave and are targeting the
corridors. Rather than putting practical pressure on the
fighters, some are putting up a media curtain around
the terrorist and criminal activity taking place.

Unfortunately, some members of the Security
Council at times conduct their discussions improperly,
dishonestly, making provocative insinuations in the
Council with regard to Russian Air Force operations,
but they do not mention their own illegitimate actions.
As is well known, on 19 July, aircraft of the coalition
led by the United States bombed a town in the area
of Manbij, with more than 90 strikes, resulting in the
deaths of dozens of people and injuries to hundreds of
others, including women and children. Armed groups
of the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces besieged the
town, with street fighting in residential areas, and no
assistance was given to the Syrian population. The only
way they could get out on 19 July was to pass through
the firing directed against them, and approximately
200 people were killed.

Nevertheless, no steps to avoid the death of civilians
have been taken by the coalition. On 28 July, coalition
air strikes against Al-Ghandour led to the death of 28
civilians, including seven children, and left 10 more
wounded. Since then, and for the second time, we have
been discussing the humanitarian situation in Syria,
but not a word has been said about the events and the
participation of the opposition. We would like to call on
our Western partners to stop their rhetoric and to look
in the mirror more often, look at what they are doing
and what the people they sponsor are doing. If they do
that, then maybe the tragedy will end.

In conclusion, it is necessary to continue efforts to
encourage parties to reach a peaceful solution on the
basis of international agreements. We call upon all those
who have any influence on the opposition to convince
them to adopt a negotiating position that will allow them
to truly move forward to a political settlement. Without
that, and without effectively combating terrorism, the
necessary radical improvement in the humanitarian
situation in Syria is impossible.

