The Secretary-General: I am grateful to the
Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today's meeting. It
comes at yet another crucial period in the evolution of
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, as the whole region is
threatened by violent conflicts and extremism.
Over the years, we have seen determined efforts
to achieve a comprehensive, negotiated peace based on
a two-State solution. Instead of peace, however, there
have been decades of missed opportunities and failures
that have come at an enormous human cost. The
prospect of a two-State solution continues to recede,
with potentially explosive consequences. In the coming
weeks, a new Israeli Government will be formed. I
strongly urge the incoming Government to reaffirm
Israel's commitment to the two-State solution and to
take credible steps to foster an environment conducive
to a return to meaningful negotiations, including a
freeze of settlement activity.

I welcome the agreement reached last week
between the Palestinian Authority and the Government
of Israel, under which Israel has now transferred more
than $470 million in revenues collected on behalf of
the Palestinian Authority. I wish to underline, however,
that the recurrent withholding of such revenues is
counterproductive and seriously undermines the
ability of the Government of Palestine to carry out its
responsibilities. I urge the parties to find a sustainable
solution on tax collection in line with the Paris Protocol
of the Oslo Accords.

Seven months since my last visit to Gaza, I continue
to be concerned by the fragile security situation, the
lack of progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and
the pace of reconstruction. Gaza is facing a crushing
financial crisis. Public sector employees remain
unpaid. The impact of the conflict and of extreme
poverty on Palestinians in Gaza has been severe. I
urge the international community to support a second
humanitarian payment to Palestinian civil servants in
Gaza as an integral part of the necessary and agreed
crucial reforms.

I welcome ongoing efforts to promote Palestinian
reconciliation. The Government of National Consensus
must assume its leadership of Gaza, including control
of border crossings. Until the crossings are fully
reopened within the framework of resolution 1860
(2009), the temporary Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism
shall continue to serve as a critical tool to alleviate the
suffering of Gaza's people. To date, the Mechanism
has enabled approximately 70 per cent of households
in need of shelter repairs to procure the necessary
materials. Additionally, 60 of 130 projects funded by
the international community and the private sector have
been approved by Israel, with six of these currently
under way.

These are promising developments, yet the
needs remain enormous. Despite the generosity of
some donors, critical funding gaps threaten stability.
Humanitarian agencies are struggling to raise the
$720 million needed for temporary shelters for 100,000
internally displaced people. Without immediate
funding, the World Food Programme will be forced to
suspend its food assistance to 95,000 Palestinians in
Gaza by July. Gaza's water and energy supply is also
perilously unstable, with no long-term solution in sight.
I again urge donors to fulfil pledges made in Cairo last
October.

In the West Bank, clashes between Israeli
security forces and Palestinians continue, along with
the destruction of Palestinian-owned structures.
Administrative detentions are increasing at an alarming
pace, including the recent arrest of and charges against
a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council. Such
realities feed frustration and tension in a vicious cycle
that undermines the path to peace. Both sides need to
see more constructive actions, such as Israel's recent
approval of a master plan for building 2,500 housing
units and public buildings for the Palestinian population
in East Jerusalem. Such steps can help to reduce
pressure, but they also need to lead to tangible results.

The international community must do more to
promote a return to negotiations that will end nearly
half a century of occupation and allow two States,
Israel and Palestine, to live side by side in security and
peace. I am encouraged by current discussions among
Member States. The United Nations is committed to
supporting such efforts.

Both sides face difficult choices. But one choice
stands above all others: whether to choose peace or
the death, destruction and suffering that have defined
the conflict for far too long. Too many lives have been
lost, too many families have been destroyed, too many
livelihoods have been shattered and too much distrust
has been sown. Ultimately, the parties themselves must
demonstrate the commitment and courage necessary to
chart a viable course towards a better future.

