Argentina thanks the Government of France for organizing today's debate on the essential topic of the comprehensive protection of children in the context of conflict, on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. It also thanks Special Representative Virginia Gamba de Potgieter and UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore for their briefings. We also express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his most recent report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525) and its annexes. Argentina firmly supports the Organization's work to prevent, avoid and stop the six grave violations of children's rights in the context of armed conflict. In that regard, our country was one of the first States to ratify, in 2002, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and supported the adoption of resolutions 1261 (1999), 1612 (2005), 2143 (2014), 2225 (2015) and 2427 (2018). Argentina therefore stresses the relevance of resolution 1612 (2005) and the creation of the monitoring and reporting mechanism as a fundamental tool for the protection of children. I would like to highlight the coordinated action of the Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and the tasks carried out by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General with the collaboration of UNICEF and other agencies of the United Nations system, which is reflected in the progress made in the area of prevention and protection of the rights of children. Accordingly, we appreciate the important work of the "Act to protect children affected by conflict" campaign and the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers initiative as key tools for strengthening collaboration between the United Nations, civil society and the international community in support of actions designed to end and prevent grave violations committed against children in armed conflict and to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable reintegration that is oriented towards the needs of children and takes a humanitarian, peace and development approach. Argentina welcomes the rescue ofa total of 13,200 children who were separated from non-State actors and armed forces in 2019, the prevention of the recruitment of children at risk and the release of children detained for being associated with or suspected of belonging to armed groups, as mentioned by the Secretary-General in his most recent report. However, despite the great work done and the progress made, several challenges remain to be confronted. Argentina shares the serious concern of the Secretary-General about the alarming number of more than 25,000 grave violations against children verified during 2019 and the great increase in the number of children affected by the denial of humanitarian access as a result of violence against humanitarian workers, restrictions on their movements and impediments to the performance of their work. Preserving access to medical care and safeguarding health personnel and medical and surgical supplies, in addition to allowing medical evacuations, is essential to safeguarding children's lives. We also express our concern and strongly condemn cases of killing, maiming and sexual violence perpetrated against children. In this regard, it is necessary to recognize the increased exposure of girls and boys to sexual violence in conflict situations and to bear in mind that all responses to this scourge must focus on the needs of survivors and ensure access to essential health services and to justice. Argentina expresses its concern over the increasing number of kidnappings of children. Not only does kidnapping constitute a serious violation in itself, but it also gives rise to other violations, such as forced labour, sexual slavery and military recruitment. Kidnapping is also used as a means of punishing civilian populations. Argentina condemns the attacks perpetrated against schools and hospitals, whose number nearly doubled, according to the report. Education is critical to the development and full enjoyment of human rights, and access to safe education supports the protection of children from the dangers of armed conflict, helping them to reach their potential and contributing to building more resilient and peaceful communities. Argentina firmly believes that the scourge of attacks on schools in all their manifestations can be confronted only through international cooperation, within the framework of unrestricted respect for human rights, international humanitarian law and international law. In that regard, Argentina reiterates its firm support for the Safe Schools Declaration, adopted in May 2015 and promoted by Argentina and Norway, which has been endorsed by 104 States. The Declaration commits States to implementing the Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict, thereby ensuring the right to education and the protection of children and young people in conflict situations. We recall that the Secretary-General has called on all countries to endorse the Declaration and note that the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict has indicated that the endorsement of the Declaration has contributed decisively to the adoption of concrete measures to prevent attacks on education. Argentina supports the Secretary-General's 23 March global appeal for peace, in which he stressed the urgent need to "put armed conflict on lockdown and focus together on the true fight of our lives". Peace is the best protection we can give to our children. We reiterate the urgent need to agree on and implement measures to increase the international community's pressure on State and non-State actors that commit violations against children, in order to demobilize, separate, rehabilitate and reintegrate children associated with such groups, in collaboration with their respective communities, within the framework of absolute respect for international humanitarian law, international human rights law and refugee law. In order to ensure the full protection of children, a human rights-based approach to protection is essential and should guide the mandates of peacekeeping operations and special political missions, the peacebuilding actions of the Security Council, as well as efforts aimed at combating terrorism and violent extremism. In this regard, it is essential to develop, maintain and strengthen capacities in the field of peacekeeping operations in the areas of prevention, protection, assistance, advice, documentation and verification of violations of children's rights. Likewise, it is of crucial importance to strengthen the role of child protection advisers, who carry out a fundamental task in the implementation of Security Council mandates on child protection. In conclusion, we highlight and support the work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and of the Global Coalition for Reintegration of Child Soldiers in advancing this important initiative as it provides us with a renewed and comprehensive understanding of reintegration. It is crucially important that we adopt both a comprehensive approach to reintegration, understanding it not only as immediate humanitarian assistance but also as a long-term commitment, and gender-sensitive integration programmes that include mental health, psychosocial support, education and access to justice as key aspects of sustainable reintegration. In this regard, it is essential to meet the urgent need to come up with concrete actions to comply with the cross-cutting principle of "leaving no one behind" set forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We firmly believe that an inclusive approach to society as a whole, focusing on the collective commitment and coordinated efforts of all stakeholders, is a key factor in achieving the sustainable reintegration of all children, on the basis of humanitarian assistance, development and peace.
