Mr. Sall (spoke in French): I would just like to
say that it is true that currently the first problem facing
the implementation of the Moratorium is the need to
maintain the strong political involvement that existed
at the outset of this effort. I believe that, as the
problems have become increasingly serious, we must
continue to encourage political commitment on the part
of the States and Governments of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

With regard to the technical questions that have
been raised, I believe that the most difficult challenge
we experienced was overcoming the ministerial
competition that arose in each country with regard to
the chairmanship of national commissions. That caused
us delays in many countries. As sovereignty issues are
often negotiated by ministries for foreign affairs at the
same time that operations are carried out by defence
and security ministries, it is not always easy to
harmonize the problems that arise between the various
ministries in an effort to have them understand each
other and engage in collective efforts. That was not an
easy thing to do. In fact, we worked on this issue quite
a hit this year.

I also wish to refer to the availability of
resources. I believe that one of the major constraints
facing national commissions is the lack of necessary
resources, beginning with human resources. Civil
servants are appointed and are also responsible for
other duties on a full-time basis: they work in
ministries and public administration and therefore
cannot systematically manage a programme to combat
the proliferation of arms. But we have seen that even
though civil servants may be otherwise occupied, the
roles of facilitators and coordinators have made a
difference. On the issue of financial resources, every
operation I have mentioned - including training,
border control, establishing registers and collecting and
destroying arms - stems from national commissions,
which actually carry out operations on the ground. Our
resources are therefore quite limited. I wish to
emphasize that only Guinea - and, to a lesser extent,
Mali - have been able to mobilize strictly bilateral
financing from donors to dedicate to programmes to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in their countries. Other ECOWAS countries
are financed through national commissions solely from
the funds that the Programme for Coordination and
Assistance for Security and Development (PCASED)
can provide them. The idea is therefore to assist every
country to establish a national programme that will
make it possible to organize the mobilization of
resources from international community donors.

In that vein, I am pleased to report to the Security
Council that the Programme is trying to establish a
national portfolio on non-proliferation in the 15
countries. We would hope to organize a round table
some time around December 2003, at which we would
invite the international community to assist us to face
up to security issues on a country-by-country and
programme-by-programme basis, while bearing in
mind the specificities of each country.

