Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I welcome you back
to the Security Council, Madam President. I also thank
Special Coordinator Mladenov and Commissioner-
General Krahenbiihl for their respective briefings.

Since the Council's previous monthly meeting on
this issue (see S/PV.8517), we have witnessed the worst
violence in Gaza since 2014. The United Kingdom was
gravely concerned about that escalation, during which
both Israeli and Palestinian civilians were killed. We
utterly condemn all rocket fire from Gaza towards
Israel, and we are clear that it must stop. It is ultimately
the ongoing decision by Hamas to embrace violence
and reject the Quartet principles that lies at the heart of
the Gazan tragedy. The United Kingdom's support for
Israel's right to self-defence is unequivocal, but we are
equally clear that Israel's action must be proportionate
and guard against civilian casualties.

We welcome to ceasefire brokered by the United
Nations and Egypt and support their efforts to
maintain calm. We urge all parties to demonstrate
restraint and make progress towards reaching a long-
term agreement. As well as creating fear among the
Israeli and Palestinian populations and damaging the
prospects for peace, this hopeless cycle of violence
further undermines the humanitarian situation in Gaza.
Against that backdrop, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) is a necessary humanitarian and stabilizing
force in the region, providing vital services to millions
of Palestinian refugees.

The United Kingdom remains a firmly committed
supporter of UNRWA and Palestinian refugees across
the Middle East. We will do everything we can to
maintain the continuity of essential services at this
time. The United Kingdom almost doubled its original
core support for UNRWA last year and, over the next
two years, the United Kingdom will provide the Agency
with up to $100 million. We also recognize the need for
UNRWA to reform in order to ensure its sustainability.
UNRWA has undertaken significant cost-cutting
measures to respond to budget cuts and growing need.
We welcome UNRWA's efforts to broaden its donor
base. We encourage others to step up with more funding
and predictable disbursements.

The United Kingdom remains worried about the
impact of Israel's decision to withhold tax revenues
from the Palestinian Authority (PA). The Israeli
decision will have significant consequences for stability
and security. It is impacting ordinary Palestinians and
risks exacerbating the already dire humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza. The United Kingdom
continues to have concerns about aspects of the
Palestinian system of payments to detainees. We
encourage the reform of the system to be needs-
based, transparent and more affordable. But that is not
justification for withholding agreed tax revenues.

A stable Palestinian Authority is in the interests of
both Palestinians and Israelis. This is the PA's money.
We encourage Israel to reconsider this decision, or find
other ways to counteract the risks, while abiding by all
signed agreements. Given that the risk of fiscal collapse
is very real, we also urge the PA to accept the remaining
tax revenues. We welcome the calls made at the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination ofInternational
Assistance to Palestinians for enhanced dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian Governments to
address the current fiscal crisis, as well as the offers
made to assist the parties in addressing the outstanding
fiscal issues adequately and urgently.

The United Kingdom continues to believe that
substantive peace talks between the parties leading
to a negotiated two-State solution, based on the 1967
borders, with agreed land swaps, Jerusalem as a
shared capital and a just, fair, agreed and realistic
settlement for refugees, is the way to end the Arab-
Israeli conflict, provide security and justice to both
Israelis and Palestinians and preserve Israel's Jewish
and democratic identity.

I want to thank the representative of the United
States for his comments, including on the proposed
meeting in Bahrain. We look forward to studying the
United States Administration's proposals for a viable
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement that addresses the
legitimate concerns of both parties.

In order to have the best chances of success, the
peace process must be conducted in an atmosphere free
from violence. We call on all parties to work together
to maintain calm.

