Mr. Egeland (spoke in French): Allow me, first
of all, to express my most sincere condolences to the
Government and citizens of the Russian Federation for
the fearsome suicide attack that occurred this morning
in Moscow.

I would like to express my great gratitude to the
members of the Security Council for their sustained
interest in the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I am very encouraged by the ongoing interest
demonstrated by the Council during this meeting. A
number of members emphasized the central role played
by the protection of civilians in the Council's activities,
and we are extremely grateful. I am also very touched
by the Council's unanimous support for the road map
and the aide-memoire.

I note the concern expressed by the representative
of France, as well as a number of other representatives.
I share that concern about the politicization of
humanitarian access. As many speakers have stated,
access is essential in the protection of civilians.

(spoke in Spanish)

As this was my first opportunity to hear the
opinions and ideas of the members of the Security
Council, I am very grateful to the Council for the
advice members have offered for my future work in
turning principles into reality for vulnerable
populations in areas of conflict on several continents.
Allow me to comment on a few of the topics raised in
this important debate.

The representatives of Spain, Chile and Mexico,
among others, focused on the need to create a culture
of protection and concrete mechanisms to protect
women and children in particular. Those speakers
underscored the seriousness of sexual violence against
women and children. As I said in the briefing, that is
one of our most urgent priorities. We require the
Council's ongoing valuable support in that regard.

Mexico, as well as other members, also spoke of
the need to consistently and comprehensively address
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement and the trafficking in small
arms from a regional perspective. That is another
important area in which we hope to work in close
cooperation with the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

I am grateful to representatives who gave
perspectives on advocacy in respect of access by and
security of humanitarian workers. I wholeheartedly
agree that that must be addressed far more
systematically in all our operations. It is important that
we convey the right message to all parties to a conflict
and reinforce our impartiality and neutrality. I will be
taking this forward with my colleagues within the
Secretariat and in the humanitarian agencies. I've also
taken note of your concern that we continue to develop
across the United Nations system a clear, coordinated
approach to the delivery of effective protection of
civilians, as urged most recently by Canada, Norway
and others. We also welcome the call for robust action
at the national, regional and international levels against
those who break the rules and attack humanitarian
personnel.

My Office will also give more thought as to how
we can respond to the suggestion made by the
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom and
others about developing a framework that establishes
indicators of compliance with international
humanitarian refugee and human rights law. By the
next report, I hope that we will be able to outline
concrete elements of an information system to provide
systematic reporting to the Council on the effectiveness
of the current protection of civilians framework, both
institutionally and in specific field situations.

We will further consider how to address to the
next Secretary-General's report the suggestion by
Pakistan for regular and specific information on the
scale, the locations and allocated responsibilities in
areas where protection of civilians is a major concern. I
welcome the support that I heard for integrating
protection of civilians into Security Council
peacekeeping mandates. This makes an important
difference to our work on the ground.

Finally, while the role of the United Nations is
unquestionably important for the protection of
civilians, I am grateful to the representative of China
and others for reminding us that it is the Member States
of the United Nations and the parties to conflicts that
bear the primary responsibility. Many statements in the
Council today have called for robust implementation
and resourcing of measures to strengthen the protection
of civilians on the ground by all parties to conflicts.
With that in mind, I am extremely grateful to members
of the Security Council for their solid support of the
proposed lO-point platform for action that I outlined
this morning. Your leadership on this is vital, and we
look forward to close collaboration with you, as we
work together to move forward with the protection of
civilians agenda in very concrete ways.
