Mr. Waxman (Israel): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madame President, on Colombia's able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
would also like to thank Colombia for organizing this
timely and important debate on the question of Haiti.

I wish to join previous speakers in welcoming
President Preval to today's debate. I would like to
express my admiration for the strength and resilience
of the Haitian people, which continue to inspire my
country and countless others around the world.

Today's debate highlights the progress that we
continue to see in the recovery of the Republic of Haiti
following the tragic and devastating earthquake of last
year. It also makes clear the many challenges that lie
ahead in this effort. From the moment that the news
broke about the tragedy, Israel resolved to assist in
whatever way it could. As such, within three days of
the earthquake, Israel had already deployed more than
200 personnel to Haiti, including Israel Defense Forces
search-and-rescue, forensic and medical teams. Israel
rapidly constructed and operated a field hospital in
Port-au-Prince, with the capacity to treat more than 500
patients daily. In total, the hospital treated more than
1,000 patients, performed 317 surgeries' and delivered
16 babies, including three by Caesarean section.

When international efforts moved from the phase
of rescue to recovery, Israel's National Agency for
International Development Cooperation, in
consultation with the Government of Haiti, began to
develop projects specific to the needs of the people of
Haiti. As part of that effort, just last week, a team of
Israeli and Haitian contractors began the construction
of a new trauma unit at the Hopital Justinien in Cap-
Ha'itien. A joint venture between the Israeli
Government, the Office of the Haitian Prime Minister
and the Haitian Ministry of Health, that collaborative
effort will bring a modern trauma centre to the people
of Cap-Haitien. The centre will offer high-quality
medical care for trauma and other emergency medical
needs and provide important surge capacity in the
unfortunate case of future disasters. In addition to
supporting the construction of that trauma unit, the
Government of Israel will provide the medical
equipment and specialized training necessary for the
hospital's staff to operate this unique centre.

Israel has also played a part in the
intergovernmental peacekeeping efforts in Haiti that
followed the tragedy, deploying a police unit to
participate in the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti. As the first deployment of its kind by Israel,
the unit consisted of 14 Israeli policemen with
specialized capabilities in crowd control. Israel's police
officers served under Italian command - the first
international formed police unit to participate in a
peacekeeping mission.

Israel believes that promoting democracy and
stability remains a crucial component for advancing the
process of full recovery in Haiti. We welcome the
preliminary results of Haiti's second round of elections
as an important step in that effort. Israel will remain
closely engaged with the authorities in Haiti and with
the international community in order to play our part in
a sustained and comprehensive recovery process that
will build a bright and prosperous future for the
Haitian people.

