Mr. Petritsch: As the time is already quite far
advanced, I would like to just quickly respond to the
issues of overall security prior to the elections and to
the Croatian Democratic Community (HDZ).

With regard to the security situation, I believe
Jacques Paul Klein will be able to give the Council
more details as to the police and law-enforcement side
of the overall situation there. I would like to take this
opportunity to stress the fact that, in order to provide
for a safe and secure environment, the continued
presence of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) is of the
utmost importance, both for the upcoming elections as
well as for the immediate period thereafter.

I also believe that, ultimately, it is up to the local
authorities to provide the necessary safety and security
for their citizens. The reform of the judiciary and that
of the civil service, which is still ahead of us, are two
very important aspects in fostering civilian security.
The reform-oriented, multi-ethnic Government is very
much aware of the fact that, in the immediate post-war
era, security and, of course, personal safety are of great
importance.

One of the continued security risks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, so to speak, is political and other types of
extremism. But again, in this area the change has been
quite considerable. That change can also be
demonstrated even when it comes to the radical
tendencies that prevailed in the course of last year in
the HDZ. That is the second question I am trying to
answer.

When I talk about extremism in the HDZ I am
basically and exclusively referring to the radical top
leadership, not to the great number of decent members
of that party who are seriously, and rightly, concerned
about the status of Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Again, I am confining myself to the radical top
leadership that has tried to split away from the
Constitutional Framework in the course of last year,
when it was out-voted by the incoming reform-oriented
Government, the Alliance for Change; when it called
for a total boycott of Federation institutions; when it
established extra-constitutional, illegal institutions;
when it called for desertion and 7,000 ethnic Croats left
the entity armed forces within days; when they called
for a tax boycott - that, in fact, was the gravest crisis
since Dayton - and when they also started to boycott
the legislative bodies in the Federation and at the State
level.

Things have changed very considerably since
then. I have had to intervene forcefully. I had to
dismiss the party President, who was also a member of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina at the time.
I had to put the Hercegovacka Banka, which served as
a money-laundering institution for the radicals, under
provisional administration. At the same time, I also
continued the dialogue with the moderate forces in the
Croat community and inside the HDZ.

The crisis has been basically over since
November. The HDZ has returned to legislative bodies.
It is very clear that there is now a split inside the party.
The sidelined extremists realize that their time is over.
It is also very clear now that this party will have to
come up with new leadership. Changes are therefore
imminent, thanks to the continued support that the
Government in Zagreb is lending to reform and
moderation inside the Croat community in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this regard, things are on the upswing.
I believe we will see a better future for the Croat
constituent people in Bosnia and Herzegovina once
these decisions have been taken by the HDZ.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for your very kind words. I also wish to
thank speakers for their kind words about my work and
the achievements in more than two and a half years in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I think what is more
important, of course, is the Council's continued
support; because I am convinced that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can indeed become a full-fledged member
of the European community of sovereign States, as
well as of the international community, of course. That
will be the ultimate proof that our work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has not been in vain.

Ambassador Simonovic' pointed out that this job
is the ultimate challenge, and I fully agree with him.
But we will ultimately be successful. That is also my
conviction. I believe that, now that my mandate is
drawing to a close, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is far more promising than it was. That is
thanks to the concerted efforts on the part of the
international community, in conjunction with the
partnership that has been built over the past couple of
months. I again urge the Security Council to fully
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
personally urge the Council to give its full support to
my successor.

