Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
I join my colleagues before me in welcoming the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Leonid
Kozhara, and congratulating him on his assumption
of the chairmanship of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I thank him,
furthermore, for the comprehensive briefing in which
he set out the priorities and positions of the Ukrainian
chairmanship.

Morocco attaches great importance to the role
of regional and subregional organizations and their
cooperation with the United Nations in keeping with
the Charter with full respect for their mandates and
respective responsibilities. The OSCE makes an
undeniable and appreciated contribution in resolving
conflicts through its prevention mechanisms, in
particular the Conflict Prevention Centre. We believe
that the understanding and complementarity between
the OSCE and the United Nations are achievements that
must be preserved and enhanced.

We welcome the priorities identified by the
Ukrainian chairmanship, which are part of the OSCE's
ongoing contribution to the promotion of international
peace and security. As an active member of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, Morocco welcomes
the commitment of the Ukrainian chairmanship to
fostering the development of an OSCE mediation
support mechanism and its intention to pursue efforts
to find lasting settlements to protracted conflicts in the
OSCE area.

We share the priority attached by the Ukrainian
chairmanship to constructive negotiations and dialogue
in resolving disputes, including in the framework of the
"5+2" talks and international discussions in Geneva.
In that respect, my country supports efforts to find a
negotiated, peaceful settlement to the conflict between
Azerbaijan and Armenia. Accordingly, we reiterate our
support for OSCE efforts through the Minsk Group, and
in particular the appeal of the co-Chairs for dialogue.
In that regard, the territorial integrity of Azerbaijan is
an important principle that must be upheld.

Turning now to the other actions planned by the
Ukrainian chairmanship, Morocco remains convinced
that the United Nations could draw on the experience
and capacities of the OSCE in many areas, including
in weapons control, non-proliferation and combating
transnational threats. We will follow with interest the
updating of the Guiding Principles on Non-proliferation,
and underscore the contribution of the OSCE to
responding to transnational threats. We take this
opportunity to reiterate that the multidimensional and
universal nature of those threats requires collective,
coordinated and sustained international action. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the importance attached
to bolstering cooperation with the United Nations in
those areas.

Morocco is an OSCE Mediterranean Partner
for Cooperation and actively participates in the
Mediterranean Contact Group. My country's interest
in its Mediterranean partnership with the OSCE
arises from the great importance it attaches to the
partnership's priority areas in the security, economic
and environmental fields, in particular those
concerning the fight against terrorism and other types
of crime, discrimination, trafficking in human beings,
immigration and development.

Allow me in that regard to reiterate Morocco's
appeal to review the status of the Mediterranean
Partners for Cooperation with a view to identifying
a more committed and participatory approach. In
that respect, I recall that Morocco put forward a text
reflecting our vision of the format and content of
that partnership. The document contains a number of
proposals aimed at strengthening the partnership and
making it more substantive on the basis of an updated
agenda.

Morocco supports all initiatives to promote
tolerance and interreligious dialogue and to counter
all types of discrimination, and reiterates its appeal for
strengthened cooperation between the OSCE and the
Alliance for Civilizations. That partnership is based
on a number of clear objectives in peace, security and
cooperation.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating all our wishes
for success to the Ukrainian chairmanship of the OSCE
in carrying out the ambitious objectives that it has
taken on.

