Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
begin by acknowledging the presence of Prime Minister
Aristides Gomes here today. Sweden has a long-
standing relationship with the people of Guinea-Bissau
dating back even before its independence. It is in that
spirit of close partnership that we are now engaging in
support for Guinea-Bissau in the Council.

I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. The mission has
a crucial role to play in the coordination of international
efforts in support of Guinea-Bissau, not least now in
support of the preparations for elections. I also thank
the Ambassador Mauro Vieira of Brazil, Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. We appreciate the opportunity to draw
on the Peacebuilding Commission's strategic advice on
Guinea-Bissau.

As has been highlighted today, Guinea-Bissau has
seen a number of positive developments over the past
few months. We once again welcome the consensus
appointment of a Prime Minister, the formation of
an inclusive Government and the reopening of the
National Assembly. The recent approvals of the new
Government programme and national budget are also
positive steps. We welcome the military's neutrality and
its posture of non-interference in the political process,
and we stress the importance of its continued neutrality
moving forward.

The sense of optimism that Ambassador Vieira
alluded to in his briefing is encouraging. The elections
on 18 November will be a crucial step towards building
trust and stability. The ongoing challenges must now
be addressed to ensure credible and timely elections
within the agreed time frame. We stress the importance
of ensuring women and men's equal participation in the
upcoming elections both as voters and candidates, and
we welcome the adoption of a gender quota law. We
encourage the country's leadership to follow up the law
with targeted efforts to include women's participation
in the political processes at all levels. In that regard,
I also welcome the briefing by Ms. Tavares Pinto
this morning.

The six-point road map and the Conakry Agreement
must be implemented in full. In that regard we take note
of the draft framework document for the stability pact
that has been developed by the Government. For the
pact to be credible and sustainable, we underscore the
importance of ensuring that it is underpinned by an
inclusive and consultative process.

Guinea-Bissau now needs concerted and coherent
international support for the electoral process. It will
be important to make full use of the good offices of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
preparing for the elections. We commend the efforts
of the Economic Community of West African States,
which has played an essential role on behalf of the
region in finding a solution to the political crisis, and
we encourage its continued engagement, especially in
the electoral process.

As is often discussed in the Peacebuilding
Commission, for a sustainable peace to be truly
consolidated, it is always important to address the root
causes, including by focusing on constitutional reform,
reconciliation, strengthening the rule of law through
strong and inclusive institutions, assuring equal access
to economic opportunities and respecting, protecting
and ensuring human rights. Such reforms will be
critical drivers of peace. The international community,
in close partnership with the region, should now step
up its efforts to support Guinea-Bissau on its path to
sustainable peace and development.

