Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, the Chinese delegation wishes to
congratulate Japan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council. We also wish to thank the
French delegation for its contribution to the work of
the Council. In addition, the Chinese delegation would
like to thank Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg,
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General, and
Ambassador Frank Majoor for their briefings, and we
welcome the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone.

Over the past year, the political situation in Sierra
Leone has remained generally stable. The security
situation is moving in a direction favourable to the
peacebuilding process, and some progress has also
been made in social and economic recovery and
development. That is a result of the joint efforts of the
Government, the political parties and the people of
Sierra Leone, and we welcome it.

On 1 December last year, President Koroma
issued his Agenda for Change, which identified priority
areas for the Government of Sierra Leone in its
economic development efforts. The Secretary-
General's Executive Representative, working together
with the Government and other relevant actors, also
formulated a Joint Vision of the United Nations Family
for Sierra Leone, which set out priorities for the next
phase of the international community's assistance to
the country. That indicates that the policy framework
and guidelines for peacebuilding in Sierra Leone have
been established. The next phase of work will focus on
ensuring that their implementation achieves the
expected results.

Sierra Leone has experienced many years of civil
war, which has taken a heavy toll on its economy and
society and inflicted severe suffering on its people. The
peace and stability of Sierra Leone are hard-won
results. The Government of Sierra Leone and other
relevant actors should make full use of the country's
current stability, work hard to achieve consensus and
devote themselves to national development. At the
same time, the international community should
continue its assistance to Sierra Leone.

The establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL)
indicates that the peacebuilding process in Sierra
Leone has entered a new phase. UNIPSIL's mandate
incorporates the relevant political, development and
human rights mandates of the United Nations agencies
in Sierra Leone. That will help the mission to support
the Government in its efforts to maintain peace and
stability and promote social and economic development.
We wish to express our support for the work of the
mission and hope that it will achieve effective results.

The impact of the global financial and food crises
must not be overlooked. Accordingly, the peacebuilding
process in Sierra Leone also faces a number of new
challenges in that regard. The report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/59) refers to issues such as the fight
against corruption and piracy, which must receive the
full attention of all relevant actors.

In combating drug trafficking, we should draw
upon the good lessons learned by other countries and
recognize that prevention is the key. Our efforts in that
area should be part and parcel of our efforts to restore
the rule of law and develop the economy in order to
improve the country's capacity to suppress drug
trafficking activities.

China calls upon the international community, in
particular the international financial institutions, to
continue to assist Sierra Leone in order to further
consolidate the peacebuilding process there and make
further progress possible. For its part, China will make
its own contribution to the peacebuilding process in
Sierra Leone.

