Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to express my sincere thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan for
his comprehensive briefing on the activities of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I would also
like to express our appreciation to him for his objective
and professional leadership of the Committee. He
has sought to be effective in promoting stability and
security in the Horn of Africa. Egypt expresses its full
support for such efforts, as well as for the Monitoring
Group. It is important to expand international and
regional efforts to confront the threats the countries of
the region are currently facing.

As for the situation in Somalia, despite the positive
developments in the recent period, including successful
parliamentary and presidential elections and the peaceful
transfer of power to the new President, the activities
of Al-Shabaab and other terrorist groups continue to
be a major obstacle on the road to building peace and
completing the rebuilding of State institutions. Efforts
must be at made to confront these groups in order to
reveal the sources oftheir arms financing. These groups
must also be challenged through a strict implementation
of the arms embargo imposed by the Security Council.
The Monitoring Group must inquire into any breaches
of the embargo. At the same time, the reform of the
Somali national security forces must continue apace
and not be impeded.

As for the sanctions on Eritrea, I should like to
pay tribute to the successive reports of the Monitoring
Group to the effect that there is no evidence of Eritrean
support for Al- Shabaab. Egypt has a principled position
on sanctions. Sanctions are not an end in themselves
but a measure to be resorted to in exceptional
circumstances for a specific period of time in order to
achieve particular political objectives. It is therefore
important to periodically review such sanctions so as
to ensure that they are commensurate with the situation
on the ground. Sanctions may be lifted as long as the
conditions imposed by the Security Council are met.

Egypt looks forward to the midterm report of the
Monitoring Group, in accordance with resolution 2317
(2016) concerning sanctions against Eritrea. There
must be better cooperation between Eritrea and the
Monitoring Group. Constructive dialogue among
all regional parties is important in order to reach
solutions to the region's conflicts. Let me also stress
the importance of a speedy and final settlement of
the issue of Djibouti's missing personnel, which has
humanitarian dimensions that cannot be ignored. Egypt
therefore stresses the need for the parties to step up
their efforts to that end.

We express our support for the Monitoring Group,
whose members must be objective and professional
in seeking the truth regarding the implementation of
the sanctions regime. Furthermore, the principle of
equitable regional representation must be respected
in the establishment of such groups. There must be an
appropriate African presence in the Group of highly
qualified experts with skills and an understanding of
the situation in the region.

Finally, we support Kazakhstan's chairmanship
of the Committee and thank it for its efforts to attain
peace and security in the Horn of Africa.

