Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minister Kim Sung-hwan for chairing this
important debate. I also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, High Commissioner Pillay and International
Committee of the Red Cross Director Spoerri for their
statements. Protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a fundamental responsibility of the international
community and a core function of the Security Council
in carrying out its mandate to safeguard international
peace and security.

The United States knows that its security is
diminished when masses of civilians are slaughtered,
refugees flee across borders to escape brutal attacks,
and murderers wreak havoc on regional stability and
livelihoods.

Regrettably, history has taught us that our pursuit
of a world in which States do not systematically
slaughter civilians will not arrive without concerted
and coordinated action. Nearly a year ago, President
Obama announced at the United States Holocaust
Memorial Museum new actions that the United States
is taking to implement his landmark policy directive on
atrocity prevention.

Under the President's leadership, my Government
has implemented unprecedented steps to enhance our
capabilities and structures for preventing heinous
crimes against civilians, from strengthening our
early warning and preventive diplomacy to punishing
perpetrators and pressing for accountability. Our new
Atrocities Prevention Board, a committee of senior
officials from across the United States Government, is
overseeing this critical work and ensuring that we are
focused on emerging situations of concern.

But while national action is necessary, it is not
sufficient. International collective action is required,
and we look forward to strengthening our cooperation
with the United Nations and Member States to that end.
Few are more likely to be the victims of mass
atrocities than civilians caught in armed conflict. Time
and again, and all too often, the world bears witness to
the horror of mass killings, sexual violence and gross
human rights abuses ofinnocents in conflict. Therefore
protecting civilians in armed conflict must remain a
top priority of the Council and the United Nations as
a whole.

Though we must never relent in this effort, we
are encouraged that the United Nations has made
strides in enhancing United Nations tools to protect
civilians. We commend the Secretariat's efforts to
help United Nations field missions develop operational
guidance and mission-wide strategies to implement
their civilian-protection mandates. The recently
released United Nations study entitled "Protection of
civilians: coordination mechanisms in United Nations
peacekeeping missions" highlights several mechanisms
for executing protection-of-civilian mandates
successfully.

Simple but practical tools, many focused on internal
procedures and mission structure, enable mission
focal points to integrate mission activities in support
of protection mandates. The United Nations Mission
in South Sudan, for example, produced an integrated
strategy that led to an innovative early-warning system
and country support basis that enabled better protection
of rural populations.

Mission-wide strategies depend on missions really
understanding the threats and violence that civilians
face in their area of operation. When peacekeepers
know their local environments well, they are better able
to protect civilians. Such detailed knowledge requires
active and sustained engagement with local populations.
We encourage United Nations missions with protection
mandates to assess, in their reports and briefings to the
Council, the threats and vulnerabilities facing civilians
in their area of operation. We also urge mission-wide
strategies to anticipate and outline steps to counter
any escalation in violence against civilians that could
culminate in mass atrocities. United Nations missions
should proactively explain their role in protecting
civilians to local communities.

Beyond a sophisticated understanding of their
areas of operation, peacekeepers need strong training
in civilian protection. The United States invests
significantly in peacekeeper training, and we urge
all peacekeeping training centres to adopt the United
Nations innovative training guidance on the protection
of civilians. Such training should be standardized and
required for every peacekeeper.

For all that United Nations peacekeepers and
field missions can do, let us not forget that national
Governments always bear primary responsibility
for protecting their own populations. In some
countries, Governments are manifestly failing in that
responsibility, often because of insufficient capacity
or will to address the problem. In some countries,
moreover, Governments condone and even perpetrate
atrocities against their own people. Through its
statements, resolutions and diplomacy, the Council
must continue to press Governments to fulfil their
obligations.

In that regard, I want to highlight the horrific
attacks by the Syrian regime on the Syrian people,
including the widely reported targeting of hospitals
and health-care centres and the use of ballistic missiles
against civilian populations. The carnage unleashed
by Al-Assad merits universal indignation and strong
action from the Council. When the people of Libya
were on the verge of being slaughtered by a brutal
dictator, the Council acted, prevented a massacre and
saved countless lives. That should remind us that, for
civilians in conflict, Security Council action can mean
the difference between life and death.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1) and in resolution
1894 (2009), all States Members of the United
Nations accepted a shared responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. While we continue
to elaborate the application of that principle, when
Governments manifestly fail to protect their civilians,
the international community must not dither, but, rather,
act decisively to assume its responsibility collectively
to protect.

Another fundamental but often overlooked
principle of protecting civilians is the ensuring of
humanitarian access. No State Member of the United
Nations or non-State actor should ever prevent timely,
full and unimpeded humanitarian access to populations
in need of assistance. Yet the Government of the Sudan
has refused, for a year and half now, to permit the safe
and unhindered provision of international humanitarian
assistance to address the acute humanitarian
emergency in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states,
particularly the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-
North-controlled areas, which is largely of Khartoum's
making. Since 2011, more than 214,000 refugees have
crossed into Ethiopia and South Sudan, and 695,000
have been displaced within the two areas. That is
appalling and unacceptable.

In this and other such situations, we commend the
service and dedication of the humanitarian workers,
who help the world's most vulnerable, at great risk to
themselves. Attacks against humanitarian workers
are deplorable and should be condemned wherever
committed.

We fully support the Secretary-General's call for
the Council to be more active in addressing violations
of international law and to strengthen accountability.
The United States strongly rejects impunity and
supports efforts to hold accountable Violators of
international humanitarian and human rights law. Our
long-standing support for international tribunals and
efforts to document ongoing atrocities in places such as
Syria reflect that commitment.

Recent events, including the conviction of Charles
Taylor by the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the
International Criminal Court's judgement against
Thomas Lubango Dyilo, of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, show us that accountability for those
who commit atrocities and justice for their Victims is
possible.

Yet too many perpetrators remain free. The Council
needs the facts and strong reporting to help bring to
justice the perpetrators of crimes against civilians.
President Obama has declared that preventing mass
atrocities is a core national security interest and a core
moral responsibility of the United States. The protection
of civilians is a fundamental element of the Security
Council's obligation to ensure international peace and
security. It is clear that we must keep our attention
focused squarely on the practical steps we can take to
enhance the protection of civilians in armed conflict
and redouble our efforts to ensure that the Council is
not sitting on the sidelines when civilian populations
are in grave danger.

