The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
the Government of the United States for its leadership
in convening this historic first-ever Security Council
meeting of Finance Ministers. I salute your decision,
Mr. President, to focus on countering the financing
of terrorism. As Daesh and other terrorist groups
disseminate their hateful propaganda and ratchet up
murderous attacks, we must join forces to prevent them
from acquiring and deploying resources to do further
harm.

We know the challenges before us. The terrorists
take advantage of weaknesses in financial and
regulatory regimes to raise funds. They circumvent
formal channels to avoid detection and exploit new
technologies and tools to transfer resources. They
have have forged destructive and very profitable links
with drug and criminal syndicates, among others,
and they abuse charitable causes to trick individuals
to contribute. They are agile and have been far too
successful in attaining resources for their heinous acts.

Through the years, we have made progress in
identifying and limiting various methods of terrorist
financing, in many cases developing measures to prevent
the flow of funds to terrorists. Numerous Security
Council resolutions clearly express the international
community's determination to tackle terrorist
financing. More and more Member States continue to
sign and ratify the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. More and
more countries have adopted legislation to criminalize
terrorist financing and build and strengthen regulatory
systems to counter funding flows to terrorists. The
focus and guidance of the Financial Action Task Force
has expanded to include the spectrum of methods to
fund terrorism.

Still, more needs to be done. Terrorists continue to
adapt their tactics and diversify their funding sources.
Today, Daesh runs a multi-million dollar economy
in territories under its control. Daesh terrorists raise
money through the oil trade, extortion, undetected
cash couriers, kidnapping for ransom, the trafficking
of humans and arms. and racketeering. They loot and
sell precious cultural property, shamelessly profiting
from the destruction of humankind's common heritage.
Social media outreach is exploited by Daesh not just for
radicalization and recruiting, but also for fundraising.
Other terrorist organizations around the world - from
Boko Haram to Al-Shabaab to the Taliban - are
following suit. They increasingly employ elusive tricks
to raise and transfer funds, covering their tracks and
leaving little evidence for Governments and the private
sector to identify tainted resources or to follow the
funding trail.

Just as terrorist groups are innovating and
diversifying, the international community must stay
ahead of the curve to combat money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. Doing so will not be easy. Many
States have yet to establish the necessary legal regimes,
institutions and expertise to identify and freeze terrorist
financing and assets. The implementation of key
Security Council resolutions on this subject remains
weak in many parts of the world. The private sector
and civil society are often left outside the circle of
consensus-building and trust, thus becoming a potential
weak link. In some cases, the misinterpretation and
misapplication of international standards have resulted
in violations of due process, undermining confidence
and damaging the. partnerships with key communities
needed to effectively address the problem.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council today will help intensify our efforts, identify
new vulnerabilities and advance stronger and more
efficient regulatory regimes, with due regard for human
rights. I would suggest at least five further areas of
focus.

First, we should increase international cooperation
and share information and expertise, especially in
stopping the illegal transfer of and trade in cultural
artefacts. Where States lack the knowledge and
resources to strengthen their systems, the international
community should offer effective capacity-building.

Secondly, we will expand United Nations
programming on countering the financing of terrorism,
which currently includes the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group
on this subject. That body coordinates the activities
of several entities in this area, such as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre will also now focus on
programming in countering the financing of terrorism.

Thirdly, we should work more closely with the
private and charitable sectors to identify suspected
transactions and invest in credible and manageable
regulatory systems to block terrorist funds.

Fourthly, I intend to lead, as requested by the
Council, strategic-level discussions within the United
Nations on the gravity of the threat including on the
sources of financing of these groups, and report back to
the Council within 45 days on our conclusions.

Fifthly and critically, as we fight terrorists, let
us also take special measures to ensure that we do
not harm migrants or refugees and their communities
of origin. Last year, developing countries received
over $400 billion in remittances from migrants living
abroad. That is more than three times the total of global
official development assistance.

Remittances sent home by migrant workers are
a lifeline. The average Somali family, for example,
receives 60 per cent of its income from abroad. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) includes commitments to
making the transfer of remittances faster, cheaper and
safer, while fully recognizing measures to combat
the financing of terrorism. Let us work to ensure that
measures to stop illicit financial flows do not undermine
the achievement of the sustainable development goals.

I once again welcome today's draft resolution
and this unprecedented demonstration of global
commitment. I urge the Council to complement its
effort today with concrete action to ensure that today's
historic meeting shuts down funding channels for
terrorist groups, prevents attacks and builds a safer,
more secure world for all.

