Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
With respect to this agenda item, I, too, believe that for
the record, and for the purpose of inclusion in next
year's report, we should not limit ourselves to hearing
an explanatory statement from the Secretariat - from
Mr. Fall - but that members of the Council should
also make comments on the subject.

Several circumstances are mentioned in the
introduction that were taken into account with a view
to improving the product. As we said in consultations,
and as Ambassador Mahbubani has noted, it says, for
instance, that in 1997 new measures were adopted with
a view to making future annual reports more analytical.
That goal has not been achieved, at least insofar as the
last three reports are concerned.

On the other hand, certain Council members have
on numerous occasions met with the Assembly's
working group. Both this year and last year, it was said
that the report must be improved and made more
useful. Those of us who are permanent members of the
Assembly as well as non-permanent members of the
Council bear an additional responsibility in this regard.

I am convinced that we can and must enhance its
contents, so as to describe better the work of the
Council and also to ensure that the report can better be
utilized. As has been said, and as was noted in
consultations, in no way should these comments
prevent us from acknowledging the valuable work done
by the Secretariat in compiling information and
organizing it in keeping with the instructions and
guidelines that the Council has laid down.

However, the report still is designed to be
informational - to be a compendium of data that can
easily be consulted, especially if we use modern
technology. What we need is a report that is more
flexible and more appealing: a report that can provide
an accurate reflection of what is accomplished here,
and one that would make it possible for other members
of the Organization better to understand the Council's
relationship with other bodies of the United Nations
system.

We therefore support the efforts that are being
made. Proposals will surely be made in this respect. We
will participate in the debate in the Assembly, and we
hope to submit alternatives in a timely fashion that will
receive the support of the other members of the
Council.

