Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in congratulating your delegation, Sir,
on having assumed the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February. We support you in
discharging your tasks, which we are sure you will do
in full. We welcome the holding of this meeting and
thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her valuable briefing
on this topic.

Peru condemns the use of chemical weapons by
any actor, in any place and under any circumstance.
Their use against the civilian population in Syria is a
war crime and a flagrant violation of international law,
international humanitarian law and the non-proliferation
regimes. In that regard, Peru believes it is essential
for the international community, and in particular
the Security Council, to remain resolute and united
in its support for the non-proliferation regime and in
ensuring that those responsible for these atrocious
crimes - which are also threats to international
peace and security - be held accountable. We must
continue to demand that the Syrian Government fulfil
its commitment to cooperate with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in the
elimination of all of its chemical weapons.

We take note of some recent progress, such as
the imminent destruction of the last two declared
chemical-weapon production facilities, as verified
preliminarily by the OPCW last November, and the
allocation of new financial resources to that end.
Nevertheless, we are concerned that key points of
the Syrian Government's declaration have yet to be
verified, more than four years after its accession to
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on Their Destruction. We hope that the 19 recently
translated documents that were provided to the OPCW
will help rectify errors and omissions and clear up
discrepancies. We reaffirm our commitment and
support to the OPCW, whose Executive Council Peru is
honoured to be a member of.

In the face of new reports of chemical-weapon
attacks in eastern Ghouta and Idlib, Peru expresses
its solidarity with the victims and reiterates the urgent
need to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators
of such atrocities. Like a majority of Council
members, we believe that accountability is essential
to safeguarding the international non-proliferation
regimes. Preventing this threat requires a credible
deterrent. With that goal in mind, we believe it is urgent
to establish an attributive mechanism with the highest
standards of professionalism, objectivity, transparency
and, primarily, independence in order to fill the gap
left by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism. My delegation will continue to work
constructively to create a new mechanism that addresses
the legitimate concerns of all Council members and of
the international community.

