Ms. Coomaraswamy: I wish once again to thank
the Government of Mexico for presiding over this
important debate on children and armed conflict. Your
presence here today, Madame Minister, elevates the
discussion and your words provide a framework for the
serious deliberations that must follow.

Since the last report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2009/ 158), we have had
some measurable progress in important areas. The
Security Council adopted resolution 1882 (2009),
which now makes sexual violence against children and
the killing and maiming of children contrary to
international law grounds for listing in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's report. This naming and
shaming exercise, along with the possibility of
sanctions against persistent violators, has persuaded
parties to cease their reprehensible behaviour and
should deter others from future offences. The collective
voice of the Council, guided by the common moral
compunction of humanity to protect its children, must
be used to make outcasts of those who commit
unspeakable acts against children in war.

I cannot emphasize enough how important this is.
Just two weeks ago, I was in Gulu, Uganda, where I
met with a girl named Agnes who had just escaped
from the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). She fled with
a baby born of rape, fearing for her life and that of her
infant child as the LRA splintered and regrouped
across the region. She could hardly express herself.
Years of abuse had broken her spirit. We cannot ignore
Agnes or those like her. The Council's decision to
make sexual violence and the killing and maiming of
children grounds for listing by the Secretary-General is
the first step in the right direction.
10-40745

The Council's decision to expand the triggers
requires that we further develop our methodologies and
practices to collect reliable information and to guide
the field with regard to action plans. For the past few
months, my Office has been working with Ms. Patricia
Sellers, whose extensive experience with both the
International Criminal Tribunals for Yugoslavia and
Rwanda has brought new momentum to the discussions
on action plans. In close consultation with our United
Nations partners, she is developing templates for action
plans on the killing and maiming of children and on
sexual violence against children. I am glad to say that
she is finalizing guidance to the field on resolution
1882 (2009), which will enhance the monitoring and
reporting on the two triggers. With regard to sexual
violence in particular, I welcome the appointment of
Ms. Margot Wallstrom, the new Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and I am pleased to
report that we are already working very closely and are
looking into common strategies. I look forward to a
fruitful collaboration.

Parties listed in the Secretary-General's report
can be de-listed if they enter into an action plan with
the United Nations We have also had marked successes
with regard to the formulation of action plans required
by the Security Council. Within the framework of such
an action plan, the Maoist party in Nepal released
almost 3,000 minors in an extraordinary process in
which the Whole United Nations worked together as
one. My office, the United Nations Mission in Nepal,
UNICEF, the United Nations Development Programme
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as their
national partners, worked very closely together to
secure the agreement and implement the terms of the
release.

It was an important moment for the United
Nations in Nepal. Children were identified, registered
and sent home. At the moment, our child protection
partners are tracking these boys and girls in their home
villages to ensure that they are included in the
reintegration process. Later this morning, the Council
will hear from Manju, a Nepali girl who was taken by
the Maoist forces at the age of 13 and remained with
them for two years. Since her release, she has rebuilt
her life and is a model for other children. Manju has
travelled a long way to share her story with us so that
her experience will not be repeated in any part of the
world.
3

The Moro Islamic Liberation Front from the
Philippines has also entered into an action plan with
the United Nations. The terms have been agreed and
activities outlined. Our main challenge now is to assist
in the reintegration of these children. Unless we
provide the United Nations in the Philippines with
assistance to secure schooling or livelihood training,
they will either be re-recruited or tempted by other,
less peaceful avenues. It is crucial that the international
community step up to the plate and give these children
a real future. I appeal to all Member States represented
here to support the reintegration process. I also call
upon the ceasefire mechanism in place in Mindanao to
include the monitoring of child rights Violations in its
mandated activities.

In the Sudan, there have also been some
successes. In the past month, we have moved forward
on commitments by the Sudan Liberation Army/Free
Will and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abu Gasim from
Darfur to release children and to give unhindered
access to the United Nations for verification purposes.
The ceasefire agreement between the Liberation and
Justice Movement and the Government of the Sudan
includes specific key provisions for the release of
children and is reflective of the priority and
commitment to children on the side of the parties. I
urge that all subsequent ceasefire or peace agreements
include provisions for child protection. The Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army has also entered
into an action plan for the release of children
associated with their forces this year. Again, child
protection partners have the responsibility to make this
reintegration a success.

Despite these successes, many challenges remain.
In the report before the Council (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General has highlighted a list of the most
persistent violators who have been on the annexes of
his reports for a minimum of five years. As the
Secretary-General's independent voice for children
affected by armed conflict, it is my duty to persuade
this body to move forward on taking action against
these violators. In this regard, resolution 1882 (2009)
calls for closer cooperation among sanctions
committees of the Council. The Sanctions Committee
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo had the
foresight to include crimes against children as grounds
for listing, and I urge other sanctions committees to
also consider the same. I had the honour of addressing
the Democratic Republic of the Congo Committee and
to thank its members for the fair hearing they gave to
our recommendations. I look forward to deeper
engagement with other relevant sanctions committees.

That being said, we would also need to move
forward to devise appropriate mechanisms to deal with
the large number of parties listed in the Secretary-
General's annexes that are not covered by sanctions
committees. I hope that the Council will sharpen its
focus on this issue so that perpetrators do not sense
reluctance on the part of the Council to hold them fully
accountable. After all these noble efforts by this body,
the Security Council should not be perceived to be part
of the cycle of impunity.

Many parties have been listed in the Secretary-
General's reports for recruiting and using children,
committing sexual violence against children, and
killing and maiming children. The vast majority are
non-State actors, who need to enter into action plans
with the United Nations to be de-listed. We urge
Governments to endorse this process in the best
interest of the children as a humanitarian imperative
towards saving children's lives. Without access to
dialogue with non-State actors on action plans, the
chances of securing the release of children is very slim.

In recent times, new issues have also emerged
with regard to children and armed conflict. The first is
the ever-increasing pattern of attacks on schools. This
has become a very disturbing phenomenon that
requires urgent attention. The United Nations system
has always argued that children and schools should be
zones of peace. Instead, schools themselves are
increasingly being targeted. The classroom, once a
sacred space, has become a place of fear. It is
important that we respond to this crisis effectively,
working with local communities so that children,
especially girls, are not placed at risk and are not
denied their right to education during or after conflict.

We are also discovering that more and more
children are being used for military intelligence
purposes by different armed forces and groups around
the world. Recently, we have been engaged in bilateral
advocacy against this practice in a number of
situations. Children should be handed over to child
protection institutions and partners within 48 hours of
their capture. This is extremely important. Placing
them at risk or subjecting them to prolonged
interrogation will only make it more difficult for their
proper reintegration into their communities.
We are increasingly concerned about the
changing nature of warfare in different parts of the
world and the difficult challenges it poses for child
protection partners. In some wars, we find children
being used as suicide bombers; there were seven such
cases in Afghanistan and several in Iraq in 2009.
Attacks on schools and denial of humanitarian access,
where the neutrality of humanitarian actors is not
respected, are also posing major dilemmas. We are just
starting to fully explore how we should deal with such
phenomena. We do not as yet have the answers.

Counterinsurgency also poses its own set of
difficulties. The number of children being killed in
aerial bombardments and drone strikes is a matter of
great concern. I had the opportunity to meet General
McChrystal, the commander of the international forces
in Afghanistan, who reassured me that the protection of
civilians is an important part of military strategy in
Afghanistan and explained the measures taken to
minimize civilian casualties. Nevertheless, children
continue to die, and in 2009 137 Afghan children were
killed by aerial bombardment alone. We do commend
the steps taken recently in this regard, but would like to
impress upon all actors that vigilance is necessary and
that the killing of children must be avoided at all cost.

Finally, it is 10 years since the Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict was
adopted. My office, along with our partners, UNICEF
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, has begun the "Zero
Under Eighteen" campaign for the universal
ratification of the Protocol. I will be knocking on the
doors of those who have not signed and ratified, and
encouraging those who have ratified to speak to their
neighbours. Universal ratification signifies an
international moral consensus - a consensus that is
necessary to give further strength to laws and norms
protecting children from unlawful recruitment.

In my work with this Council, I have been
encouraged by the political will to reach consensus on
issues relating to children. It is this consensus that
empowers and emboldens us, both in the field and at
Headquarters, to work with heart and spirit for the
protection of children.

