Ms. Stener (Norway): Norway also welcomes the
recent historic agreement between the P5+l and Iran on
the Iranian nuclear programme. We stand ready to assist
and support the International Atomic Energy Agency in
the important and demanding task of monitoring the
implementation of the agreement. There is hope that
the agreement will open a window for settling other
pressing issues in the region.

For more than a year, the efforts towards realizing a
two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict have
been suspended. Now is the time for the international
community to find concerted ways to aid the parties in
reinvigorating the peace process. Norway welcomes the
European Union initiative to discuss how to broaden
support for the process. The Security Council should
also explore how it may be of assistance.

Norway believes that an important way of preparing
the ground for a renewed process is to strengthen the
Palestinian economy and further improve the Palestinian
institutions of governance. The sustainability of
those institutions has been severely threatened by the
restricted economic space. Improved market access is
key for the Palestinian economy to thrive.

Norway therefore appeals to Israel to increase
its efforts 4 working together with the Palestinian
Authority and within the arrangements established by
the Oslo Accords and the Paris Protocol 4 to settle
outstanding problems, increase space for Palestinian
economic activity and improve the financial
sustainability of the Palestinian Authority, which needs
more support from its donors. To follow up on the
technical meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
(AHLC) in Brussels on 27 May, Norway will convene
a meeting of the AHLC at the ministerial level here in
New York in September. The objective is to address the
challenges and provide the necessary political guidance
for further donor efforts. We appeal to the parties to
avoid provocative measures. A freeze on the Israeli
plans to demolish the Palestinian village of Susiya
would be taken as a measure of goodwill.

There are positive developments in the
reconstruction work in Gaza, but progress is still far
too slow in terms of access, funding and the unification
of the administration. Norway notes with satisfaction
that Israel has allowed increased volumes of imported
goods to enter, and that Egypt has extended the opening
of the Rafah crossing. We call on Israel to further lift
the restrictions on access to Gaza. We also call on
donors to honour the pledges they made at the Cairo
International Conference on Gaza Reconstruction, and
we call on the Palestinians to renew their efforts to
reunite the administrations of Gaza and the West Bank
under the Palestinian Authority.

We were horrified by the bomb attack in
Diyala province in Iraq, and again in Turkey, where
young people on an idealistic mission of peace and
reconstruction were brutally targeted. Recently,
victims of terrorism have included tourists on a beach
in Tunisia and worshippers in a mosque in Kuwait.

In Iraq, we have seen progress in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but clear
challenges remain. Non-sectarian messages should seek
to counter the forces fuelling sectarian fears and actions.
Iraqi Prime Minister Al Abadi should be commended
for his efforts in that regard. We encourage the Iraqi
Government to further step up its reconciliation efforts
and to give all of Iraq's constituent communities a real
stake in the future of the State. The struggle against
ISIL will take time. As villages and towns in Iraq and
Syria are liberated, it is important that the rule of law
and respect for human rights replace the rule of terror.

The situation in Syria is becoming ever more
desperate and fragmented. The regional andinternational
parties involved must intensify their efforts to find
a political solution to the armed conflict. Norway
supports all efforts to that end, particularly the efforts
of United Nations Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.
But the United Nations Envoy can only make progress
on the issues that the Council agrees on. Therefore,
each Member State bears a great responsibility to seek
unifying action, to work with the parties and to pave
the way towards a political solution. Norway also calls
for full and safe access for humanitarian actors to all
Syrian people in need.

Finally, spearheaded by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, Mr. Bernadino
Leon, the Skhirat agreement is a critical first step
towards ending the armed conflict in Libya. Norway
strongly urges the party that was absent in Skhirat to
address outstanding concerns through the remaining
annex negotiations. The final agreement must be
founded on broad Libyan consensus in order to stand a
real chance of successful implementation.

