Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome our guests to today's meeting of
the Security Council.

The ongoing discussion has shown that West
Africa has accumulated a tremendous negative
potential for subregional and cross-border problems,
with a consequent threat to peace and security, the
integrity of States and the well-being and lives of
people. Africa is encountering a new generation of
challenges. Russia views the strengthening of stability
on the continent as an integral part of the work of
building a global system, under United Nations
auspices, to counteract the new threats that have
emerged. We cannot expect a harmonious development
of international relations if African States, which
represent one of the world's largest communities,
continue to find themselves in a political, socio-
economic and ethnic "earthquake zone".

We have carefully studied the report submitted
today by the Secretary-General. The recommendations
contained therein are comprehensive and multifaceted
in nature and mesh fully with the challenges of
neutralizing the major cross-border problems in West
Africa. Those recommendations apply to all the players
in the subregion - national Governments, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society, the United
Nations and the international donor community.

We are pleased to note that the report reflects
ideas developed by the Russian delegation during the
Security Council's mission to West Africa in June 2003
and during Council meetings held at United Nations
Headquarters. We support the recommendation
contained in the report aimed at modernizing national
legislation, as well as the legal basis of inter-State
relations, in accordance with existing international
conventions and other instruments.

We are convinced that this type of measure will
help strengthen national statehood, develop democratic
standards and promote the rule of law in West African
countries - areas of weakness which, as acknowledged
by African leaders, are the reason for the current
instability in West Africa.

We welcome the proposals aimed at strengthening
the national borders of African States. The Russian
delegation has on a number of occasions advocated
that - without prejudice to inter-State dialogue, trade
and economic cooperation, integration measures or
cross-border communication among populations -
specific measures be taken along borders to address
threats such as the proliferation of illegal armed
groups, the cross-border spillover of conflicts, the
movement of mercenaries and child soldiers, the illegal
arms trade and the illegal exportation of natural
resources. The recommendations of the report on
reforming the security sector and on leveraging donor
capabilities are a step towards resolving these
problems.

We were pleased to see the new United Nations
peacekeeping practice of ensuring close interaction
between the Organization's missions in neighbouring
States of the subregion. It is very important that this be
done in a coordinated manner and that the United
Nations Office for West Africa play a key role in this
respect. In so doing, we must exhibit due diligence.
The coordinated actions of United Nations forces in the
subregion must violate neither the sovereignty of
individual States nor the mandates of specific missions.

Russia is ready to study and consider
constructively in its work in the Security Council other
recommendations of the Secretary-General, including
those dealing with the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes,
as well as those dealing with cooperation with
subregional organizations - the Economic Community
of West African States in particular - and in resolving
the problem of impunity, child soldiers and so on.

Although West Africa has a great many problems,
international cooperation has significant potential in
terms of resolving them. It is important that this be
done in a specific and timely manner. In many ways,
this is a unique kind of experience; if successful, it
could be applied to other regions of Africa and
elsewhere. In that regard, it would be advisable, in
United Nations meetings with regional organizations,
to consider international peacekeeping in West Africa
as a separate matter.

