Ms. Schmid: It is an honour to be here on behalf of
the European Union's High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini.
I would like to thank the Ukrainian presidency for
convening this meeting.

Please allow me to start by expressing High
Representative Mogherini's heartfelt condolences on
the passing away of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin. He
not only played a leading role on the Security Council
for so many years, but he was also a very respected
and important interlocutor for the European Union
(EU) on the many issues that are of key interest to the
Union at the United Nations. I was actually supposed to
meet with him yesterday, and I was deeply shocked and
saddened to learn the news upon arrival. We are left
with deep sorrow and our thoughts are with our Russian

colleagues and in particular with his family.

For many ofits citizens, the European Union remains
a unique path to lasting peace, stability and prosperity.
The continent has, however, not been immune to
conflicts. I very much agree with the Secretary-General
that we cannot take peace for granted. As conflicts
grow more complex, our efforts to address them need
to evolve. These efforts now involve action at multiple
levels - local, regional and global - with a wide
variety of stakeholders and across the conflict cycle,
from early warning to conflict prevention, mediation,
crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction.

This is why we so much welcome what the
Secretary-General has said right from the beginning
about his focus on conflict prevention and mediation.
This goes hand in hand with the key objective of the
European Union's global strategy, which is to address
conflicts at an early stage while building the resilience
of societies around us. I very much associate myself
with Lamberto Zannier when he speaks about the need
to include women in all stages of the conflict cycle.

Allow me to highlight the implementation of this
approach by the European Union on the European
continent.

First of all, promoting stability in the countries
closest to the European Union in the western Balkans
is a natural strategic priority. The accession perspective
to the European Union has carved out a path to heal the
wounds ofthe past and foster stability in the region. It has
encouraged transformation and modernization among
countries to whom we have given a firm commitment
that their future lies within the European Union. At
the same time, the region's fragilities deserve our
continued attention. The Belgrade-Pristina dialogue, as
facilitated by High Representative Mogherini, between
the leaders of both sides has already led to substantial
progress in the normalization of their relations.

Secondly, stabilization has been placed at the heart
of the recently reviewed European neighbourhood
policy in which the European Union offers further
cooperation on civilian security sector reform, tackling
terrorism and extremism, disrupting organized crime,
strengthening cybersecurity and, last but not least,
conflict prevention. Through the Eastern Partnership
dimension of this policy, we are contributing to
conflict resolution by focusing on the enhancement
of our partners' resilience. This means taking new
approaches, such as strengthening institutions and good
governance, taking advantage of market opportunities,
and enhancing mobility, people-to-people links and
interconnectivity.

Thirdly, the European security order is firmly
based on the principles of sovereignty, independence
and the territorial integrity of States; the inviolability
of borders; the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
free choice of countries in deciding their own future.
Unfortunately, these long-standing key principles of
European security have not been respected. The crisis
in and around Ukraine has demonstrated this. Our
support for Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity
and independence is unwavering, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 68/262 of March 2014 and
our fundamental principles. We continue to condemn
and will not recognize the illegal annexation of
Crimea and Sevastopol. European Union leaders have
repeatedly made this very clear.

In accordance with resolution 2202 (2015), the EU
remains firm in its call on all sides to swiftly and fully
implement the Minsk agreements to pursue a sustainable
political solution. We call in particular on Russia to
use its influence with the separatists. The EU fully
supports the efforts undertaken through the Normandy
format, the Trilateral Contact Group and the presence
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). The EU and its member States are the
biggest contributors to the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, which is doing a very important
job. The continued fighting and loss of life in eastern
Ukraine demands redoubled efforts to fully implement
the Minsk agreements. Let me also say, as was already
stated by Lamberto Zannier, that measures, including
those recently taken, that increase tensions and are not
in the spirit ofthe agreements must be avoided. As High
Representative Mogherini has stated, the EU stands
ready to increase its support for the implementation of
the Minsk agreements.

Fourthly, unresolved conflicts pose an obstacle to
peace, stability and regional development and require
a consolidated effort to manage and resolve. The EU
supports a peaceful settlement of the Transnistrian
conflict that is based on the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Moldova with a special
status for Transnistria. In that regard, we remain
committed to active involvement in the settlement
process within the 5+2 agenda in order to support the
efforts of the Chair in Office of the OSCE in Europe.

In Georgia the EU's Monitoring Mission ensures
respect for the ceasefire at the line of control with the
breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The
EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus and
the crisis in Georgia is tasked with engaging with all
stakeholders on measures aimed at peaceful conflict
resolution. Our cooperation with the United Nations
and the OSCE is particularly advanced in that area.

On the unresolved Nagorno Karabakh conflict,
our Special Representative supports and complements
the OSCE Minsk Group and its co-Chairs, while, at
the same time, the EU also supports civil society and
promotes peacebuilding activities across the conflict
divide.

Finally, we are witnessing history in the making in
Cyprus as the United Nations-facilitated talks between
the two Cypriot leaders reach their end game. Never has
a settlement been so close. The EU has a special role to
play, because a future united Cyprus will be a member
of the European Union. We are represented at the
highest level in the Conference on Cyprus in Geneva,
with both President Juncker and High Representative
Mogherini personally engaged and committed.

To conclude, let me reiterate that the European
Union will continue to be a first supporter of the
multilateral approach and a strong United Nations, and
will remain a very reliable and predictable partner in
striving for common ground and win-win solutions in
crises that are otherwise difficult to solve.

