The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I thank Presidents Meron and Agius and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their respective reports (S/2016/453, annex and S/2016/454, annex) and briefings. France
reiterates its thanks and affirms its support to all staff
of the Tribunals for the work undertaken in order to
successfully complete the judicial proceedings. We are
all aware of the importance of everyone mobilizing. It
is important to uphold the time frame set forth by the
Security Council.
With regard to the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia, France takes note that at
this stage two cases remain in trial for two indictees
and two in appeal. The Tribunal has therefore handed
down sentences in 151 out of the 161 individuals
brought before the ICTY. France attaches the greatest
importance to the fact that, in the framework of the
completion strategy, the Tribunal continues to serve
justice, fully upholding due process, and it should be
provided with all necessary cooperation. The ICTY
has abided by the rules in the reporting period. France
recalls that, pursuant to resolution 2256 (2015), the
Security Council requested that the Tribunal conclude
its work according to a set time frame, in the light of its
closure, by handing over its activities to the Mechanism.

Over the reporting period and in line with resolution
2256 (2015), the Office of Internal Oversight Services
carried out an assessment of the methods and work of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
and submitted its report (S/26/441) on 1 June. France
welcomes the Tribunal's cooperation in that exercise.
The report underscores the high quality work of the
Tribunal and its efforts in the completion strategy,
in particular in the area of management, as well as
necessary improvements made for better efficiency.

We also highlight the interest expressed by the
Tribunal itself regarding the evaluation exercise, stating
that it should be more far-reaching using the necessary
means and in a manner suitable for a judicial institution.
The evaluation approach is totally compatible with the
idea of the independence of the judiciary and even
ensures the sound administration of justice, which is
itself an indispensable mark of the credibility of the
international criminal justice. In that respect, pursuant
to paragraph 11 of resolution 2256 (2015), France
expects the Tribunal "to report on the implementation
of the OIOS recommendations in its next six-monthly
report". This is particularly the case regarding the
implementation of part of a code of conduct and a
disciplinary mechanism applying to judges, as well as
a centralized information system on staff reductions.
France would like to see this approach applied across
the board and in a professional manner. In particular,
I stress the recommendation of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services that the decisions handed down and
their proceedings be analysed so as to ensure progress
in international criminal justice as a whole and to
identify what merits being replicated and what should
be done differently in the future. Such an evaluation by
practitioners would further enrich the legacy of these
jurisdictions.
The ICTY and International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) branches of the Residual Mechanism
have well begun the transition to ensure that the work of
justice continues to run its course. We wish to emphasize
the unique opportunity that the Mechanism affords for
drawing on the experience of the two Tribunals and,
in so doing, combining the best working methods.
We recall the provisional nature of the Mechanism's
mandate, which requires the adoption of a tailored
management that duly accommodates the diversity
of legal systems and balanced equitable geographical
representation.

This debate is a time for the Council to welcome
the major contribution of the Tribunals in the service
of the fight against impunity, of reconciliation and
of identifying the work that States must now do to
ensure that this work of justice is maintained over
time. The States concerned must henceforth continue
the construction of the rule of law in which the
independence of the judiciary must be fully ensured.
The prosecution of criminals considered mid-level
should remain a national priority and be the subject of
enhanced cooperation and regional assistance.

France maintains its support of the Mechanism,
including the arrest of fugitives targeted by arrest
warrants issued by the Tribunal. Furthermore, I wish
to indicate that the two cases referred to France by the
ICTR are being handled with all the necessary diligence
and rigor, under the supervision and in constant contact
with the ICTR and the Residual Mechanism. In that
regard, I recall that France is the only State, alongside
Rwanda, that has accepted case transfers.

In conclusion, I thank the Ambassador of
Uruguay, Chairman of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, and his entire team, the
representatives of the International Tribunals, the
Office of Legal Affairs and the Office of Internal
Oversight Services for their efforts to implement the
transitions pursuant to resolutions 1966 (2010) and 2193
(2014). More than ever, combating impunity should
be at the core of the Council's actions, as justice is a
prerequisite oflasting peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.

