Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): It is good to see you back
at work, Sir, in this Organization that you know so well.
The Security Council can profit today from your
exceptional expertise, as much, I am sure, as the General
Assembly will benefit in the months to come from your
leadership. Let me also congratulate you for the exceptional
manner in which Ambassador Andjaba and the delegation
of your country have conducted the work of the Council
this month and, in particular, for the organization of this
open debate.

For my delegation, it is indeed an honour to be here
today at a meeting presided over by Namibia on a subject
to which my delegation is particularly attached. As you
might recall, it was under the presidency of Portugal, in
June last year, that a debate of the Council open to all
Members of the United Nations first took place on this very
important topic. It is therefore a particular pleasure for me
to be able to participate at this meeting. Let me stress, too,
that Portugal fully subscribes to the statement made earlier
by the Presidency of the European Union.

Graga Machel, in her report on the impact of armed
conflicts on children, submitted to the General Assembly in
1996, revealed to the international community the extent of
suffering by child victims of armed conflicts throughout the
world. The painful awareness of this scourge led the
Members of the United Nations to request the Secretary-
General to name a Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict - Ambassador Olara Otunnu - whose
role must be praised and whose presence here today I
would like to welcome. I commend him for the active way
he is carrying out his mandate. His efforts to raise
worldwide awareness and to mobilize official and public
opinion for the protection of children affected by armed
conflict are bearing visible results. His recent visits to
Africa - Sudan, Burundi and Rwanda - and to Colombia,
as well as his special agenda for action for the children of
Kosovo have shown in a very concrete way how to place
the protection and welfare of children on the peace agenda.

I welcome his intention to undertake a mission to
Sierra Leone later this month, and I hope that a coordinated
and concerted response to the dramatic situation of children
in that country can be achieved as soon as possible. As a
member of the Group of Friends of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, I would like to
reaffirm the support of Portugal for the work of Olara
Otunnu and his team. Let me also voice my delegation's
strong support for the important set of proposals
announced today by Ambassador Otunnu, which will pave
the way for the full concretization of the concept of
children as a zone of peace.

Since last year's presidential statement, the Security
Council has shown an increasing awareness of the impact
of armed conflict on children. At that time, the Council
highlighted some important elements that remain essential
for decisions and further action on this issue.

Let me recall some of these elements, to which my
delegation continues to be fully committed: the
condemnation of the targeting of children in armed
conflicts, including the recruitment and use of children in
hostilities in violation of international law; the need to
consider means to provide humanitarian aid and assistance
to civilian populations in distress, in particular women
and children; the need to pursue efforts aiming at the
disarmament and demobilization of child soldiers and the
reintegration into society of children maimed or otherwise
traumatized; the need to support and promote child-
focused mine clearance and mine-awareness pro grammes,
as well as child-centred physical and social rehabilitation
programmes; and the importance of providing special
training to personnel involved in peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building activities concerning the
needs, interests and rights of children, as well as their
treatment and protection.

Last year's presidential statement was a first step
towards raising awareness of the relevance of these
concerns to the field of international peace and security.
Since then, the Security Council has continued actively to
follow this issue.

I would like in this context also to underline the
intention of the Council to follow closely the situation of
children affected by armed conflicts and in particular to
maintain contact regularly, as appropriate, with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and with
the relevant programmes, funds and agencies of the
United Nations system. These include, in the lead, the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), which has
deployed a notable effort to alert us to the dimensions of
the problem and to promote action designed to counter it.
Through specific activities at the national level in the
various countries affected by conflicts, UNICEF has
managed to achieve surprising results. To name just one
case, in Angola, a country devastated by war, it was
possible to negotiate temporary ceasefires to allow for the

 

vaccination of children and provide critical life support. In
other situations, UNICEF continues to provide training on
child protection, gender, humanitarian principles and child-
soldier demobilization for United Nations personnel to be
deployed in peacekeeping operations, as was the case
recently in East Timor.

But there is also the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Assistance and other United Nations Secretariat
departments, and, finally, the international financial
institutions - namely the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF). My delegation believes that there is
a need for a global effort. States, United Nations bodies and
agencies and other relevant humanitarian organizations
should give priority to respect for the rights of the child in
complex humanitarian emergencies, in particular armed
conflicts and post-conflict situations.

In the same vein, I would like to praise the continuous
interest of the Council in these topics and to highlight the
initiative of Ambassador Fowler of Canada in organizing
last February an open debate on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The impact on children emerged naturally
as a central focus in the debate.

I was particularly struck by the statement made on that
occasion by the Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Carol
Bellamy, and in particular by her reference to what she
termed "a peace and security agenda for children", the main
elements of which should guide, in our View, the action of
all States and Organizations in this common goal.

My delegation looks forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is expected to be issued next month, and
which will certainly include one chapter on the protection
of children.

The basic legal framework to ensure the fulfilment of
this common goal is in place and continues remarkably and
enthusiastically to be adhered to by the international
community.

First, there is the Convention on the Rights of the
Child. The almost universal ratification of that
Convention - the first to include humanitarian law among
its provisions to protect children in time of war and
conflict - in such a short period of time clearly
demonstrates the will of the international community to
achieve this objective. While setting a standard of the
universal determination of States to protect the rights of
the child, the Convention, however, reflects an ideal
world still far from reality. We must find a way to breach
the gap that exists between this commitment by so many
States and the reality, including, and in particular, those
participating in or suffering the effects of armed conflicts.
The Security Council must play a particular role in this
respect. It must be vigilant and active, urging and helping
the parties concerned to comply with their obligations
freely assumed under the Convention and other
instruments of international law.

The adoption of the Statute of the International
Criminal Court is another example of the determination of
the international community to protect victims of serious
crimes in the context of armed conflicts. Portugal, a
signatory of the Statute, is aware of the need for such an
international instrument and is now undertaking the
necessary process of ratification. The flow of signatures
of the Statute and the increasing number of ratifying
States is encouraging and reassures us that in the near
future this Court will be established and ready to help
bring to justice those who commit serious crimes against
civilians, including the most vulnerable of them: women
and children. In this context, it need hardly be underlined
that the Council also has a crucial role to play, as
conferred by the Statute.

My Government thanks you once again,
Mr. President, for the initiative to hold this open debate
and welcomes the opportunity for the Security Council to
keep children as a distinct and central concern of its
agenda. But we also encourage the Council to pursue all
the necessary efforts towards achieving an effective
protection of children. For that purpose, and in order to
ensure an effective follow-up to the open debate, it is
important to achieve and promote the mainstreaming of
the situation of the rights of children in the various
activities of the Council, including in the context of
specific country situations. In that same vein, we strongly
believe that it would be very useful if, in future, the
Secretary-General's reports to the Council included a
section with relevant information on this issue; I think
that Mr. Olara Otunnu underlined this aspect this
morning. Special attention should also be given by the
Council to the protection and respect of the rights of
children, namely through the mandates conferred by it to
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

Finally, in its debates on thematic and country-
related issues, it is fundamental that the Council
increasingly seek the Views of relevant United Nations

 

agencies. With their operational experience, they can
decisively enrich the debate and inform the decisions to be
adopted by the Security Council, while being key allies in
support of the implementation of decisions taken.

I wish to underline once again that, as I said, it is
crucial that the Security Council continue to devote further
attention to the question of children and armed conflict,
ensuring follow-up of last year's presidential statement and
of the draft resolution that will be adopted later today. In
doing so, it will be essential to maintain a very close
working relationship with Special Representative Olara
Otunnu and the relevant agencies, programmes and funds
of the United Nations.

