Mr. Bosah (Nigeria): First and foremost, I would
like to thank the Swedish presidency and the entire
membership of the Security Council for organizing
today's briefing. It is indeed emblematic of the interest
of the United Nations in the security situation in the
Lake Chad basin region. We are particularly and
deeply appreciative of the work by the Council and
its positive attitude in seeking to resolve the security
and humanitarian situation and the crisis in the Lake
Chad basin region. Our special appreciation goes to
Under-Secretary-General O'Brien for his insights into
the situation in the region, and to Ms. Fatima Yerima
Askira for sharing her perspective on the matter being
discussed.

When Boko Haram reared its ugly head in Nigeria
a couple of years ago, it heavily impacted virtually
every facet of human endeavour in the north-eastern
part of Nigeria, including the economy, policy and
people's livelihoods. That impact also had unsavoury
reverberations across the country. The insurgency and
its attendant consequences may have tested our will,
but they have not broken the resolve and the resilience
of the Nigerian people.

It has been a difficult time that has fuelled additional
waves of terrorism and violent extremism in other parts
ofthe world. In spite ofthe devastation in the Lake Chad
basin region occasioned by the Boko Haram insurgency,
we are happy to report that the Multilateral Joint Task
Force has recorded great success in degrading Boko
Haram. We have continued to witness the emergence
of survivors and victims who have been rescued from
Boko Haram's brutal oppression in the north-east.

For its part, the Nigerian Government has made
significant progress in the fight against Boko Haram.
Just before Christmas, our military successfully took
over the Sambisa forest, formerly a hideout of the Boko
Haram militants. That progress notwithstanding, the
Government is aware of the other challenges impacting
development in the region, including the shrinking
of Lake Chad, a situation that continues to serve as
a tinderbox for violence and attendant humanitarian
crises. Tackling that problem successfully by recharging
the lake will require major international intervention.

As we celebrate our gains in the war against Boko
Haram, we are not oblivious to the humanitarian
challenges that the crisis has created through the
massive displacement of persons, the abandonment
of farmlands and the disruption of the educational
system. In that regard, the Government of Nigeria is
embarking on programmes aimed at restoring the
livelihoods of the communities in those areas. We have
put in place a robust, people-driven counter-terrorism
strategy based on a combination of revamped security
operations and a human rights-based approach, which
will help to implement rehabilitation, reintegration
and reconstruction. In order to achieve that, we have
empowered the Presidential Committee on North-East
Intervention with a mandate to coordinate and provide
synergy, leadership and direction for the various
initiatives in the area, encompassing the Government,
development partners, private foundations and civil
society. We are also accelerating the implementation
of existing legal and institutional frameworks for
alleviating our people's suffering in the region in
order to improve the effectiveness of our humanitarian
efforts, in the spirit of the Istanbul World Humanitarian
Summit of May 2016.

Nigeria is firmly committed to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and recognizes that it is
the primary responsibility of States to protect civilians
within their national jurisdiction. That conviction
underlines our Government's resolve to take all the
measures necessary to protect civilians in the battle
against Boko Haram and similar terrorist groups.
Indeed, no priority is higher for the Government than
to rescue all those whom the group is holding hostage.
We should stress that the kidnapped Chibok schoolgirls
remain in Nigeria's national consciousness, and that the
Government is working hard to ensure the release of
all Nigerians held captive by Boko Haram, including
the Chibok girls. Once they are freed, we are ready
to ensure their swift rehabilitation and reintegration
and the continuation of their studies. Overall, we are
focusing our efforts on ensuring that all victims can
regain their personal dignity and resume the enjoyment
of their God-given fundamental rights and freedoms as
soon as possible in Nigeria's democratic setting.

I would like to emphasize that our holistic approach
in that endeavour is based on the promotion of good
governance, transparency and accountability. We renew
our call for determined international action to help us
meet the victims' humanitarian needs and address the
root causes of terrorism itself. Genuine humanitarian
intervention by the international community must
no longer be delayed or downplayed. It is time for
collective global action aimed at investing in the people
of Nigeria's north-east and the Lake Chad basin region.

