Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
congratulate and express our gratitude to the delegation
of Argentina for having organized this debate and
providing us with a new opportunity to consider the
situation in Haiti, in particular through the most
recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/493)
on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), which we of course also welcome.

We welcome the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Ms.Sandra Honore', and wish her success in her work
leading the assistance efforts in that Caribbean nation
and helping the Haitian authorities in strengthening
democracy and promoting long-term development.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Uruguay on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We reiterate our commitment made in February
2004 to the stabilization and peacebuilding process
in Haiti and the work of MINUSTAH in favour of the
security, stability, institution-building and development
of Haiti and its people. In that regard, we also welcome
the participation of new countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean in MINUSTAH by contributing either
troops or police contingents. That allows us to express
our ongoing regional commitment towards Haiti.

We recognize the progress made in the security and
humanitarian spheres in the period covered in the latest
report of the Secretary-General. In particular, we want
to stress the closure of 33 sites for displaced persons and
the relocation of 34,000 Haitians. However, significant
challenges remain to which the Haitian authorities
must respond with the support of the international
community. We also highlight the institutional progress
made in some areas - for example, in the area of
human rights and, specifically, with regard to the
establishment of the interministerial commission on
human rights. However, much remains to be done.

For my delegation, security, stability and
development are interrelated elements. The latest
report of the Secretary-General once again makes it
clear that MINUSTAH remains essential to achieving
those objectives. In that regard, the consolidation plan
for MINUSTAH must be implemented bearing in mind
the needs identified in the field, and with a View to the
future that makes it possible to strengthen institutional
capacity in Haiti under the principle of national
ownership, such that the Haitian people will gradually
take over the various responsibilities.

In that regard, on the understanding that the
priority is to strengthen the rule of law and improve
the political environment in Haiti, especially with
regard to the electoral sphere, we encourage the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to continue
working so that the Haitian authorities will respond to
the ongoing institutional processes through a political
dialogue and social inclusion, the best path to the
desired end.

On that front, we urgently call for the partial
senatorial, municipal and local elections to take place
in a fair, credible and transparent manner as quickly as
possible. In that sense, the adoption and promotion of
the draft electoral law that was submitted to Parliament
yesterday seems to us to be of the greatest urgency.

The recent report of the Secretary-General notes
a stable, but fragile, situation where the process of
training police continues to be a priority. In that regard,
while reiterating that this process must take place in a
democratic framework with respect for human rights,
we also highlight the efforts of MINUSTAH and local
authorities to comply with the strategic development
plan for the Haitian National Police, as well as the
progress made in that area. Chile reaffirms that it will
continue to cooperate on a bilateral basis in the area of
police training, as it has done in recent years. We call on
the Haitian authorities and the international community
to continue to support and fund those efforts.

My delegation reiterates the importance of
MINUSTAH's role in the protection of vulnerable
groups, especially with regard to sexual and gender-
based Violence. We also stress once again the need for
these elements to be dealt with appropriately by the
local authorities. We also support the Mission's zero-
tolerance policy against sexual exploitation and abuse.

We also highlight our concern with regard to the
prevention and treatment of the cholera epidemic,
and we stress the importance of supporting the
Secretary-General's initiative in favour of the national
plan for the elimination of cholera. We also urge donors
to fund the programme.

We also wish to highlight the role played by
MINUSTAH through its battalions of engineers in the
so-called quick-impact projects and its programmes to
reduce community violence.

