The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Singapore.

First, I wish to join colleagues in thanking Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his clear and useful
briefing.

The United Nations has been involved in Kosovo
for almost 20 months, in one of its larger and more
complex peacekeeping operations, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Much has been achieved during this period. Mr.
Bernard Kouchner, who has just relinquished the
leadership of UNMIK, has said that advances have
been made in the provision of electricity, the
refurbishment of hospitals and schools, the relaunching
of the economy, the creation of a Kosovo police force
and judiciary and the reconstruction of about 100,000
homes. I commend Mr. Kouchner and UNMIK for their
efforts and achievements in rebuilding Kosovo from
devastation.

However, much more needs to be done. Before
spelling out what these tasks are, let me first take this
opportunity to publicly convey my warm
congratulations and best wishes to Mr. Hans Haekkerup
as he takes up his new responsibilities at the helm of
UNMIK. He has taken on an awesome burden.

The Singapore delegation has said before in this
Chamber that the peacekeeping operations in Kosovo
appear to be conceptually unsound. There does not
appear to be a clear exit strategy for the United
Nations. But there also does not seem to be a better
alternative to UNMIK, considering the circumstances
in which the United Nations became involved in
Kosovo. We should not stray from the course at this
critical juncture of change in the leadership of UNMIK.
The United Nations involvement in Kosovo and the
strict implementation of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999) must continue, despite the great
difficulties we face.

Our overall aim must be to return Kosovo to
normalcy. Kosovo cannot be allowed to languish in its
present state for ever. In this regard, the uniqueness of
UNMIK as a United Nations peacekeeping operation,
like the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor, stands out. UNMIK is an administration in
every sense of the word, albeit an interim one. Like any
administration, it is responsible for building - or,
more correctly, rebuilding - Kosovo in all its aspects:
security, socio-political, economic and others. It is
important that, having begun such a major undertaking,
the United Nations not terminate it prematurely. It is
therefore essential that we be clear on our goals and
ensure that we achieve them. At the same time, the
United Nations must always be conscious of the need
to ensure efficiency and cost-effectiveness in its
administration and use of resources.

In our view, there are three critical areas which
need to be addressed in Kosovo. The first is the
security situation in and around Kosovo. The
politically motivated violence against the Kosovar
minorities has increased again after the municipal
elections in October last year. This does not do anyone
any good. It certainly does not help Kosovo to progress
towards normalcy. Every effort must therefore be made
to curb such violence. We call on all the Kosovar
ethnic communities to put an end to the killing and
maiming. All those who engage in such activities
should be dealt with severely. We therefore call on
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to step up their
efforts to ensure the security of all the ethnic
communities, in particular the minorities, and also
bring the perpetrators to justice. The coordination of
the activities of the UNMIK police and KFOR by the
joint UNMIK-KFOR Political Violence Task Force is
certainly a step in the right direction.

The conflict in the Presevo Valley, just outside
Kosovo, must also not be allowed to fester. It has the
potential to destabilize the region and undo all the good
that has been done in Kosovo. All acts of violence in
the Presevo Valley, especially by extremist groups,
must cease. We welcome the recent arrest of nine
members of the Liberation Army of Presevo, Medvedja
and Bujanovac (UCPMB) by KFOR close to the
administrative border with Serbia. UNMIK and KFOR
should take further necessary measures to address the
problem. We also welcome the fact that the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
representatives of the affected communities have
started a dialogue. This could facilitate a resolution of
the problem in the Presevo Valley. We urge the two
sides to continue this dialogue.

The second area is reconciliation among the
Kosovar ethnic communities. Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) is clear on the political status of
Kosovo. This issue should not be allowed to further
divide Kosovo, given all the ramifications for the
region. Instead, efforts should be made to reconcile the
various ethnic groups in Kosovo. Of course, this is
easier said than done. But if there is movement in the
right direction, all ethnic groups could benefit.

Promoting ethnic tolerance is a key to bringing
together all ethnic communities. A simple test would
be the free return of minority refugees in large numbers
to Kosovo. Until then, we hope that the security
framework developed by UNMIK and KFOR will
encourage minority refugees to come back to Kosovo.

We should also address the hard issues that
impede reconciliation. All political prisoners should be
released. The whereabouts of all missing persons in
Kosovo should be revealed. The recent change in the
leadership of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
Serbia provides hope for the early release of political
prisoners. We hope that the missing persons issue will
be resolved soon.

The third area is building self-governance
capacity and economic recovery for Kosovo. UNMIK's
efforts to build the institutions and capability in
Kosovo for self-governance should be commended and
supported. All the ethnic communities in Kosovo
should be involved in this important process towards
self-governance. However, Kosovo-wide elections
should be held only when the proper conditions are in
place.

Efforts should also be made to spur economic
development in Kosovo. Steps should be taken to
increase trade with and investments in Kosovo, as this
will generate a positive spiral and return Kosovo to
normalcy. When the Kosovars taste the fruits of
economic growth, they will be more predisposed
towards having a peaceful, stable and secure
environment to further build the economy.

Let me conclude by making one important point:
we should be realistic. Kosovo's return to normalcy is
likely to take several more years. The continued
involvement of the United Nations and the
international community in Kosovo, and their patience
in addressing these three critical areas, will therefore
be crucial.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Guehenno to respond to the
comments made.

