Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I would like to express our condolences for the victims of the most recent attacks, most notably in Kabul on 6 March. It is sad to see violence flare up again after some days of calm. Those responsible must be brought to justice. Let me affirm once again Germany's commitment to Afghanistan. Together with Indonesia, we are the co-penholders on Afghanistan in the Security Council but, in addition to that, we will continue to be engaged in Afghanistan as the second-largest donor and troop- contributing country, which is also working hard to support the capacity-building of the Afghan National Police. We will continue to stand by Afghanistan's side. Our goal remains to maintain the main achievements of the past 18 years, in particular regarding the rule of law and the constitutional and human rights of women, children and marginalized groups. We would like to congratulate President Ghani on the occasion of his inauguration yesterday. His commitment to national cohesion and the formation of an inclusive Government acceptable to all remain key. At the same time, we call on Afghan stakeholders to act responsibly in the interest of the country's unity and to continue working towards democratic and inclusive governance based on the Afghan Constitution. In particular, we will not accept any parallel Government or the use of force to solve any political conflict. We believe that the Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan between the United States of America and the Taliban as well as the Joint Declaration between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the United States of America for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan, of 29 February, can be important stepping stones to peace in Afghanistan, which the country so urgently needs after 40 years of war. On this occasion, I would also like to pay tribute to the Government and the people of Qatar, who over the years have worked very hard to make it possible for that Agreement to be concluded. We also appreciate the very close cooperation with the Government of Qatar in organizing the intra-Afghan dialogue, which is so important in the future, since, for this process to now begin, we call for a rapid start of the intra-Afghan negotiations. We welcome the announcement of the negotiating team by the Government of Afghanistan and we hope that outstanding issues on the prisoner exchange can be resolved without delay. With regard to the negotiating teams, and I expressly mean both negotiating teams, it is key that what we always urge in general happens in practice, namely, that women are not a marginal but a substantive part of the negotiating teams. Regarding resolution 2513 (2020), we welcome that it calls for the start without delay of the inclusive intra-Afghan negotiations. It points out that the Security Council does not support the restoration of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan. It contains references to the rights of women, youth and minorities. Lastly, it underlines the importance role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Those points are significant and must be implemented. We would have welcomed in the resolution clear references to the Afghan Constitution as well as to human rights and the importance of respecting such rights in general. For us, references to the Constitution and to human rights remain the indispensable basis for the future development of the country.We also stress the significance of the United Nations in the Afghan peace process. We hope in particular that, in this crucial period for the country's future, the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of UNAMA can soon commence her work. The UNAMA mandate will come up for renewal later this year. It is vital that the Security Council and the entire United Nations remain by the side of the Afghan people, especially Afghan women. We therefore ask for a strong mandate this year. As the two co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany are united in their determination to ensure that the Security Council continues to closely follow and support the peace process in Afghanistan as an expression of their responsibility as co-penholders.
