Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The Security Council is
meeting today to discuss the situation in the occupied
Arab territories and to reaffirm its support for the
continuation of the peace process on the basis of
agreements reached thus far. We share the concern,
frustration and disappointment of the international
community over the current stalemate in the peace
process and over the fact that the people of the Middle
East, specifically the Palestinian people, are still being
denied the opportunity to live in peace, security and
prosperity.

Many times in recent history it seemed that no peace
could be agreed upon in the Middle East, that wars,
violence and fear were predestined for the people of the
region. However, the peace process launched in Madrid
and Oslo proved that that was not the case. For the first
time since 1948 there was a realistic opportunity for and
possibility of peace. What it took was for the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to show political will and wisdom,
responsibility and courage. Firm foundations for peace
were laid down with those agreements, and the
subsequent efforts created a legitimate expectation that the
peace process would become irreversible.

 

We still believe that the peace process must be made
irreversible. It is up to the Israeli and Palestinian leaders to
live up to their responsibilities and commitments to their
own people and to continue taking further steps towards
peace and security for the benefit and well-being of the
people in the Middle East. Therefore the present obstacles
to the peace process need to be overcome so that the
negotiations on the final status can begin as soon as
possible.

The issue of the settlements in the occupied territories
has become a central obstacle to the whole Middle East
peace process. There is a wide degree of consensus
throughout the international community that these
settlement activities are illegal under the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which is applicable in the present situation.
These activities include settlements, activities for enlarging
settlement boundaries and establishing the "umbrella
municipality", and the confiscation of Palestinian land in
East Jerusalem. Settlement activities and other activities and
plans which alter the demographic balance in the Jerusalem
area represent obstacles to the peace process.

Jerusalem is not only a city, and it is not just a Holy
City. Jerusalem is a Holy City for three religions. That is
why the question of its status is so emotional and
potentially so explosive, and that is why Jerusalem is one
of the most sensitive and contentious issues in Israeli-
Palestinian relations. The question of Jerusalem should be
resolved in negotiations between the two parties themselves.
Until then, the status established by Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) continues to apply to all occupied
territories, including Jerusalem. All sides should refrain
from any action that could have negative implications for
the peace process.

We trust the mediation efforts of the co-sponsors of
the peace process, especially those of the United States.
Their determination and commitment to success give us
hope that the difficulties will be overcome and that the
next, and most essential, stage of negotiations leading to the
final status talks will begin. The right of the Palestinians to
self-determination, with all the implications of that right,
and the right of Israel to live within safe borders will have
to be fully recognized and articulated in specific
arrangements.

No credible alternative exists to the peace process in
the Middle East. The commitments made by Israeli and
Palestinian leaders in Madrid and Oslo, which have to be
fully implemented, constitute a historic opportunity to reach

 

a just and lasting peace in the region, which has been
deprived of this for such a long time.

