Mr. Grauls (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for permitting me to address the Security Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
country-specific configuration for the Central African
Republic. First, I would like to pay tribute to
Ms. Sable-Work Zewde, the former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic, for her efforts to support the
peacebuilding process in the country. I would like also
to take this opportunity to wish Ms. Vogt every success
as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) in Bangui. I already feel that it will be a
privilege to work with her.

At the outset, I wish to inform the Council in
detail of the main activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission over the past six months, and then of the
priority actions to be undertaken by the country-
specific configuration in the coming months.

Let me turn first to the activities of the past six
months. Without losing sight of other sectors, our
configuration focused mainly on the electoral process
and preparations for the partners' round table that was
held in Brussels three weeks ago. With respect to the
elections, the Peacebuilding Commission played an
important role from the outset in mobilizing donors. As
a result of those efforts, it has been possible to
overcome the $7.5 million shortfall in the electoral
budget.

Moreover, the Commission provided advice
through BINUCA to some of the actors involved in
preparing the elections, including the Independent
Electoral Commission, the Government and the
opposition. The recommendations also covered
measures to be taken with respect to irregularities
noted in large part during the first round of
parliamentary elections. In the light of that, the boycott
of the second round of the parliamentary elections by a
coalition of opposition parties was a particularly
regrettable incident.

I wish to draw the Council's attention to the
policy statement presented by the Government of the

Central African Republic to the National Assembly in
Bangui on 18 May. This communication should be
studied by the Council because it contains extremely
important political engagements that should be recalled
here. The Government has committed itself, notably, to
complete the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of rebels before the end of 2011; to
combat corruption; to bolster governance and the rule
of law; and to revise the 2009 electoral code and to
establish a permanent and independent secretariat
responsible for future elections. The Commission trusts
that the Central African authorities will not tarry in
implementing these political commitments.

After the conclusion of the election process, the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Peacebuilding Commission organized in Brussels on
16 and 17 June a round table of partners, with the
support of the United Nations Development
Programme, the World Bank and the African
Development Bank. The Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Jean Ping, decided to travel
expressly to Brussels to attend the round table.
Approximately 160 participants represented some
30 Governments and 35 international, regional and
subregional organizations; observers represented
Central African civil society, international
non-governmental organizations and the private sector.
For a forgotten country such as the Central African
Republic, this was truly an unprecedented number of
participants.

The main purpose of the round table was to make
partners aware of the priorities of the second-
generation Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP).
This excellent document was drawn up by the Central
African authorities with the technical assistance of the
World Bank.

Development needs obviously remain vast in the
Central African Republic. The message of the
participants at the round table was very clear. They all
encouraged the national authorities to define priority
areas for action in the second PRSP and to focus on
measures to restore stability in the country and to
target vulnerable populations in particular. It was clear
to all that this event was but a first step on a long road
intended to strengthen links with existing partners and
to develop new ones from a broad spectrum of
potential new partners. Naturally, the Commission,
cooperating with the Central African authorities, will
5
ensure a targeted follow-up to the work of the round
table.

I also welcome a number of decisive
developments in the weeks and days prior to the round
table to which the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has already referred. These include
the signing of a ceasefire agreement with the
Convention des patriotes pour la justice et la paix, the
only remaining rebel group that did not sign the 2008
Libreville peace accords; the signing of a tripartite
agreement among the Central African Republic, Chad
and the Sudan that should contribute to stabilizing the
situation in the north-east of the country; and further
progress towards national reconciliation.

I would now like to turn towards the future. One
of the main priorities for the road ahead will be
security sector reform, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General has also noted. Here I welcome
the fact that the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has made support for the
Government in creating a strategy for national security
sector reform (SSR) a priority for BINUCA. The list of
existing SSR projects, as presented at the round table
in Brussels, still needs to be prioritized and guided by a
strategy, such as was sketched out during the national
seminar on security sector reform in April 2008. In the
coming months, the Commission will focus on getting
effective SSR under way.

The areas of good governance, the rule of law and
judicial reform will also be part of our peacebuilding
priorities for the coming year. The United Nations
Development Programme has already begun
implementing a multi-year programme that must be
completed and refined. Transparent management of
natural resources is an issue that requires urgent
attention in order to generate increased State revenue
and encourage private investment. For its part, the
Commission will pursue its efforts to mobilize the
support of existing and potential partners for
peacebuilding projects.

Before concluding, I would also like to
emphasize an issue that is important both to me
personally and to the German presidency of the
Council - the situation of women and children in
areas of conflict in the Central African Republic. That
situation is still very serious in some areas. During my
last visit to Bangui in April, I had the opportunity to
stress the urgency of setting up a reporting and

monitoring mechanism for children and armed conflict.
On my return to New York, I briefed the Security
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, which you chair, Mr. President. I encouraged
the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to again Visit the Central African
Republic this year in order to assess the situation on
the ground, which, I reiterate, remains very worrying
and deserves the full attention not only of the
Commission but also ofthe Council.

