Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Mathias Licharz, speaking on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for their thorough and valuable briefings. The Council may rest assured that the Niger, a neighbouring country of Libya directly affected by the crisis, is ready now more than ever to contribute to international and regional efforts for the peaceful resolution of the Libyan conflict, a guarantor of stability in the Sahel. While we welcome the truce observed during the Berlin international conference on Libya, the recent resumption of hostilities is a stark reminder of the complexity of the conflict, which is exacerbated by foreign interference and the ongoing and blatant violation of the arms embargo. The Niger strongly condemns that state of affairs, which is characterized by a dangerous deterioration in the humanitarian situation in the country. It cannot be said often enough that without a solution to the Libyan crisis, the Sahel will continue to be exposed to the horrors of terrorism, particularly since international terrorists are deploying their most dangerous and battle-hardened affiliates there. Libya does not need more weapons and terrorists transferred to it; it needs peace. In that regard, we reiterate the African Union's call for a ceasefire between all parties and the return to an inclusive political process so that Libyans can engage in dialogue among themselves and there be compliance with the arms embargo and the imposition of sanctions against violators. The Niger welcomes the meeting on Libya held in Algiers on 23 January, which brought together neighbouring countries and in which Germany participated. That meeting was a good step in seeking to ensure inclusiveness on the Libyan question, for which my country, the Niger, has always called and willwork with the countries concerned in order to advance the peace process in the country. We also welcome today's meeting of the African Union High-Level Committee on Libya in Brazzaville and call on the Security Council to take into account its outcomes, which will be endorsed at the upcoming African Union summit, to be held in Addis Ababa in a few days. Finally, the Niger encourages the Libyan parties to prioritize dialogue and to reject any external interference in their affairs.
