Mr. De Guindos Jurado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by welcoming your
initiative, which gives us an opportunity for Ministers
for Finance to come together at the Security Council in
a historic meeting. I also wish to express my gratitude
for the contributions and leadership of the Secretary-
General and of the President of the Financial Action
Task Force.

I would like especially to congratulate the Russian
Federation and the United States of America for
introducing resolution 2253 (2015), which improves the
tools at the disposal of the international community for
combating the financing of international terrorism in
three important ways.
The resolution incorporates Daesh as part of the
United Nations sanctions regime; it strengthens and
enhances the obligations of Member States in the light
of the recent recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force; and it sets up systematic reporting, which
will facilitate the updating of intelligence information
of the United Nations and its States Members on the
reality we are facing.

The urgency of the threat represented by Daesh
today justifies the updating of the sanctions regime and
making sanctions as effective as possible. That is why
we very much welcome the new measures set out by the
resolution with regard to the functioning of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011).

Spain is fully committed to the core principles of
the United Nations, especially the initiatives developed
to combat terrorism generally, and the financing
of terrorism in particular. Often we are tempted to
see terrorism as an issue that is only of interest to
those countries that suffer from terrorist attacks first
hand. However, we tend to forget that we live in an
interconnected world with a globalized economy.
Therefore, the risk that the financial system of one
country could be used to channel funding to terrorism
exists in every country in the world.

Those who finance terrorism take advantage of
the lack of control over the risk that may exist in some
countries in order to abuse the financial system. That
is why I believe that one of the first tasks on which
we need to redouble our efforts is in raising global
awareness about the risks. All countries are faced with
the risk of being used to divert funds for the purpose
of terrorism. And therefore all countries must act with
determination to set up effective oversight mechanisms.

The global nature of the threat necessarily requires
a coordinated response aimed at eliminating any
vacuum or gap or disconnect that could be exploited by
terrorists to their own ends. We must therefore improve
communication networks and information exchange,
both bilaterally and multilaterally and eradicate any
existing impediment, as called for in the resolution we
have adopted today.

To ensure effective coordination, however, a
necessary first step requires us to establish national
structures capable of handling the information and
intelligence that is indispensable and relevant if we are
to prevent and fight this scourge. As part of the combat
against the financing ofterrorism, access to information
is an essential element. It is important that we intensify
efforts and improve transparency regarding the real
holders of funds, who hide themselves behind other
persons and legal provisions.

We have a lengthytaskbefore us, but we must address
it with a broad perspective that not only focuses on the
financing of terrorism but also encompasses financial
aspects of violent extremism and radicalization, which
is the life blood of such organizations.

Daesh also needs to finance its processes for
attracting new adherents. It is crucial that we are able to
identify and cut off financial flows at that early stage.

Moreover, terrorist groups have exploited new
payment methods in financing their criminal activities.
Against that backdrop, we must be able to put in place
mechanisms to control and avert the use of such tools
for financing of terrorism.

Finally, I would like to highlight the point that the
new instrument adopted today by the Security Council
includes elements that will serve to strengthen one
of the core principles in the fight against terrorism,
namely, respect for human rights. We very much
welcome the fact that the new resolution includes
a specific mention of the importance of the role of
the Office of the Ombudsperson and calls upon the
Secretary-General to take all the necessary measures to
continue to ensure the independence and effectiveness
of that Office. We hope that, on the basis of that new
paragraph in the resolution, we will make progress
towards the full institutionalization of the Office of
the Ombudsperson, which plays an essential role in the
work of the Committee.

