Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I align myself
with the statement to be made shortly by the
representative of the Austrian presidency of the
European Union on behalf of the Union. I should like
to make the following additional remarks.

Once again we are discussing events in the
Middle East at a critical time. Today's suicide bombing
in Tel Aviv is a terrible reminder of the challenges we
face. My delegation extends its sympathies to the
families and friends of those killed or wounded. The
United Kingdom deplores this senseless and totally
unjustifiable terrorist attack, which has so far claimed
the lives of nine innocent people and which injured
many more. We condemn those responsible. We call on
the Palestinian Authority to take all necessary steps to
bring them to justice and to prevent any further attacks.

We welcome the clear public condemnation of
this terrorist act issued by President Abbas this
morning and repeated by the Palestinian observer this
afternoon. It is very disappointing to us that the new
Government has not done likewise and instead has
sought to justify this senseless, abhorrent and
counterproductive action.

It is our firm view that this attack makes it even
more pressing that the new Palestinian Authority
Government should renounce violence and act against
terrorism, should recognize the State of Israel and
should accept previous agreements reached by the
Palestinian Authority. That is, it should act to align
itself with and implement the principles set out by the
Quartet on 30 January 2006 and reiterated on 30
March. With the democratic mandate that they have
come responsibilities. It is unacceptable to pursue
political goals through violent means.

At the same time, my Government has made clear
that the Palestinian people should not be punished for
the decisions their new Government takes. We are
concerned by the deteriorating humanitarian situation.
The United Kingdom is doing what it can to ensure that
we can continue to provide humanitarian and
development support to the Palestinian people to help
them build a better future. We have been one of the
largest bilateral donors to the Palestinian people, and
we hope that we and the rest of the international
community can continue to deliver aid. But we need to
be sure that our funding is not supporting terrorism.

The United Kingdom is deeply concerned at
recent violent events in the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip, in particular rocket attacks against Israel and re-
entry into the Gaza Strip by the Israel Defense Forces.
We are particularly concerned about the impact of
Israeli artillery fire close to residential areas. Recent
Israel Defence Force operations have resulted in
several Palestinian civilian deaths, including those of
children. We believe that such civilian casualties are
unacceptable; they, too, leave grieving families and
friends.

Israel has a right to defend itself, but any actions
in the occupied territories must be proportionate and in
accordance with international law. Equally, the
Palestinian Authority must take urgent steps to halt all
attacks launched against Israel from the Gaza Strip and
to reform its security services.

We remain concerned by Israeli policies in
Jerusalem, which threaten to cut off Palestinian East
Jerusalem from the West Bank. That includes the
routing of the barrier on occupied territory, settlement
activity both within and around East Jerusalem, and
increasingly restricted access to Jerusalem for
Palestinians living east of the barrier. Those policies
will have serious economic, social and humanitarian
consequences for Palestinians and they risk reducing
the possibility of reaching a final status agreement on
Jerusalem. We call on both parties to implement the
Agreement on Movement and Access.

Above all, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the principles of a negotiated two-State
solution. To achieve that, of course, both parties must
meet their obligations under the road map. We
welcome Acting Prime Minister Olmert's commitment
to negotiations and we urge both sides to resume
negotiations as soon as possible.

