Mr. Boureima (Niger) (Spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to express my delegation's
pleasure at seeing you, Mr. President, presiding over
the Security Council for the month of January. We
warmly congratulate you. I also wish to thank you
for having organized this briefing, which is an ideal
opportunity to discuss a matter of great importance to
us all, namely, the situation in Mali. I would also like to
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his informative briefing.

This briefing, which follows the public ministerial
debate on a comprehensive approach to counter-
terrorism (see S/PV.6900), held on 15 January under
your presidency, Sir, once again demonstrates the great
importance that you and your great country attach to
the issue of peace and security, particularly in the Sahel
region.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Cote d'Ivoire
on behalf of the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and
that delivered by the Permanent Observer of the African
Union. I would just like to add a few comments of my
own.

The situation in Mali has gone on too long. That
should not have happened because the international
community's eyes have long been focused on the threats
looming over the entire Sahel following the crisis in
Libya. Indeed, the joint United Nations-African Union
mission to assess the impact ofthe crisis in Libya on the
countries of the region was exhaustive in its diagnosis
and even provided appropriate recommendations.
Meanwhile, the high-level meeting on the situation in
Mali, initiated by the Secretary-General, was also very
clear as to the need to effectively, comprehensively and
above all promptly address the problems of the region
in general, and those in Mali in particular, in order to
forestall an even graver state of affairs.

Certainly, everybody took an interest in the
situation, encouraged by ECOWAS, the African Union
and other stakeholders. However, the progressive and
sensitive approach, far from leading to a peaceful
settlement, appears on the contrary to have encouraged
the armed groups, which soon exploited the institutional
crisis to consolidate their dominance of the entire north
of Mali. They must have viewed the phased reaction of
the United Nations through the adoption of successive
resolutions 2056 (2012) of 5 July, 2071 (2012) of
12 October and 2085 (2012) of 20 December 2012 as
Sign of lax resolve to counter their Machiavellian
intentions. They therefore dared to venture farther
south in ultimate effort to occupy the entire country.

Had it not been for the prompt and beneficial
action taken by France, which quickly grasped the
implications of the fall of the city of Kona to the armed
groups, the situation today might be very different.
That is why the entire international community must, as
did the Conference of Heads of State and Government
of ECOWAS, commend France's intervention, which
forestalled a situation that would have been very
difficult to remedy. It must also provide effective and
timely support to the joint efforts deployed by the forces
of Mali and of France.

Over and above the legitimacy and legality
conferred by the express request made by the authorities
of Mali under the relevant provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations, and specifically pursuant to
article 51, which enshrines the universally recognized
principle of individual and collective self-defence,
France's intervention is, in our view, consistent with
the spirit of resolution 2085 (2012), whose ultimate
objective is none other than the restoration of Mali's
territorial integrity - an essential precondition for the
implementation of the other provisions of the resolution.

It is in that same spirit that the Conference of Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS authorized the
deployment of the international force, the African-
led international support mission for Mali (AFISMA);
neighbouring and friendly countries are involved in
that context.

For its part, the Niger, which is deeply concerned
about the situation in Mali, will participate in
AFISMA; in fact, the Deputy Force Commander is a
general from the Niger. Niger also recently increased
the number of its troops from 500 to 650. I must also
take this opportunity to state that all the constitutional
formalities have been complied with and that the
contingent is ready to go. This morning it was visited,
before its imminent deployment, by the President of
the Republic, the Head of State and of the army, His
Excellency Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou, Whose firm
commitment to Mali since the outset of the crisis has
been unflagging.

My country welcomes the expressions of solidarity
with Mali, which are becoming more and more
numerous and Whose nature and scope will be made
clear at the donors conference to be held in Addis Ababa
on 29 January and in the meeting of the international
support and follow-up group, to be hosted by the
European Union in Brussels on 5 February.

