Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): We welcome Foreign
Minister Samura Kamara. We are glad to have him in
our midst today. I would like to take the opportunity
of his presence among us to convey our very heartfelt
condolences on the passing of the former President of
Sierra Leone, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. We join the
Government and people of Sierra Leone in paying our
respects to his memory.

I want to thank Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen on his
comprehensive briefing on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL). The Chair ofthe Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), our colleague
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, deserves our
greatest appreciation for the passion, commitment and
remarkable dedication with which he has approached
his task. Indeed, he is part of this success story.

We commend the Government and people of Sierra
Leone for their purposeful collaboration with UNIPSIL,
which has culminated in discernable progress towards
peace, stability and long-term development. Today, as
speakers before me have noted, Sierra Leone represents
one of the success stories of post-conflict recovery,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Three elements have emerged as the drivers
of the success that we all applaud today in Sierra
Leone's transformation: political dialogue towards a
constitutional review process and national inclusiveness,
security sector support and the strengthening of human
rights institutions. Those will constitute the focus of
my comments.

First, the close collaboration among the
Government, civil society and non-State actors towards
developing solutions to common challenges provides
considerable inspiration and, indeed, a good foundation.
That was particularly evident in the dialogue held
during the constitutional review process. Such efforts
promote understanding, political participation and
capacity-building for governance institutions and are a
clear sign of the country's democratic progress. More
significantly, they laid the foundations for the holding
of peaceful and credible elections, which represent a
milestone in the political history of Sierra Leone.

The security reforms that have taken place in the
country during the transition are crucial. We note
specifically the establishment of the transnational
organized crime unit and other regional initiatives, in
conjunction with UNIPSIL, for combating national and
transnational crime. We encourage the strengthening
of such initiatives through the development of national
institutions and capacity-building of the security
agencies. That is even more pertinent as UNIPSIL
hands over its functions to the State authorities later
this year.

As UNIPSIL winds up its activities, it is important
to highlight the efforts of the National Human Rights
Commission in establishing a framework that promotes
accountability. Such mechanisms have contributed
immeasurably to the creation of a relatively conducive
environment for the protection of vulnerable members
of society. In the same vein, we welcome the hybrid
mechanism of utilizing the courts and the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission in fighting impunity. The
most visible fruits of that effort are the considerable
lessons that serve to address the issue of transitional
justice.

As other speakers before me have aptly noted,
reconciliation is indeed possible after a protracted and
bitter conflict. We applaud the steady and remarkable
recovery of civilians from the socioeconomic collapse.
We acknowledge the steadfastness of donors and
international development partners, which have served
as pillars of support. The onus is now on the authorities
of Sierra Leone to consolidate those gains and to
reinforce them by encouraging investment and the
development of opportunities in the country.

We are indeed pleased to support the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of the
meeting. It not only speaks to the remarkable recovery
of Sierra Leone but also is an eloquent testimony to the
remarkable achievements of UNIPSIL. For that, we
remain greatly indebted to Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen and his staff
for their commitment and dedication in the success
story of Sierra Leone today.

