The Secretary-General: I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your country's presidency of the
Security Council this month. I thank you for your
leadership in convening this Security Council summit.
This is the second time that you have presided over
this Council on a matter with grave implications for
international peace and security.

The world is witnessing a dramatic evolution
in the nature of the terrorist threat. In the last year,
terrorist attacks have killed, maimed and displaced
many thousands of civilians - the vast majority of
them Muslims - from Afghanistan to Somalia to
Nigeria, from Iraq to Libya to Mali. Those attacks
have been carried out by violent extremists who thrive
in conditions of insecurity and injustice, fragility and
failed leadership. Those groups ruthlessly hijack religion
to control territory and Vital economic resources. They
brutalize women and girls. They target and slaughter
minorities. They are the enemies of faith.

As Muslim leaders around the world have said,
groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) - or Daesh - have nothing to do with Islam,
and they certainly do not represent a State. They should
more fittingly be called the Un-Islamic Non-State. Yet
those groups have become a magnet for foreign terrorist
fighters who are easy prey to simplistic appeals and
siren songs.

The United Nations Al-Qaida/Taliban Monitoring
Team estimates that more than 13,000 foreign terrorist
fighters from over 80 Member States have joined ISIL
and the al-Nusra Front. The growing phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters is a consequence, not a cause,
of the conflict in Syria. A long period of upheaval and,
until recently, unresponsive leadership in Iraq, coupled
with outrageous human rights abuses in Syria, have
created a hothouse of horrors. There can be no genuine
protection of civilians if extremist groups are permitted
to act with impunity and the Syrian Government
continues its assault on its own people.

For more than a year, I have sounded the alarm
about the vicious and unjustifiable actions of those
groups and the danger they pose to Iraq, Syria, the
wider region and international peace and security. We
need a creative and comprehensive political strategy in
Syria and beyond to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters. Terrorists must be defeated, but we must do so
in a way that avoids the deliberate acts of provocation
that they set for us: victimization, further radicalization
and more civilian deaths. Eliminating terrorism requires
international solidarity and a multifaceted approach,
among the many tools we must use. We must also tackle
the underlying conditions that provide violent extremist
groups the opportunity to take root. Immediate security
issues must be addressed.

Over the longer term, the biggest threat to terrorists
is not the power ofmissiles. It is the politics ofinclusion.
It is peaceful societies and respect for human rights.
It is education, jobs and real opportunity. It is leaders
who listen to their people and uphold the rule of law.
Missiles may kill terrorists, but good governance kills
terrorism. Free and independent societies, free from
suffering, oppression and occupation - that is what
will kill terrorism.

I welcome resolution 2178 (2014), which was
just adopted, and its call for strengthening the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Through the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, we are stepping up efforts
in support of Member States and regions seriously
affected by terrorism. Through the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, we are working with Member
States to enhance understanding of the foreign terrorist
fighter phenomenon and to develop and implement
policies to combat their flows.
Through our collective efforts, we must ensure that
all counter-terrorism actions and policies are consistent
with international human rights and humanitarian law.
As the custodian of the Charter of the United Nations, I
want to emphasize that all measures must be fully in line
with the goals and values and principles of the United
Nations. I once again welcome the unity of purpose
of the Council on that issue, under the leadership of
President Obama. I hope that that spirit will carry over
to other pressing issues, particularly finally bringing
peace to the people of Syria.

