Mr. Motoc (Romania) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed report (S/2004/52). My thanks go also to the
Council presidency for having convened this meeting
to discuss the Security Council mission to Central
Africa, which is an excellent opportunity to assess the
implementation of its recommendations. Mr. Kalomoh,
as usual, gave us an outstanding introduction to the
report. I would like to pay special tribute to the
enlightened leadership of Ambassador de La Sabliere
as head of mission.

Romania associates itself fully with the statement
to be made by the Irish presidency of the European
Union. I take this opportunity to say that we very much
appreciate the efforts made by the European Union for
the stabilization and development of Central Africa.

We take note of the overall progress in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which could signal a new favourable context for peace
and stability throughout the region. In our View, the top
priority for the success of the transition in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is to strengthen the
capacity of the transitional Government of national
unity and the extension of its authority throughout the
territory, beginning with its capacity to control all of its
borders. Furthermore, the Government must speed up
the formulation and adoption oflegislation essential for
the electoral process, and must implement the process
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
Congolese combatants.

We echo the appeal made in the report of the
Secretary-General for the Council to continue to
support the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in particular concerning the elimination
of arms trafficking, a condition which is essential for
the stability and development of the country.

When we look at the report, we must note that it
does not consider in detail the human rights situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That aspect
should be addressed in greater detail in future reports.

Turning to the situation in Burundi, Romania, like
other Council members, welcomes the considerably
improved prospects for peace in that country. Here, we
welcome the discussions that took place recently in the
Netherlands between the President of Burundi and a
delegation ofthe Forces nationales de liberation (FNL).
We very much encourage the parties to continue their
discussions in order to achieve concrete results and to
consolidate the peace process.

Without doubt, there is now a real chance for a
return to normalcy in that country. But the Burundians
themselves, as well as the international community,
need to take advantage of the favourable context. Much
remains to be done, since the peace process will soon
enter the crucial phase of elections. The parties must
make sure that the ceasefire is fully implemented. We
also hope that political progress will lead to improved
living conditions for the people and an improvement in
the humanitarian situation. Urgent and substantial
support by the international community will be
essential to ensure that peace in Burundi is irreversible.
From that standpoint, the work done by the United
Nations Office in Burundi as well as the important role
played by the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB) are
commendable.

It would be logical to mention, at this point, the
timeliness of an international conference on the Great
Lakes region, given the progress made in the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in Burundi. Romania unreservedly supports the
organization of such a conference. We are encouraged
by steps recently taken, both nationally in the countries
concerned and regionally, to prepare for the
conference. In this context, we welcome the convening
of a preparatory meeting in Addis Ababa on 14
January, with the participation of the representatives of
the subregional organizations of the Great Lakes
region.

I take this opportunity to stress the need for
regional coordination, which would make it possible to
implement political and economic confidence-building
measures that are vital to the development of the entire
Great Lakes region. The strengthening of a climate of
trust and the capacities of the countries of the region to
develop regional cooperation projects is an important
condition for guaranteeing concrete results and the
success of the international conference on the Great
Lakes region.

