Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): May I also
welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Lithuania, Mr. Azubalis, to the Council
today. I thank him very much for his briefing.

The United Kingdom welcomes Mr. Azubalis's
assumption of his role as Chairperson-in-Office for
2011. We fully support the work programme that he has
set out for us this morning. In particular, we welcome
his human rights and good governance priorities,
alongside hard security issues. Implementing his
programme of work will not be an easy task. The
members of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) must work collectively
and with vigour to meet the many challenges we will
face over the coming years. The Commemorative
Declaration issued at the OSCE Summit in Astana last
December (see A/65/688) pointedly reaffirmed the
OSCE's principles and commitments. Delivery will
require close cooperation with international
organizations, including of course the United Nations.

Progress on protracted conflicts has been elusive.
It is therefore right that Mr. AZubalis has prioritized
this. We were disappointed at the failure at the Astana
Summit to agree language on protracted conflicts,
notably on Georgia. That prevented the OSCE from
agreeing an even more ambitious and comprehensive
framework for action. The United Kingdom welcomes
the role that Mr. Azubalis has already played in
attempting to advance dialogue on the Transdniestrian
conflict, as well as his commitment to pursuing a
settlement in Nagorny Karabakh.

In Georgia, the OSCE has worked with the
United Nations and the European Union as a co-chair
of the Geneva talks. We remain convinced of the need
for an OSCE presence in Georgia, including in the
region of South Ossetia. We welcome the continued
efforts to explore all options to that end.

The response to the Kyrgyzstan crisis last April
was a demonstration of the effective cooperation
between the OSCE, the European Union and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. Those three bodies worked towards
resolving the situation and restoring peace and
stability.

Developing and strengthening key institutions
and civil society is key to sustainable conflict
resolution. The OSCE's field operations conduct
crucial activities in those areas. We therefore regret
that the office in Minsk will close. Its mandate remains
relevant and important. Much more needs to be done to
ensure the protection of human rights and fundamental
freedoms in Belarus. We reiterate our call to the
Belarusian Government to reconsider its position.

Human rights and fundamental freedoms are an
essential element in promoting and maintaining peace
and security. That includes freedom of the media. Too
many journalists in several OSCE States work We also
commend the close cooperation between the OSCE and
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo.

The prestigious role of the OSCE Chairmanship-
in-Office brings with it important responsibilities to
promote and embody the principles of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, democracy, good
governance and the rule of law, on which the OSCE is
founded. The work programme set out for us
underlines that Mr. Azubalis has a clear and pragmatic
vision for making progress on all of those areas. We
offer our full support to his efforts to achieve those
objectives.

