The President: I next invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia, Her Excellency Madam
Olubanke King-Akerele, to take the floor.

Madam King-Akerele (Liberia): It is an honour
to address this body, representing Her Excellency the
President of Liberia, Madam Ellen J ohnson-Sirleaf.
She was unable to be here as she would have liked. On
her behalf, we want to congratulate South Africa on its
presidency of the Security Council, while commending
the Council on this initiative. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his very thought-provoking
report and the proposals contained therein.

I wish to state here that Liberia is an example par
excellence of what can be accomplished through a
combination of a regional initiative - in our case, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which took the high road in intervening in
the Liberian crises in the 19905 - and then the
international community, through the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) in the following years.

Let me begin by referring to the intervention of
the Special Representative of the United Nations
Secretary-General to Liberia, Ellen Margrethe Loj,
who addressed the Council on 14 April (5864th meeting) and to brief it on the status of developments
in Liberia. Having benefited and continuing to benefit
from an extraordinary United Nations presence through
UNMIL, which combines a range of peacekeeping
forces representative of the United Nations
membership, we remain most grateful for that role. The
peace we enjoy today is largely attributable to their
presence, as well as to the fact that ECOWAS laid the
foundations in the 1990s. Indeed, many of our
ECOWAS brothers have paid dearly for that peace.

Given the fragility of that peace - the reasons
for which were detailed by Ms. Loj - it is clear that
there is still much to be done if we are to achieve
sustainable peace and security. Hence the subtitle of
my intervention on the issue before us today: "No
sustainable security without development; no
development without sustainable security".

If we are to have an enhanced and meaningful
relationship between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council, that perspective must guide us. I now
want to focus on a few specifics.

The objectives of the AU Peace and Security
Council include the promotion of peace, security and
stability in Africa, the anticipation and prevention of
conflict and the promotion of peacebuilding and post-
conflict reconstruction. In the letter dated 8 April from
the Permanent Representative of South Africa
addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the
concept paper (S/2008/229), it is indicated that today's
debate will provide an opportunity to address, at the
highest political level, the complex nature of some
current conflicts and the need to respond in a timely
manner to threats, taking into account factors such as
the capacity - and, at times, the limitations - of
regional organizations. Here, I want to underscore the
word "threats".

Liberia wishes to submit that the growing food
crisis is not only a worldwide crisis, but is also proving
to be a major security issue for the continent. It is a
serious threat to peace and security that could
undermine the gains that are being made throughout
the continent if it is not addressed urgently. A recent
Jeune Afrique article refers to it as a food crisis that is
spreading like wildfire. Thus, protests have been
sparked throughout the continent, from Morocco to
Mauritania and Senegal and from cote d'Ivoire to
Mozambique, Tunisia, Cameroon, Burkina Faso, Egypt
and Tunisia. This speaks for itself.

Surely that is sufficient warning: we can ill afford
to wait. Liberia proposes high-level attention and the
holding, on an urgent basis, of a special meeting of the
Security Council on the food crisis. We further propose
that we join forces, bringing together the expertise of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the African Union and relevant food-
producing countries in Asia and food-importing
countries in Africa and elsewhere to tackle this matter
within the shortest time possible. We believe that, on
this issue, we need the equivalent of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security.
In addition, this situation will undermine one of
the key Millennium Development Goals, related to
improving food security. This is a major security
matter that needs to be tackled. It is at the core of the
economics of insecurity, with which we all must be
concerned if we are to achieve sustainable security.

Next, I would like to refer to Council resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. It is an
excellent example of an important Security Council
resolution that is being considered and implemented at
the local and national levels in many African countries,
including my own. That resolution has now been
adopted in the context of an African Union declaration
of heads of State. However, we need a mechanism for
monitoring its implementation, and we urge the
Security Council to look into that. We are pleased that,
in response to the resolution, the Secretary-General has
appointed a woman as his Special Representative for
Liberia. Indeed, we believe that Liberia could be used
as a case in point in the implementation of the
resolution. Plans are under way for the Presidents of
Finland and Liberia to convene a meeting in 2009 on
women and international peace and security, within the
framework of the resolution.

I would now like to highlight the importance of
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations Security Council to ensure stronger
border security among African countries, in order to
implement counter-terrorism measures and to control
the trafficking of small arms and light weapons.

With regard to the series of reports on various
topics submitted by United Nations panels of experts to
the Security Council and other bodies, while Liberia
fully appreciates their importance, we would like to
emphasize that they need to include the views and
contributions of the relevant countries.

As far as the African Union and Security Council
forces in Darfur are concerned, there are clearly major
lessons which we must learn and on the basis of which
we must make corrections.

In closing, I wish to reiterate Liberia's View, in
the light of its very painful experiences over the past
15 years, that Africa's leadership must, through the
African Union, do everything possible to avert the
looming crises that pose threats to the continent and to
world peace and security. I also wish to reiterate that
there can be no sustainable security without
development and no development without sustainable
security.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. Bernadette Simvura, representative of
Burundi.


