Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Let me start by
welcoming you, Mr. President. We are really honoured
that you are presiding over this Council meeting. Allow
me also to congratulate the new members that joined
the Council as of the beginning of this year. I also wish
to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his comprehensive
briefing, as well as to stress the leading role that the
United Nations should play in the resolution of the
Middle East conflict. In that regard, we commend the
recent visit of the Secretary-General to Lebanon - the
first trip of his new term - during which he reaffirmed
his commitment to Lebanon's sovereignty and security,
to the aspirations of the Arab peoples and to peace and
stability in the region.

Lebanon associates itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, as well as
with the statements to be made on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Arab
Group.

The Quartet statement of 23 September reiterated
the obligations of both parties and called upon them to
refrain from provocations (see SG/2178). Yet, in less
than one week from that date, the Israeli authorities
approved a plan to build 1,100 housing units in the
settlement of Gilo on land originally expropriated
mainly from the Palestinian village of Beit J ala. In less
than one month, the same Israeli authorities approved a
plan for the construction of 2,610 units in the
settlement of Givat Hamatos on land illegally annexed
from Beit Safafa and Bethlehem, further encircling and
cutting East Jerusalem off from the rest of the West
Bank.

In the past four months, Israel has managed to
expand its settlement activities at an unprecedented
rate. In November 2011, the Israeli Government
announced plans for the construction of 2,000 housing
units in the settlements of Ma'ale Adumim and the
Gush Etzion bloc. At the time, in another unilateral
prejudgment of the outcome of any negotiation, the
Israeli Prime Minister declared that those new areas
"will, under any future agreement, remain part of
Israel".

Recently, this past December, the Israeli
Government announced another 130 new units in the
settlement of Gilo, as well as plans to construct a
"tourist complex" in the Silwan neighbourhood of
occupied East Jerusalem. This month, the Israeli
Government issued three new tenders for the
construction of yet another 300 settlement units in
occupied East Jerusalem - in the settlements of Pisgat
Ze'ev and Har Homa.

According to the latest Human Rights Watch
report, published just yesterday, as of 1 November the
Israeli authorities had demolished 467 Palestinian
homes and other buildings in the West Bank, including
Jerusalem, displacing 869 people. That rate means that
Israel will have forcibly displaced more Palestinians in
2011 than during any year since the United Nations
started collecting cumulative figures. The Israelis have
also uprooted and burned hundreds of olive and
almond trees in Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron.

In East Jerusalem, Israeli bulldozers demolished a
Palestinian-owned structure in order to create a parking
lot for settlers in the Silwan neighbourhood, and razed
a playing field belonging to a Palestinian college for
the purpose of establishing a so-called Israeli national
security college in Al-Sawwanah. In addition, armed
settlers have physically assaulted and injured
Palestinian civilians, including many children, as
documented by reports of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

OCHA reported that, during 2011, five
Palestinians, including two children, were killed and
over 1,000 Palestinians injured by Israeli settlers or
security forces in incidents directly or indirectly related
to settlements. This January, a settler shot and killed a
15-year-old boy near the Palestinian village of Safa.
OCHA further reported that, in 2011, illegal Israeli
settlers vandalized over 10,000 Palestinian olive trees,
while Israeli occupation forces destroyed 90 water
structures throughout the West Bank.

OCHA also notes that 90 per cent of Israeli police
investigations into incidents of settler violence during
the past six years were closed without any indictment.
In her last briefing to the Council, the United Nations
Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Valerie
Amos, reported that settler violence in 2011 had
increased by 40 per cent since 2010 and 165 per cent
since 2009.

That is the reality of Israeli settlement activities,
which stands in complete violation of the principles
and provisions of international law - the same
principles and provisions that the Organization was
established to protect and defend, as stated in its
Charter. In resolution 446 (1979), the Security Council
reaffirmed that the Fourth Geneva Convention applies
to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
The said resolution also determined that:

"[T]he policy and practices of Israel in
establishing settlements in the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied since 1967 have
no legal validity and constitute a serious
obstruction to achieving a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace in the Middle East." (resolution 446 (1979), para. 1)

The Council reached that conclusion decades ago,
and dozens of General Assembly resolutions have
reiterated that settlement activity in the Arab territories
occupied in 1967 are illegal and illegitimate and
constitute an obstacle to peace.

Furthermore, the July 2004 advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice on the Wall also
concluded that "the Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory (including East Jerusalem) have
been established in breach of international law"
(A/ES-10/273, para. 120).

Here, do we need to also recall that the road map,
put forward by the Quartet and endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 1515 (2003), requires
Israel to freeze "all settlement activity (including natural growth)" (S/2003/529, annex). It also requires
that Israel "immediately dismantle settlement outposts
erected since March 2001" (ibid).

Those are the principles and provisions of
international law and the United Nations resolutions on
settlements. However, they are the same principles and
provisions that Israel has continued to ignore and
challenge to the point where the number of settlers in
East Jerusalem and the West Bank now exceeds
517,000.

A lasting peace in our part of the world needs to
be a comprehensive and just peace based on the
principles of international law and the United Nations
resolutions. Accordingly, it will also require that Israel
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
line of 4 June 1967 and from the remaining occupied
parts of southern Lebanon.

