Mr. Sauer (Finland): I wish to align myself with the
statement made earlier by the observer of the European
Union.

At the outset, let me thank the Special Representative
Nick Haysom for his briefing, and the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive and realistic analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan.

The situation in Afghanistan remains very fragile.
While security is key to stability, it is only one of
many challenges that need urgently to be addressed.
Economic opportunity and social development are
equally important elements of sustainable stability.
Job creation is of particular importance. Encouraging
the participation of women in creating conditions for
security and development should be one of the primary
measures in building a stable and just society in
Afghanistan.

Civilians, women and children in particular, always
pay the highest price in conflicts. We should therefore
also give women a voice in designing the peace. We
see women's equal and active participation in peace
processes as crucial, and we sould like to commend
the Government of Afghanistan for its launch of the
National Action Plan for Security Council Resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security last
June. We look forward to the Plan's full and swift
implementation.

Finland welcomes continued Afghan efforts in the
fields of improving governance, anti-corruption and
the rule of law. We encourage the Afghan Government
to live up to the commitments in the Self-Reliance
through Mutual Accountability Framework, presented
recently by President Ashraf Ghani.

Finland is supporting through participation in
NATO- and European Union-led crisis management
by providing significant amounts of humanitarian
assistance and development aid, as well as cooperation
in trade and diplomacy. We recognize that long-term and
comprehensive international engagement is essential. In
order to strengthen stability and economic development
in Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries, we wish
also to express our support for regional cooperation via
the Istanbul Process.

It remains difficult to make a precise estimate of
the mid-term outlook for the development of Afghan
society. The most likely path includes gradual progress
with occasional setbacks. What ultimately counts is the
unity and commitment of the Afghan leadership and
its ability to pursue the most urgent reform measures.
Finland's role in that process is to remain a steadfast
partner of those who advocate such change.

