Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
I welcome the convening of this meeting and the
presence of Minister Angelino Alfano, to whom we
wish every success during the Italian chairpersonship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE). He delivered a valuable briefing on
the priorities that he will spearhead this year at the
helm of the OSCE, many of which are convergent with
those of the United Nations and, consequently, the
Security Council.

In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, Peru believes it necessary to develop
and strengthen synergies with regional organizations
in order to more effectively prevent and respond to
conflict situations. We take this opportunity to highlight
three areas in which we believe that the OSCE plays a
fundamental role in the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The first area is the effectiveness of the OSCE's
comprehensive security vision and corresponding
regulations, which recognize the fulfilment of security
and human rights as two sides of the same coin, with
a view to acting collectively to prevent and address
modern vulnerabilities, challenges and threats. Despite
the emergence of revisionist discourse, we believe that
the current vision is clearly valid and relevant. If we
are to promote peaceful and inclusive societies, ethnic,
religious and cultural diversity must be understood as a
value, never as a threat. In that regard, we applaud the
fact that the spirit of the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime has spread
across the Mediterranean to protect migrants, including
women and children, the victims of various conflicts
and humanitarian crises and those who fall victim
to criminal organizations that traffic in persons.
Comprehensive security is focused on individuals.

The second area is the OSCE's remit and leadership
in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime. We wholeheartedly agree with the
OSCE on the importance of identifying the nexus
between terrorism and transnational organized crime to
effectively combat those scourges. We must understand
and address their perverse dynamics, which work to
benefit them both and to harm our collective security
and our societies and institutions. Peru believes that
regional organizations should promote implementation
of the various elements of our international regulatory
framework, such as Security Council resolutions,
while taking into account the particular challenges of
each region.

The third area concerns the credibility and value
of the mechanisms of political support and peaceful
settlement of disputes that the OSCE offers to its
members in Europe and Central Asia. We believe
that the legacy of its work constitutes a reference for
all regional mechanisms aimed at promoting peace
and security.

Finally, we emphasize the consistency of the
principles of dialogue, ownership and responsibility
that are reflected in the OSCE's theme for this year,
with a sustainable peace-centred approach that the
United Nations has championed.
