Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): We wish to thank
you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on the important issue of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region that took place
last week in Nairobi, Kenya.

We wish to thank the Special Representative of

the Secretary-General, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, and

Ms. Mulamula, the first Executive Secretary of the

Great Lakes Conference Secretariat, for their

presentations. We also wish to thank the Government

of Kenya for graciously hosting the Conference and the

Government of the United Republic of Tanzania for

having so ably chaired the summit of the International
Conference for the past two years.

The Great Lakes region has registered several
positive developments since the signing of the Dar es
Salaam Declaration in 2004. The people of Burundi
have moved from many years of conflict to a new
democratic dispensation. They have now begun the
difficult task of post-conflict recovery and
development. We congratulate them and call upon the
international community to support them.

In that same period, the peoples of the Republic
of Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania also
exercised their democratic right to elect their leaders in
free and fair elections. Most recently, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo held democratic elections for
the first time in four decades. We warmly congratulate
the Government and people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the success of that historic
election. We pledge our full support to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as it begins to address the
numerous difficult tasks that lie ahead. We remain fully
confident that, with the Great Lakes region working
together in a spirit of genuine partnership, we shall
find solutions to the outstanding issues.

The 11 core countries should congratulate
themselves for successfully bringing the preparatory
process of the International Conference to its logical
conclusion. Since 2003, we have worked together to
give shape and direction to this process. We have
frankly discussed the peace, security, governance and
economic challenges our region faces. We have
reached agreements on the way forward, in order to
turn our region from one characterized by conflict to a
region characterized by peace, stability and sustainable
development.

The Conference process has allowed for the
broad participation of important sectors of our
societies. These have included, among others,
Government officials, representatives of women,
youth, civil society, media professionals, the private
sector and religious leaders. Through constant
interaction, a sense of partnership and friendship has
developed across the region. A genuine understanding
of the challenges that each individual country faces is
developing. This can only be good for the future of our
region.

Of course, the process has also had challenging
moments. Sometimes, we struggled to re-focus the
Conference to deal with the key issues that the region
faces, instead of promoting the ideas of some who
prefer to see our region continuously divided and in
conflict.

In the past, some Powers saw the Conference
process as a vehicle to bestow a new political
acceptability to the forces that committed genocide in
Rwanda. They claimed that the process would not
advance so long as these forces, the genocidaires, were
not at the table, either as participants or as observers. I
am glad that, by working together, the region said
"no". Now, we have before us agreements on what we
need to do collectively to deal with those who want to
destabilize our countries. We have also agreed to
cooperate in combating impunity by bringing these
genocidaires to justice and to work together to combat
their divisive and destructive ideology.

The leaders of the Great Lakes region have
already committed themselves to advance the agenda
for peace. We have agreed that we shall not allow our
territories to be used as bases for the destabilization of
other countries. We have agreed on the need for
peaceful resolution of conflicts, respect for the
territorial integrity of all our countries and promotion
of the principles of good governance. We have also
agreed to work together to promote development and to
cooperate in reducing poverty in our region. This is a
very important agenda. As we come to the end of the
preparatory phase, therefore, we must also commit
ourselves to implementation of this agenda.

We believe that implementation of the peace
Pact's programmes of action will be an important
cornerstone in the architecture for peace in our region.
As peace, stability, good governance and economic
development are established and consolidated
throughout the region, the humanitarian crises we
periodically face will recede accordingly.
The core countries of the Great Lakes region
decided to take regional ownership of the process
through the establishment of the regional follow-up
mechanism to help us implement this ambitious
agenda. In order for us to succeed, however, we believe
that there must be strong commitment to do the
following things. First, we must commit ourselves to
implement all the provisions of the Pact, especially
those dealing with the key issues of armed groups still
operating in our region. The implementation phase
should be a time for serious action in this regard.
Secondly, we must commit ourselves to ratify the Pact
as expeditiously as possible. Thirdly, we must extend
all the necessary political, diplomatic, and financial
support to the follow-up mechanism, and especially to
the new secretariat. Fourthly, we must work to make
the special fund for reconstruction, hosted by the
African Development Bank, operational as soon as
possible.

The agenda for peace and development in the
Great Lakes region will continue to need strong
international partnerships. I thank those members of
the international community who have worked together
with us in the search for peace. I wish to thank, in
particular, the Group of Friends, who have been valued
partners. I also thank the African Union and the United
Nations for their support through the Secretariat.
International partnership is crucial, particularly in the
context of post-conflict recovery.

Leaders in the region have considerable
experience in leading the search for peace in our
region. From the Arusha peace process in 1993 for
Rwanda, the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and Sun City
peace process for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Arusha peace process for Burundi, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement for the Sudan, and
the Intergovernmental Authority of Development
(IGAD)-led process for Somalia, it is clear that we
have the capacity and the will to resolve conflict. What
we have always needed is support in post-conflict
recovery and reconstruction. We therefore hope that
our partners will not consider the end of the
preparatory process as an end to their support. We
would encourage them to support the implementation
phase, especially the economic growth and poverty
reduction agenda.

