Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. De Mistura,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
his briefing. I appreciate his tireless efforts to find a
political solution to the conflict.

In recent weeks various members of the international
community have made tremendous efforts to restore
momentum in the political process. China welcomes the
latest round of Astana talks and its joint communique,
and salutes Russia, Kazakhstan, Turkey and Iran for
their efforts. We hope that this dialogue will continue
to play a positive role in helping to maintain a ceasefire
in Syria and advance the Geneva negotiations.

China has always maintained that a political
solution is the only possible option where the issue
of Syria is concerned, and that achieving that goal
will require efforts on the international, regional and
national fronts. First, the international community
should continue to give its support to the United
Nations, as the main channel for mediation, and to
Mr. De Mistura's efforts to relaunch the Geneva
negotiations as soon as possible, on a basis of full
respect for Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity and with a View to helping the
conflicting parties to engage in negotiations on political
governance, the Constitution, elections and counter-
terrorism. The Council should remain united in moving
the Syrian political process forward.

Secondly, the countries involved in the region
should take the country's long-term interests and
stability into consideration and play a constructive role
in helping to find a political solution. China notes that
there have been attacks on targets inside Syria. We
hope that the parties concerned will remain calm, show
restraint and work together to maintain regional peace
and stability.

Thirdly, both the Syrian Government and the
opposition, based on concern for the future of their
country and the fundamental interests of their people,
should proceed to participate in the Geneva negotiations
without preconditions, in accordance with the principle
of a dialogue that is Syrian-owned and -led, and on the
basis of resolution 2254 (2015), with a View to actively
engaging in gradual efforts to reach a settlement that is
acceptable to all the parties.

For its part, China has been working relentlessly to
find a solution. On 13 and 14 May, in the first instance
of such an event being held on Syria in China, we
hosted an international symposium in Shanghai on
the prospects for a political settlement to the Syrian
issue. It was attended by Xie Xiaoyan, China's Special
Envoy for Syria, a representative of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, and the Special Envoys of the
United Kingdom and France for Syria, as well as experts
and scholars from many countries. Participants held
in-depth discussions on the prospects for a solution, the
factors bearing on a political settlement and the role
of the international community. Our Special Envoy
remains in close contact with the parties concerned
in his continuing efforts to help reach a solution.
Together with the rest of the international community,
China stands ready to continue to play a positive and
constructive role in finding a political solution to
the issue.

