Mr. Abdelsalam (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this
open meeting. We hope that our deliberations will
awaken the conscience of the international community
and put an end to the barbaric acts that have shocked
the world. This is a tragedy that has taken us back to
the law of the jungle.

We are addressing the Council today as the Israeli
killing machine goes on a rampage. It is running amok,
indiscriminately killing innocent and unarmed
Lebanese civilians, spilling the blood of children and
women, including the elderly, the disabled and the sick.
It has spilled the blood of innocent people in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. It has deliberately demolished houses and
killed and injured hundreds of people. All of these
actions continue as we speak, yet there is a suspicious
silence on the subject. We are shocked that all of the
killing and destruction is being committed under the
pretext of self-defence - a pretext that seems to have
magical power. It lets the genie out of the bottle so as
to allow the killing and destruction to continue.

We condemn the Israeli military operations and
the bombing that has targeted the Lebanese
infrastructure. The Israelis have bombed Beirut
international airport. They have destroyed bridges, sea
ports and residential neighbourhoods. Israeli bombs
and missiles have killed entire families, and the
number of casualties is now in the hundreds. More than
1 million unarmed citizens have been forced to flee.
They have been displaced or are confined to shelters
under desperate humanitarian conditions and require
urgent assistance and relief from the international
community.

The Sudan strongly condemns the systematic and
methodical State terrorism being perpetrated by Israel
in an unprecedented manner. This should remind
everyone that we are gathered together under the
banner of this Organization to hold steadfastly to the
norms of humanitarian law, the Articles of the Charter
and the guarantees provided by United Nations bodies,
particularly the Security Council, which is entrusted
with the maintenance of peace and security. All
Member States should continue to firmly uphold those
principles on an equal basis. Where is that equal basis
now? A State has flouted and violated all of those
norms and covenants. Where is the political will of the
Council to rise to meet the expectations of the peoples
of the world and put a stop to the practice of State
terrorism and the killing of innocent civilians, the
destruction of infrastructure and the excessive,
indiscriminate and unjustifiable use of force?

The world was frustrated a few days ago when it

witnessed the total failure of the Council to halt the

Israeli aggression against Gaza and the other occupied

Palestinian territories. We are saying that so that Israel

does not think it is perpetrating those crimes under the
cover provided by the Council.

We appeal for decisive measures to halt the
Israeli war against Lebanon and to find a just solution
to the crisis. The international community should
shoulder its responsibility. The Council should act to
bring about, first, a comprehensive and immediate
ceasefire under United Nations auspices; secondly, the
restoration of all the occupied Lebanese territories;
and, thirdly, the release of all Lebanese prisoners and
detainees in Israeli prisons. Fourthly, it should respond
to the Lebanese appeal for relief and the provision of
urgent humanitarian assistance and lift the air, sea and
land blockade imposed by Israel against Lebanon.
Fifthly, it must hold Israel responsible for the
humanitarian crisis and the destruction of the economy
of Lebanon and demand compensation for that
destruction. Sixthly, an urgent plan must be drawn up
for the reconstruction of Lebanon in which friendly
countries and international organizations participate.
Finally, the Council must demand the immediate
cessation of the crime of genocide perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian people.

