Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to express our appreciation to Spain for holding today's
important debate on the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs) and non-State actors. We
welcome today's unanimous adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), which we had the privilege to co-sponsor. We
extend our particular thanks to Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi and his team for their excellent work over the
past two years, especially in guiding the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) through
its second comprehensive review of the resolution 1540
(2004).

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their potential use remain the gravest of threats to
international peace and security. As we convene here
today in one of the world's most populous metropolitan
areas, we must remain mindful of what our world could
look like if a successful WMD attack were perpetrated
on this population or one like it. We must remain vigilant
against those who have demonstrated their clear intent
to use these weapons on civilians. We must emphasize
that preventing such an attack is Vital and necessary.
We must acknowledge that effective prevention cannot
be achieved without effective collaboration among
States and other relevant institutions. The role of the
Security Council is central to that effort, and resolution
1540 (2004) provides the international community with
one of the most valuable tools for pursuing it.

The second comprehensive review has reinforced
the importance, urgency and relevance of resolution
1540 (2004) and its implementation. The review was
inclusive. It gave voice to many dozens of States,
international and regional organizations and, in a major
improvement over the 2009 review, academia, civil
society and industry representatives - all of whom
play a role in implementing the resolution.

The comprehensive review has shown us in
vivid terms that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their use is a persistent and expanding
threat. We know that State and non-State actors have
used chemical weapons in Syria. It was documented
clearly for us in August and October by the United
Nations-Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons Joint Investigative Mechanism. As we have
stated before, the United States condemns in the
strongest terms any use of chemical weapons or other
weapons of mass destruction, and it is in all of our
interests to do so.

There are today robust and multifaceted tools
available to combat the threat of use of chemical and
biological weapons by non-State actors. In addition
to its proposals in resolution 1540 (2004), the United
States recently presented several proposals under the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention to strengthen those tools even
further. We urge Member States to support those
proposals so that we can collectively strengthen our
efforts to combat the threat of non-State actors' use of
chemical and biological weapons now, not later.

The proposal for a convention on the suppression
of chemical and biological terrorism is founded on the
faulty premise that there are legal gaps in the existing
international framework to combat the use of chemical
and biological weapons by non-State actors. In fact, the
problem is inadequate implementation of the existing
framework. Through diplomatic efforts, the United
States bolsters efforts to prevent non-State actors' use
of chemical and biological weapons - by sponsoring
bilateral programmes that enhance the security of
weapons of mass destruction applicable expertise,
material and infrastructure worldwide. Together, the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist
Bombings, the Chemical and Biological Weapons
Conventions and resolution 1540 (2004) provide the
foundation for combating the use of weapons of mass
destruction by State and non-State actors. What the
threat calls for is not a new legal mechanism, but more
effective and dedicated implementation of the existing
instrument that form this comprehensive foundation.

The comprehensive review has illustrated for us
that the pathways of these weapons and materials can
be permeable and go in more than one direction. We
have seen that non-State, actors such as private-sector
companies, can contribute to illicit State programmes
for weapons of mass destruction under sanction by
the Security Council. For example, we know that
there can be vulnerabilities in national export control
regimes, which can be exploited by outside States
seeking to proliferate. The Council has decided that
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery, constitutes
a threat to international peace and security, and that
States shall take and enforce effective measures to
prevent proliferation. It can be comfortable to think of
resolution 1540 (2004) as a resolution that addresses
only the proliferation threats posed by non-State
actors, but that is a dangerous oversimplification.
Resolution 1540 (2004) applies equally to both State
and non-State actors, which leads me to an important
point about implementation.

The comprehensive review yielded a range of
valuable insights for enhancing the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) to better address the increased
risks. Among its contributions, the report of the 1540
Committee drew attention to the rapid developments
in science and technology affecting the proliferation
environment and highlighted the importance of those
developments in our preventive responses. The report
emphasized the need for States to better account
for and control vulnerable materials and to better
enforce resolution 1540 (2004) within their respective
systems. The report updated its information on the
implementation of the resolution for all 193 States
Members since the first time since December 2010.

Based on those results, and others, we see the
comprehensive review process as a meaningful success.
Now that the comprehensive review is concluded,
we look forward to working with our colleagues to
evaluate what more can be done within the framework
of resolution 1540 (2004) to prevent the proliferation of
WMDs, including to our through non-State actors.

On a particular note, we would welcome a
discussion in the Council on optimal approaches to the
enforcement ofobligations under resolution 1540 (2004).
Our new resolution 2325 (2016), which incorporates
the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the
1540 Committee based on the comprehensive review
will promote the implementation of the resolution in
the coming years by providing better guidance to the
1540 Committee and the international community. We
commend Spain for the substantial achievement of the
resolution's adoption today. The existential threat we
all face from these weapons, and from those who would
use them, cannot be overstated. This resolution makes
meaningful progress towards countering that threat.

