Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting, which, given to the wide range of eminent
persons participating in it, provides us with an
important opportunity to consider the serious situation
prevailing in Guinea-Bissau as a result of the coup
d'etat of 12 April. I would therefore like to welcome
the presence in New York of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Portugal and to
thank them, as well as the Permanent Representatives
of Brazil and Cote d'Ivoire, for their statements. I
should like also to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau for his
briefing.

As my delegation stated before the Council on
13 April, Togo rejects the resort to force as a means of
resolving political problems, in particular as a means
of taking power. Indeed, the coup d'etat in Guinea-
Bissau, which its perpetrators consider to be a solution,
itself has the potential to undermine the order that the
coup claims to establish. It is a not only a violation of
the constitutional order and of free democratic
expression but also a source of ongoing instability.

Our disapproval of the 12 April coup d'etat,
which is in line with the position of the African Union
and of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), as well as of other international
organizations, has its basis in the problems that it is
causing the people of Guinea-Bissau and in our
justified and sincere concern for the country, whose
prospects have nonetheless been promising given the
progress accomplished in recent years in the
framework of peacebuilding and stability. That
progress was made possible by the commitment of the
political class to respect basic consensual rules so as to
move forward, as well as by the support of the
international community, through the United Nations,
ECOWAS, the West African Economic and Monetary
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, as well as various bilateral partners, whose
mobilization to assist the country is clear evidence of
their interest in the well-being of the people of Guinea-
Bissau.

There can be no denying the tremendous amount
of work done by the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) in
the area of peacebuilding in that country, in its role as
coordinator of partnership assistance. It also provided
support to the electoral commission so as to ensure the
smooth functioning of the electoral process, which,
unfortunately, has just been abruptly halted.

By adopting resolution 2030 (2011), on
21 December 2011, which extended the mandate of
UNIOGBIS, the Security Council sent a strong signal
to Guinea-Bissau's citizens by supporting their efforts
and by focusing on the challenges to be dealt with. The
Council has frequently expressed its concern about the
various threats facing the normal development of the
country. It has regularly asked all political leaders to
show moderation and the army to avoid interfering in
political life. It thus rightly condemned this umpteenth
coup d'etat in the country.

But over and above the general, legitimate
disapproval of the international community, the events
of 12 April bring to the fore, for all of Guinea-Bissau's
partners, the issue of the ongoing interference of the
army in the political life of the country. That is a
serious handicap for its economic development. People
who live in constant fear of instability cannot give
expression to their creative impulses for development.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau is of concern to us
because it poses a real threat to the country's future
that could undermine the progress made in recent years
in areas where it is crucial to pursue reform in order to
prevent a step backwards into chaos. Those reforms
pertain in particular to that of the army and security
sector, the combat against drugs and transboundary
crime, in particular through the West Africa Coast
Initiative (WACI), and the establishment by ECOWAS
and the CPLP, with the support of the United Nations,
of a pension fund for the military.

My country, which is actively participating in the
quest for a solution in the regional framework,
welcomes the ECOWAS initiative to send a
stabilization force to Guinea-Bissau. It welcomes the
junta's openness to a swift return to constitutional
order. Nonetheless, it is a fact that the coup d'etat,
which came right after the one in Mali, is yet another
event that further undermines the precarious situation
in West Africa. Even worse, the putsch only adds to the
list of ills that the region is, unfortunately, already
facing, namely, trafficking and the movement of
weapons and drugs, organized crime, the activities of
radical Islamic groups, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
the humanitarian crisis, flows of thousands of refugees
as well as secessionist inclinations.

Given that very bleak picture, the responsibility
of the Security Council is significant, because there is
a need to find the best approach to ensure that each
coup d'etat in Guinea-Bissau is not the next to last. We
believe that the Security Council must maintain a firm
stance regarding the militarist excesses that
institutions, in particular in Africa, are constantly
facing. We must do all we can to ensure that the
progress towards democracy and the significant
investments made by the international community in
countries such as Guinea-Bissau bear fruit, and
contribute to preventing unnecessary suffering from
being inflicted on peaceful people as a result of coups
d'etat. Only thus will the Council shoulder its
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention responsibilities
and help to promote democracy, human rights and
development.

