Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the convening of this
meeting and thank Under-Secretaries-General DiCarlo
and Lowcock for their valuable briefings.

The Dominican Republic notes with great concern
the increasing military escalation in southern ldlib and
northern Hama in the Syrian Arab Republic, which has
resulted in greater suffering, destruction and desolation
for the Syrian people. That area in particular had been
considered safe following the agreement reached
between the Russian Federation and the Republic of
Turkey in September last year. Today, however, we
see how violations of that agreement have led to the
displacement of 180,000 people. Of those who choose
to stay, nearly half a million are exposed to violence.

In a blatant and deplorable violation of international
humanitarian law, there have been reports of attacks on 18
hospitals and ambulances, where several health workers
died, as well as 10 schools and camps for internally
displaced persons, leading to the disruption of basic
services, such as education and health, especially for
women, children, the elderly, persons with disabilities
and young people. If we add the fact that humanitarian
actors who are still active are working at maximum
capacity and in an unsafe environment, it would appear
that the situation could not get any worse. Therefore, a
large-scale confrontation would lead to a humanitarian
crisis of catastrophic levels, given that it would put at
risk the access of cross-border humanitarian assistance
to 3 million people who live in the affected areas and
who depend, for the most part, on such assistance to
survive. We cannot allow that to happen.

We believe that the Council has an unavoidable
responsibility to show unity and decisively meet the
requests of the humanitarian community in Syria, which
were very clearly expressed by Mr. Lowcock, on behalf
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and actors in the field. The possible serious
humanitarian consequences described today, and of
which all of us are aware, are definitely worrisome.
However, they must be the driving force behind unity in
the Council in order to, first, stop the current violence
and demand the establishment of a safe humanitarian
corridor to ensure that humanitarian assistance can
continue to reach those affected; secondly, remind the
opposing parties in the most emphatic way possible of
their commitment to protecting civilians, in line with
the norms of international humanitarian law, and that
counter-terrorism activities must also respect such
norms; and, thirdly, call for an immediate end to the
use of, and attacks on, civilian infrastructure, such as
homes, hospitals and schools.

In conclusion, the Dominican Republic would
like to reiterate what was said here on 30 April (see S/PV.8520). It is imperative to redouble efforts to
prevent a military escalation in Idlib, which, first and
foremost, affects the lives of millions of civilians,
jeopardizes the progress made in the political process
and, no less important, calls into question the capacity
of the United Nations to prevent further suffering and
be able to reach a credible and sustainable political
solution to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.

I end by asking that the bombing of civilians stop,
and stop now.

