The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mrs. Ukonga for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea.

As His Excellency Mr. Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
Head of State of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, did
here in this Chamber yesterday, I would like to start by
expressing the enormous satisfaction and honour that
I feel being here today presiding over this meeting. I
would also like to welcome this debate on "Maintenance
of international peace and security: Transnational
organized crime at sea as a threat to international peace
and security".

Not only do the oceans unite the nations; natural
resources are paramount and among the most important
vehicles for the progress of humankind. In Africa,
the rise of international organized crime in our seas
and oceans, its growing relationship with terrorist
groups and armed groups in the region, and the
consequences of climate change are posing a growing
threat to the consolidation of development in recent
decades, especially the sustainable development of the
blue economy.

Illegal activities in the African maritime
space - maritime terrorism, money-laundering,
dumping of toxic waste and crude oil, robbery of
crude oil and natural gas, arms and drug trafficking,
human and refugee trafficking, piracy and armed
robbery, illegal fishing, overfishing and environmental
crimes - lead to loss of life and economic losses on a
scale that is devastating for our continent.

As on the African continent, more than 90 per cent of
world trade is carried out by sea. Maritime insecurity in
the region has an impact on the industrial and economic
development of countries. It is for that reason that the
African Union's Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development highlight the importance
of investment for the sustainable development of seas,
oceans and marine resources.

Through its 2050 Africa Integrated Maritime
Strategy, launched in 2010, the African Union is
working to promote the development of a prosperous and
sustainable blue economy in a safe and environmentally
sustainable manner. The Strategy's first stage, which
ends this year, has focused on the active promotion of
information exchange, communication, collaboration,
cooperation, capacity-building and coordination within
and among the subregions of the continent.

The countries of the Central and West African
subregions, including the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
share one maritime space, the Gulf of Guinea - one of
the largest and most populated geopolitical spaces on
the African continent, with an area of 5.6 million square
kilometres and a population of about 260 million people.
In order to defend common interests and promote peace
and socioeconomic development in the countries of
this maritime domain, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
was established in 2001 as a permanent institutional
framework for cooperation made up of eight member
countries, including the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

My country is firmly committed to contributing
to the sustainable development of Africa and the world
and, as we have demonstrated on many occasions,
to supporting global and regional efforts in the fight
against organized maritime crime in all its forms
and against terrorism. Equatorial Guinea participates
very actively in all initiatives seeking to normalize
the security situation in the Gulf of Guinea, such as
the Obangame Express military exercises, conducted
jointly with the United States and the other countries of
the Gulf of Guinea.
Most of the threats to our security come from the
Gulf of Guinea, as do the resources that sustain our
economy and have enabled us to develop our country in
recent years. That area is therefore of vital importance
for the subsistence of my country, and some of our
efforts to resolve disputes with neighbouring countries
in the Gulf of Guinea have met with success - we
recently signed a security agreement with our sister
Federal Republic of Nigeria to better protect our
mutual interests.

The Gulf of Guinea Commission has also
demonstrated its commitment through the Luanda
Declaration on Peace and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
Region of 2012 and the Declaration ofthe Heads of State
and Government of Central and West African States
on Maritime Safety and Security in their Common
Maritime Domain, adopted in 2013 in Yaounde.

Those Declarations established guidelines for
promoting and implementing a permanent mechanism
to enforce and monitor peace and security in the region
and for ensuring development both at sea and on land,
with the participation of a number of subregional
organizations, such as the Economic Community of
Central African States, the Economic Community of
West African States and the Maritime Organization
of West and Central Africa, and in close collaboration
with the African Union, the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone and the United Nations.

Those efforts have achieved the strategic result of
the adoption of the Code of Conduct Concerning the
Repression of Piracy, Armed Robbery against Ships,
and Illicit Maritime Activity in West and Central Africa,
also signed in Yaounde in 2013, a key instrument for
ensuring accountability with regard to maritime peace
and stability in the region, whose implementation is
currently undergoing initial technical evaluations.
In September 2014, the Gulf of Guinea Commission
established the Interregional Coordination Centre for
Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea in
Yaounde to ensure the implementation of the Code of
Conduct and other strategies related to maritime safety
and protection in West and Central Africa. Since then,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has contributed to
the implementation of the Commission's instruments
and strategies. One of its major contributions was the
establishment, financing and maintenance of a naval
military vocational school in the city of Bata, where
officers andjunior officers from 20 African States have
been trained to date.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in the past decade
accounted for 30 per cent of all attacks in African
waters. There are three main reasons for that. First,
there has been progress in the fight against piracy off
the East African coast. Secondly, there has been some
success in the containment of drug and arms trafficking
by land routes in Africa and other continents. Thirdly,
there is a need to strengthen the capacity to develop
and enforce regional and national legal frameworks to
combat maritime crime, as the perceived low risk of
breaking the law attracts criminals to engage in illegal
fishing, among other things.

What is happening in the Gulf of Guinea is important
to all of us here. The Gulf of Guinea is an important
shipping route for commercial shipments from Europe
and America to West, Central and Southern Africa. It is
key to the global energy supply because ofits proximity
to Europe and North America. And it is an important
source of natural resources for the United States, China,
Japan, the Republic of Korea and European countries.
The Gulf of Guinea is also rich in animal and mineral
resources for the sustainable economic development
of its member countries and Africa, where the diet of
40 per cent of the population is based on fish products.

The Heads of State of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with particular reference to the
Declarations I referred to, requested that the African
Union Commission, the United Nations and the other
strategic partners represented in this Chamber support
the efforts that they are making to ensure maritime
peace and security, combat terrorism and piracy and
achieve the sustainable development of the countries
of the region, some of which are among the most in
need in the world and are at the same time faced with
conflict situations and large populations of refugees
and displaced persons.

Resolutions 2018 (2011), 2316 (2016) and 2383
(2017) and presidential statement S/PRST/2016/4,
among other documents, recognize the need for
collective action. The only way to ensure maritime
security is to work together - if we do so, we will be
able to reap the immense benefits that the sea has to
offer. With regard to Central Africa, it is fair to say
that the level of interest, research and investment by
the United Nations in the region is far lower than that
shown in other regions of Africa. Turning a blind eye to
the maritime importance of Central Africa undermines
continental and global efforts to establish the true
value of the region's marine resources and to achieve
the sustainable development of our oceans through fair
trade and the development and the implementation of
relevant legal frameworks.

In conclusion, I appeal to all those present that we
do everything possible to remedy the situation so that we
can build on and strengthen progress and our collective
efforts in the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime, with the goal of consolidating peace
and security in our world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I shall now give the floor to other Council members
who wish to make a statement.

