Mr. Pleuger (Germany): Thank you, Sir, for
convening this wrap-up meeting, which comes at an
appropriate time and deals with a very important
matter. With it, you are concluding a presidency whose
challenges you have mastered with excellence and
professionalism, and we should like to thank you for
that.

We welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at the beginning of this discussion and of the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, and we welcome their important
statements. My delegation would like to associate itself
with the statement made earlier by Greece on behalf of
the European Union.

The theme of today's meeting could not be more
relevant. Since the end of the cold war, United Nations
peace operations have become increasingly complex.
Today, they comprise not only traditional peacekeeping
but also a vast array of measures aimed at rebuilding
countries - sometimes a whole region - affected by
violent conflict. The aim is obviously to consolidate
peace and to prevent the resurgence of conflict. The
cases that the Security Council has been dealing with
during this month attests to that development. Whether
it be in the Balkans, West Africa, Afghanistan or Iraq,
peace-building as the core element of post-conflict
order is the great challenge that we are facing.

Efforts to find a non-military solution in Iraq
failed. Parts of the country lie in disarray. Millions of
people need basic services to be restored so that their
lives can regain a basic degree of normalcy. We must
begin peace-building in Iraq by providing the most
urgent humanitarian relief to the people who are
suffering as a consequence of the conflict and by
restoring peace and security to a people that has been
suffering from three wars and dictatorship over the past
decades. The Security Council, I think, has managed
successfully in this phase by unanimously adopting
resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1476 (2003) - resolutions
that are urgently needed to prevent a breakdown in the
supply of essential humanitarian goods. Also, the
United Nations has launched a flash appeal to enable
the agencies to launch their humanitarian programmes.

An important initial phase of every peace-
building effort is the introduction of a political process
that requires the cooperation of the warring parties and
the will of the people concerned and that takes into
account the country's sovereignty and territorial
integrity, with a view to establishing legitimate
authority and rebuilding infrastructure. In the case of
Afghanistan, the Petersberg Conference - held under
United Nations auspices - launched such a process,
which might serve as a model for the future. In
September this year, the Afghans will, it is to be hoped,
convene a Loya Jirga and adopt a new constitution - a
further milestone on the path to building a free and
stable nation.

This task is not easy. Every crisis is different, as
the Secretary-General and the representative of the
United States said today; there is no general recipe
applicable to the solution of each and every conflict.
Nevertheless, we think that peace-building requires a
comprehensive strategy that includes the following
elements: the establishment of security, including the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants; the launching of a political process leading
to legitimate institutions and international recognition;
economic development, including infrastructure and
environmental issues; justice and reconciliation; and
social development.

Peace-building can be successful only if it is
broadly supported by the international community, in
particular the afflicted region. What we heard about the
conflict in C6te d'Ivoire, I think, supported that. A
conflict in one country can result in the destabilization
of a whole region. Therefore, the solution of this
conflict also requires the region's consent and support.
Only if the work done is accepted by a large majority
of the people in the conflict area can we envisage a
lasting and sustainable solution to the threat to
international peace and security.

Therefore, Germany firmly believes that this task
can best be managed and accomplished by the United
Nations and the Security Council. The United
Nations - as the sole universal Organization
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security - has the capability, the legitimacy and
the credibility that are needed. The capabilities of the
United Nations in this field should be fully used and
further developed. In the past 10 years, the United
Nations has gained unique experience in this field.

This United Nations task does not, of course,
exclude the work of other actors on the scene:
international and regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, Member States and, of
course, the international financial institutions. On the
contrary, the complexity of the needs and the high
degree of required resources make it necessary to
assemble non-governmental organizations, Member
States, the international financial institutions and
important regional organizations in the task of peace-
building. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, for example, has played an
important role in the Caucasus, and only yesterday we
heard impressive presentations by Foreign Ministers of
States members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) concerning their role in
cote d'Ivoire. Non-governmental organizations and
other players are essential in working together with the
United Nations, especially in the humanitarian field.

Peace-building in post-conflict situations is
simultaneously an exercise in conflict prevention. It
helps to prevent the resurgence of old conflicts, as well
as the emergence of new conflicts arising from
instability and insecurity. Peace-building is therefore
an indispensable element of the crisis-management
triad of conflict prevention, conflict management and
post-conflict peace-building.

The next presidency will face a number of
difficult tasks. It will be up to the Council to see to it
that peace is secured in Iraq so that it will remain
stable and that the legal framework to administer that
country, its resources and its reconstruction needs is
forged. The legitimate rights of the Iraqi people have to
be protected. As the Secretary-General pointed out, the
Security Council will have to take difficult decisions
on a variety of questions - on the issues of sanctions,
the oil-for-food programme and the inspections system,
as well as on a legitimate authority and on decision-
making on behalf of the Iraqi people.

We believe that the United Nations, in particular
the Security Council, should play a central role in
rebuilding peace, stability and prosperity in Iraq, as the
heads of State and Government of the member States
of the European Union recently stated at their summit
meeting at Athens. We sincerely hope that the Security
Council will overcome its past differences and that it
will return to its unity of purpose for the sake of
legitimacy and effectiveness and for the sake of the
well-being of the Iraqi people.

In thanking the Mexican presidency for a job well
done, I would also like to wish the new presidency
every success in moving forward with the difficult
issues on our agenda.

