Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French): Allow me at the outset, on my own behalf and
on behalf of the African Group, which I have the honour
of chairing this month, to extend my sincere condolences
to the United Nations, the Government of Mali and the
family of the late Alioune Blondin Beye, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola and
former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali. The tragic
death of Mr. Blondin Beye and his colleagues is indeed
a great loss to the United Nations and to the African
continent.

As the representative of the Kingdom of Morocco,
I should like sincerely to congratulate you, Sir, on your
presidency of the Council for this month, and to recall the
excellent, even exemplary, relations between Portugal and
Morocco. I believe that your sense of a job well done,
your ability to listen and to discern what is important and
your vast experience all have enabled the Council to do
its work extremely well throughout this month.

I should like also to extend my congratulations to
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Njuguna Mahugu,
for having conducted the work of this body so very ably.

My delegation would like to extend its sincere
thanks to Mr. Otunnu, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in his capacity as defender of and
spokesman for children affected by conflict, for the work
he has done in making the international community more
aware of the cruelty and the chaos that characterize
today's conflicts and in mobilizing Council members to
take action with respect to the tragic fate of children who
are Victims of conflict, particularly those in Sierra Leone.

Morocco was truly devastated to hear the terrible
accounts of the maiming of children in Sierra Leone and
joins in the urgent appeal by Mr. Otunnu for the

 

international community to help the children threatened by
the horrible conflict in that fraternal country.

The United Nations has since its creation always tried
to focus attention on the suffering of children in armed
conflict. Statistics compiled by the United Nations
Children's Fund show clearly that before 1945, most
Victims of war were soldiers. However, in the 150 armed
conflicts that have erupted throughout the world since that
time, 80 per cent of the 20 million people who died and 80
per cent of the 60 million who were maimed or traumatized
have been civilians, the overwhelming majority of whom
have been women and children.

Today the suffering of those children reminds us that
it is our duty under all circumstances to ensure respect for
all of our commitments, including the principle of
"Children First", which was proclaimed at the 1990 World
Summit for Children in connection with the 1989
Convention on the Rights of the Child. That Convention,
now near universal, gives priority to the survival of children
and to their protection in time of war and peace.

Unfortunately, several generations of children are still
being sacrificed and maimed, physically and emotionally,
during conflicts between adults, in defiance of the legal
instruments adopted by the international community.

My delegation therefore urges compliance with
commitments that have been made, so that the suffering of
the children can end as soon as possible.

The report of Ms. Graca Machel, welcomed by the
General Assembly in its resolution 51/77, was an impartial
and moving document that described the scope of the
tragedy experienced by children who are helpless in the
face of armed conflict. The recommendations in that report,
contained in documents A/51/306 and A/51/306/Add.1,
remain timely and must be implemented promptly.

As the Secretary-General stressed in his note of 26
August 1996 [A/51/306], we must find new and innovative
solutions to protect children in conflict situations and
prevent those conflicts from occurring. States are committed
to guaranteeing a broad range of rights for children and to
ensure that children will enjoy their rights to health, to
education and to grow up among their families and
communities. The report of the expert of the Secretary-
General showed how the legitimate rights of children are
systematically violated during times of armed conflict.
Exposing such violations will without doubt help to
eliminate them, or at least to attenuate them.

The international community must take action. It is
unthinkable that we should stand by as the rights of
children are so obviously and systematically violated.
Local and national strategies must bolster the action of
the international community and vice versa. Childhood is
sacred, and all children must be protected from the
twisted, inhuman effects of armed conflict.

Children are the future of mankind. Let us follow
our instincts and protect those who are unable to protect
themselves. By protecting children in armed conflicts we
gain fresh opportunities to tackle the problems that cause
their suffering. Children have the right to life, to peace
and to respect. Let us work together to help them.

The moving cases related earlier by the
representative of Canada highlighted the terrible slowness
with which the international community is shouldering its
responsibilities. All these children, these girls, these
women, who have been mutilated and tortured, and who
are the victims of armed conflict are waiting for us to rise
to the occasion and take action. What are we waiting for?

