Mr. Zenenga: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Council on the actions taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
with respect of the Council's presidential statement of
4 September (S/PRST/2008/33).

In the presidential statement, the Council
requested the Secretary-General to undertake three
tasks: first, to provide a detailed description of a
feasible multinational force; secondly, to provide a
detailed concept of operations for a feasible United
Nations peacekeeping operation; and, thirdly, to
identify and approach States that might contribute the
required financial resources, personnel, equipment and
services for the envisaged multinational force.

With regard to the first two tasks, the Secretary-
General's report (S/2008/709) provides the requested
information on the envisaged multinational force,
including its tasks, size and area of deployment. The
report also explains the phased deployment of the
multinational force, leading to a follow-on United
Nations peacekeeping operation that would be
deployed, as stipulated in resolution 1814 (2008), at an
appropriate time and subject to progress on the
political process and improvements in the security
situation on the ground. The proposed tasks of the
follow-on United Nations peacekeeping operation are
described in paragraph 49 of the report before the
Council.

DPKO sent a planning team to Addis Ababa in
September to develop the requested description of the
envisaged multinational force jointly with the African
Union (AU). It is expected that the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) will form part of the
multinational force, as explained in the report. The
envisaged follow-on United Nations peacekeeping
operation would also absorb AMISOM. troops. In that
regard, the team of 19 United Nations planning experts
that is currently assigned to African Union
headquarters in Addis Ababa is, among other things,
providing advice on the deployment of AMISOM
contingents in accordance with United Nations
standards.

With respect to the third task, DPKO has
developed a list of Member States and international
organizations identified as possible lead nations or
potential troop, financing or equipment contributors to
the multinational force. On 18 September, DPKO
convened a meeting with members of the Security
Council at the level of experts to seek their suggestions
and support regarding the mobilization of countries
that could contribute to the multinational force.
Proposals were received from a number of Council
members in that regard.

As indicated in the report of the Secretary-
General, on 24 October the Secretary-General wrote to
50 countries identified as potential contributors of
either one or all of the needed elements for the
multinational force, that is, equipment, troops or
funding. He also wrote to three international
organizations to appeal for funding and help in
mobilizing potential troop contributors. Given the
60-day deadline set by the Security Council, the
Secretary-General, in his letters to potential
contributors, requested responses by 4 November.
However, many Member States have indicated that
they will need more time to respond. The first replies
are now beginning to trickle in. The few responses
received so far are mixed.

To date, we have received a total of seven formal
responses. Of these, one Member State expressed
support for the multinational force and offered to
contribute equipment, airlift capacity or funding, as
required, but indicated that it was not in a position to
provide the lead contingent or troops. Four Member
States advised that they are unable to contribute troops
to a multinational force, owing to concerns of
overstretch. Two of the three organizations approached
expressed readiness to help facilitate funding from
their member States.

The remaining 45 countries and one organization
approached have yet to respond formally. No country
has come forward at this stage to pledge a lead
contingent. Several have indicated that they are
considering the proposal carefully. The Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has received and responded
to a large number of inquiries from Permanent
Missions in New York about the details of the

08-6107]

envisaged multinational force, particularly the
expected mandate, tasks, composition, areas and
duration of deployment, financial implications and
support arrangements. On 17 November, the Secretariat
convened a meeting of the 50 Member States and three
international organizations to whom the letters of the
Secretary-General were addressed. At that meeting, we
provided additional information based on the inquiries
received.

The letters sent to Member States by the
Secretary-General were in addition to bilateral
meetings he held with several leaders in September,
during which he raised this important issue. In doing
so, he has reiterated his view that the current
conditions in Somalia are not ready for a United
Nations peacekeeping operation.

The Council is aware of the need to ensure that
any force deploying in the complex conditions in
Somalia must have the appropriate military capacities,
which would not be available to a typical United
Nations peacekeeping force.

As we experienced in the 1990s, a force lacking
in the right capabilities can easily get bogged down and
fail. It is important to draw lessons from the Somalia
operations of the 1990s, in which a multinational force,
the Unified Task Force (UNITAF), succeeded in
stabilizing Mogadishu and a United Nations
peacekeeping force with lesser capabilities failed.

We would like to stress that the multinational
force, as described in the Secretary-General's report, is
not a maximalist approach. It is a limited, targeted
operation, deployed in Mogadishu only. It will have the
focused goal of supporting critical aspects of the
Djibouti Agreement and preparing the ground for the
deployment of a follow-on United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

We would like to express our appreciation to
Member States that have committed assets to anti-
piracy operations off the coast of Somalia, under
Security Council resolutions 1814 (2008), 1816 (2008)
and 1838 (2008). These crucial operations have been
extremely valuable in securing food deliveries for the
3.2 million people in Somalia, who are dependent on
humanitarian assistance.

At the same time, we are also mindful of the fact
that piracy and the recent terrorist attacks against
international targets are only symptoms of the
fundamental problem, which is the state of anarchy in
Somalia. These threats to international peace and
security cannot be successfully eradicated without
tackling the state of lawlessness in Mogadishu.

We believe that the approach pursued by Member
States in the efforts to combat piracy sets an example
of what is required to tackle the real source of the
security challenges in Somalia. We therefore appeal to
Member States to form a similar coalition, commit the
same level of military capabilities and deploy the
multinational force to stabilize Mogadishu and prepare
the ground for the deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. That operation would then
carry forward the task of consolidating peace,
establishing a secure environment in the rest of the
country and working with other partners to help rebuild
the Somali State.

