Ms. Rice (United States of America): I would like
to thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. We
greatly value his efforts and his effective advocacy for
the full implementation of United Nations sanctions on
Iran.

Every three months, the Council takes note of the
latest report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) showing Iran's continued defiance. Every three
months, we witness Iran's latest leaps forward in its
prohibited nuclear activities. The Council cannot afford
to be complacent. We must recognize that we face a
situation that continues to worsen. Just a few weeks
ago, the IAEA Director General provided his latest
assessment of Iran's nuclear progress (see S/2012/677, annex).

We learned that Iran is "significantly" hampering
IAEA inspections of the Parchin facility and probably
engaging in efforts to sanitize the site. We learned that,
at the Fordow fuel-enrichment plant, which is a bunker
facility built by Iran in secret and protected by the
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iran has doubled
the number of installed Iranian enrichment centrifuges.
And we learned that Iran continues to enrich uranium
to nearly 20 per cent, which is a step closer to bomb-
grade enrichment. Needless to say, such activities are
all contrary to multiple resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA.

Iran knows the steps that it must take to be in
full compliance with its international obligations.
Iran knows the actions required to demonstrate full
cooperation with the IAEA. Yet Iran's approach still
remains to deny, deceive and distract. The Security
Council must redouble its efforts to ensure that the
sanctions that we impose are fully and robustly
implemented. We have two effective tools to carry out
that task: the Iran sanctions committee and the Iran
United Nations Panel of Experts. Those bodies must
remain active and continuously seek ways to improve
the implementation of sanctions.

The June 2012 final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395, annex) provides an excellent blueprint
for Committee action on the weeks and months ahead.
We encourage the Committee to meet regularly until it
has acted upon all the recommendations contained in
the final report. The Committee should issue regular
guidance and public notices advising States on how best
to implement the sanctions. It should impose targeted
sanctions on individuals and entities responsible for
violating existing sanctions. The Committee should
also do more to help international organizations ensure
that their activities and programmes in Iran are fully
compliant with United Nations sanctions.
We particularly urge the Committee and the Panel
to focus on Iran's long-standing and well-documented
smuggling of weapons to extremist groups worldwide.
United Nations sanctions prevent Iran from exporting
all arms and related materiel to any country. Iran's
arms exports to the murderous Al-Assad regime in
Syria are of particular concern. As the Panel of Experts
has concluded, Syria is now "a central party to illicit
Iranian arms transfers" (S/2012/395, para. 120) . States
in the region must therefore work together and redouble
their efforts to deny, inspect and seize illicit Iranian
shipments, including transfers via air corridors, in line
with the cargo inspection provisions of resolution 1929
(2010).

We also urge the Committee to renew its focus on
Iran's prohibited ballistic missile programmes. In July,
officials of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
tested ballistic missiles capable of travelling 1,300
kilometres. Although such tests are in clear violation of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010), the Council and
the Committee have not yet taken effective action to
respond to that blatant non-compliance.

The United States seeks to resolve the Iran nuclear
issue through a comprehensive approach. We remain
committed to trying to find a negotiated solution with
Iran that restores international confidence in its nuclear
activities and bolsters regional stability. Working with
our Permanent Five plus one (P5+1) partners, we have
repeatedly laid out clear proposals for addressing the
Iranian nuclear issue step by step. As the Council
knows, the P5+1 focused initially on those elements
of the Iranian nuclear programme that are of most
immediate concern: Iran's continued enrichment of
uranium to 20 per cent; its stockpiling of 20 per cent
enriched uranium beyond the amount necessary for
any civilian use; and the continued activity at the
underground Fordow nuclear site.

In return for satisfactory Iranian action in those
areas, the P5+1 have made a serious offer of reciprocal
steps that begin to address Iran's concerns as well.
However, Iran has not responded constructively
to the offer, nor engaged the P5+1 on meaningful
commensurate steps. We believe that there is still time
and space for diplomacy.

However, the onus is on Iran to respond
constructively. The international community should
continue to underscore that Iran must take meaningful
steps or face increasing pressure. Yet we cannot and
will not pursue that path indefinitely. We will not
engage in an endless process of negotiations that fail
to produce any results. We must therefore remain clear
and united in seeking the resolution of the international
community's concerns regarding Iran's nuclear
programme. Time is wasting.

