Mr. Keating: As the Secretary-General said on
his first field visit since he took office, Somalia is
experiencing a moment of both tragedy and hope.
Tragedy, because a drought-induced humanitarian crisis
is now engulfing the country, with the imminent risk of
famine. Hope, because the recent electoral process has
created the momentum for fresh political engagement
among Somalis. The announcement 48 hours ago of
the establishment of the Cabinet, which includes six
women, is another important step forward.

More than 6 million Somalis - half the total
population - are now in need of assistance. Nearly
3 million, mainly women and children, require
immediate lifesaving support, and they include growing
numbers of displaced people living in miserable
conditions. Somalis, including politicians, business
people, civil society and members of the diaspora,
are taking responsibility for drought response. That
distinguishes Somalia from other countries facing
humanitarian catastrophe. President Farmajo declared
a national disaster within days of taking office. He is
using all available platforms to mobilize national and
international support. Access remains a challenge,
including in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab. But
compared to 2011, when 260,000 people died, the
scope for responding to the crisis is greater. Cell-phone
coverage and money-transfer options have expanded;
data on needs and assessment has improved; controls
on resources and partner-vetting are stronger; and
operational capacities have grown.

Humanitarian partners are scaling up the response
in various ways, including through the private sector
and with cash programming in affected areas. More
people are now being reached with food aid, nutritional
support, health-care services and access to safe water.
But much more is needed. The most urgent challenges
include funding for immediate lifesaving action, in
particular for the cholera response, which has now
affected 11 of Somalia's 18 regions. Treatment centres
and units are being opened throughout the country, but
the disease continues to spread. A rapid expansion of
treatment and preventive measures is urgently needed
before the rains, which will only exacerbate the
problem further.
The famine-prevention operational plan is seeking
$825 million in order to reach 5.5 million people by June.
The plan is currently 32 per cent funded. Funding and
cash-flow constraints prevented a significant increase
in response activities at the beginning of the year, and
more resources will be needed by the end of March if
we are to enable the partners to reach those affected
before it is too late. I welcome the recent generous
contributions made by many countries in response to
the calls from the Somali Government and the United
Nations for assistance, including a very generous one
from your Government, Mr. President.

Had the electoral process not delivered a result
accepted as legitimate, drought-response efforts would
be much more difficult. Instead, the electoral process
has created a sense of hope. The new Parliament is more
diverse, and its membership is younger and includes
more women than any before it. The elections were
largely peaceful and were not derailed by Al-Shabaab.
The African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
Somali security and intelligence forces did a great job
of protecting electoral sites. The presidential election
was conducted transparently. The former President,
Mr. Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, deserves credit for a
smooth and peaceful handover.

The elation that greeted President Farmajo on
8 February transcended clan and regional lines. The
outcome of the process has generated widespread
goodwill. As Prime Minister Dessalegn of Ethiopia
said,

Somalis have made history and set a great example
to countries emerging from conflict".

The complexity and imperfections of the electoral
process have not diminished the expectation that
there must be one-person, one-vote elections in 2020.
Preparations must now begin to establish the necessary
legal and administrative framework, lay the groundwork
for inclusive elections and enable women to compete on
equal terms with men. To that end, the United Nations
will field a needs-assessment mission this week.

The new Government and Parliament now have
an opportunity to use the goodwill to reboot efforts to
build a functional and inclusive Federal State and to
tackle the socioeconomic, structural and political issues
that make millions of Somali women, men and children
so vulnerable. For a functional and truly sovereign
Federal Somalia must find ways to rely less on foreign
funds and more on its own resources. Unless Somalia
can start attracting serious investment and generate
domestic revenues, State-building will remain only
an aspiration, and the country will remain perilously
dependent and vulnerable to weather-related shocks.
That will require not only greater institutional capacity
but also a settlement between the Government and the
private sector. Taxes should be collected by the State, in
return for assurances that funds will be accounted for
and used to provide basic services, including security
and the rule of law.

The President and Prime Minister have committed to
making improvements in public financial management,
transparency and accountability, including vigorous
steps to fight corruption, which they see as drivers of
insecurity. Those tasks will not be easy. They deserve
our support, including incentives for the private sector.
Support is needed to clear Somalia's arrears and allow
it to move along a path towards debt relief.

A more immediate challenge is to eliminate the
scourge of terrorism. The cost is just too high, both in
terms of human life and lost opportunities for Somalia,
but also for its neighbours and the international
community, including countries that are serving on
the Council. Success in degrading and dismantling
Al-Shabaab requires a multi-pronged approach,
embedded in a political strategy led by the Somali
Government. That approachwillneedto embrace support
for AMISOM'S operations, Somalian security-sector
reform, a resolution of local conflicts, the stabilization
and expansion of State authority in liberated areas, and
it should address the deficits in governance and the rule
of law that give Al-Shabaab oxygen.

Somalis want to assume greater responsibility
for their own security. There is some way to go. The
Somali security forces are underresourced, irregularly
paid, fragmented, often privatized and largely
unaccountable. But building trusted security forces that
are acceptable to all Somalis is essential. It represents a
major opportunity to build and consolidate the federal
State and should be approached as such, not just as
a military undertaking. The essential first step is a
political agreement between the Federal Government
and Federal member states, supported by Parliament
and civil society, on a shared security architecture that
embraces both army and police.

Such an agreement can become a basis for more
coherent international support and a cornerstone
for joint planning with the African Union (AU) on
AMISOM's future and eventual drawdown. AMISOM
is a model for a comprehensive approach to security,
but it has reached its tenth anniversary and will not
stay forever. The troop-contributing countries have
their own parameters, and donors face many competing
global demands. However, as was evident during
the electoral process, for now AMISOM. remains
the backbone of security in Somalia. Its presence is
essential to building the Somali security forces, and its
precipitate drawdown could be disastrous.

For that reason, I urge the Council to focus on
finding the funds to maintain AMISOM's presence and
enable a conditions-based withdrawal. The objective
must be a sufficient level of security in the coming
years, including in the run-up to the elections in 2020.
Over the next month, the AU and the United Nations
will jointly review AMISOM's future. Along with the
results of the strategic assessment mission, the review
should help the Council decide on the way forward for
AMISOM, including the use of assessed contributions.
However, the results of the review are unlikely to be
ready by 15 April, owing to delays in the establishment
of the new Government.

Security is not the only priority. Advancing the
constitutional process remains urgent. Constitutional
development will require consensus-building, dialogue
and consultations at various levels in order to address
all issues related to federalism. Strengthening conflict-
resolution capacities is another. It is vital to include
all sectors of society, including women, young people,
minorities and businesses, in the peaceful resolution
of internal conflicts. The United Nations will work on
that in coordination with key international partners
such as the African Union, the European Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

Significant work is needed to improve the dismal
human rights situation in Somalia. I am particularly
concerned about attacks on journalists and the increase
in sexual violence against internally displaced women
and members of minority clans. Military operations
and a worsening humanitarian situation will expose
Somalis to violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. Improving the capacity to provide
protection must be a priority. Full implementation of
the human rights due diligence policy, including the
implementation of mitigating measures, is essential.

In conclusion, Somalia faces many daunting
difficulties after decades of violent conflict, but it
has now been presented with a political opportunity.
The Security Council enjoys a remarkable degree of
consensus on Somalia. I hope that it can be used not
only to address the immediate crisis facing millions of
people but also to support Somalia's new leadership,
President and Prime Minister in addressing the
underlying issues so that we can prevent such a tragedy
from ever happening again.

