Major General Menon: The challenges of
Chapter VI peacekeeping have been acknowledged.
Indeed, that acknowledgement goes as far back as
Dag Hammarskjold, when he referred to peacekeeping
operations as belonging to "Chapter VI and a half" of
the Charter. However, while we accept that challenges
exist, it is important to state that many improvements
have been made as peacekeeping operations have
evolved, concepts have changed, and legal and operative
guidelines have been transformed. They include, among
others, An Agenda for Peace in 1992, the Supplement
to an Agenda for Peace in 1995, the Brahimi Report
in 2000, the Capstone Doctrine in 2008, the report of
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
in 2015 (S/2015/446) and the work of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations.
It is also notable that as challenges emerge and
the very nature of Peacekeeping Operations evolves
the core principles of peacekeeping have remained
constant, particularly under Chapter VI of the Charter:
consent, impartiality and the non-use of force,
except in legitimate defence. Arguably, an expanded
understanding of what constitutes a threat to peace,
as defined in Article 39, has led to a fourth principle.
Violence against civilians has reached levels of cruelty
in conflict beyond comprehension. It includes ethnic
cleansing, genocide, the rape of women and children,
forced displacement, the use of chemical and other
banned weapons and the crisis of refugees and the
displaced. The fourth principle is that of protecting
civil populations, human rights and the protection
of humanitarian operations. The constant vigilance
and zero tolerance of sexual exploitation and abuse
represent an unfortunate but necessary example of
where even peacekeepers, seen as a beacon of hope in
the most desperate of circumstances, can fall prey to
the worst aspects of human nature.

Is it possible to determine the conditions required
for successful peacekeeping? That has proved elusive,
as history has taught us. It is my intention in this
short statement to attempt to group the challenges
of Chapter VI peacekeeping operations under three
familiar strategic concepts: ends, ways and means. I
will use my personal experience in the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) - which
I have the privilege and honour to lead in a difficult
and challenging period - to highlight the challenges
that exist. Finally, I will conclude by highlighting the
importance ofpeacekeeping, beset as it is by challenges,
and how we can move forward with that critical task.

It is important for the success of any peacekeeping
operation to have a clear vision for the end - that
is, the outcome. I do not necessarily refer to an "exit
strategy" - although that is important - but, rather, to
a clear idea of what constitutes success. That might be
the observance of a ceasefire or the voluntary settlement
of a dispute. However, even in traditional observation
and monitoring missions, like UNDOF, the existence
of an agreed settlement does not always provide the
condition for success. Persistent belligerence or the
non-commitment of the parties to a settlement after
the initiation of a mission can represent a significant
challenge. That is particularly the case when a shift
occurs in the balance of power, or when a split takes
place.

Clearly, it is essential that the parties to an agreement
abide by that agreement. In UNDOF, the particular
challenge has been the entry and presence of a third-
party belligerent not party to any previous agreement,
not bound to accept the established conventions and not
committed to accepting the presence or role ofthe United
Nations mission. That can significantly alter the nature
of the original agreement and how it is subsequently
implemented. The intentions ofparties can also change,
and the challenge is not always to try and renegotiate
the original settlement - even where possible.

I believe that in order to overcome those particular
challenges, the United Nations mission must have a
clear and robust mandate, and it must also be flexible
and adaptive. Any United Nations mission, particularly
under Chapter VI, must have the ability to transform
itself. It must be able to respond to challenges, adapt its
disposition, tailor its forces and alter its deployments
and focus as the situation requires. That enables the
mission to respond to its environment without becoming
ineffective because the situation has changed. That has
proven to be a significant challenge for UNDOF as we
transition for the third time in four years with the return
to operations in Camp Faouar and on the Bravo side in
Syria. However, with a clear vision, that transformation
is possible. The challenge for Chapter VI operations is
to ensure that the United Nations as an organization
is flexible and agile enough to change as the mission
situation does.

How the mission achieves that end is through
various ways - strategic, operational and tactical.
And the ways can change rapidly. The political,
security and operational situations are all influenced
by the parties - legitimate or otherwise. As we have
experienced directly in UNDOF, third parties become
influential and change the dynamic. The third parties
cannot be ignored, because they also have aims and
agendas that influence and shape the situation. Although
in our specific example the third parties are not party
to the original agreement, they are stakeholders
nevertheless. They also come from the Civil population,
which they seek to control and influence, whereas
the civilian population requires protection, security,
humanitarian and human rights assistance.

The challenge for Chapter VI missions is that the
same ways will not always be suitable or possible.
Just because something was acceptable, successful or
agreeable in the past does not mean that it is the right
course of action now. For 40 years UNDOF had a
particular way of operating, with specific parameters
agreed by Israel and Syria, the parties to the Agreement
on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces.
Those ways were also agreeable and suitable to the
other key factor in peacekeeping operations - the
troop-contributing countries. That way of operating is
no longer suitable - even if it were possible. UNDOF
is currently changing the ways in which it operates. It
must - because the political, security and operational
situations have all changed. The specific challenge
for Chapter VI peacekeeping is to ensure that the new
ways are supported and resourced. The United Nations
as an organization must be open to change, open to
new ways of doing things, not be afraid to chart a new
course, even though the past 40 years have reflected
a successful way of achieving the requirements. The
Organization must be willing, and able, to learn - and
quickly, as the situation demands it.

No mission can operate without the means to do
so - that is, the capability. Capability development
is more than just equipment. It is the right equipment,
in the right place, at the right time, with the right
people qualified and capable of operating it. That
requirement covers a multitude of issues for Chapter VI
peacekeeping operations: troop-contributing country
support; contingent-owned equipment suitable for
deployment; the rotation of troops who have received
the correct environment-specific training in their
home nations i including with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse, cultural awareness and the rules
of engagement; and the complete absence of national
caveats that present commanders with unacceptable
situations on the ground.

In UNDOF, troop-contributing countries have
deployed some contingents without the required
equipment. The support from the deployed troop-
contributing countries has been superb in trying to
match the mission's requirement. Two countries have
started to develop the specific capability for the mission
that they do not possess in their home countries. That
is an admirable commitment, and I commend their
support. I could not achieve my mandate without it.
However, that also presents difficulties. The newly
developed capability has not been fully developed.
The experience is not present on deployment and
must be developed in an environment that is often not
suitable for on-the-job training. The challenge for the
Organization is to match troop-contributing-countrys'
capabilities with the requirement. In moving to achieve
new ends and ways, the means available from troop-
contributing countries are lacking.

UNDOF is attempting to turn a traditional light
infantry force into one with armoured protection
and firepower as critical force-protection measures.
However, in order to meet the demand, countries
without that capability have to develop it, rather than
countries with experienced capability providing it.
This mismatch of capability versus willingness must
be addressed.

Inter-mission cooperation is also required ifChapter
VI mission operations are to succeed. A good example
of such inter-mission cooperation and coordination,
including with a State that is not covered by the mandate,
is how UNDOF is required to conduct its operational
and administrative moves through Lebanon with full
cooperation, assistance and facilitation by the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the Lebanese
authorities, because of the absence of a crossing across
the ceasefire line between Israel and Syria.

UNDOF is an excellent example of the challenges
facing Chapter VI peacekeeping. For 40 years, it was
a classic Chapter VI mission, observing and reporting
on an agreement between two sovereign States
attempting to avoid war. For 40 years, a specific way
of operating, with minimum means, was sufficient
to achieve the desired end. Since 2011, however, this
has utterly changed. UNDOF and the United Nations
are challenged on a daily basis in transforming and
adapting to a new reality. The ends, ways and means
are all changing, and while this change is happening,
UNDOF is required to achieve its mandate however
it can - limited initially, but now moving back into
Syria and the areas from which it withdrew in 2014.
But UNDOF will not, and cannot, go back to how it
operated for 40 years. The question posed to UNDOF
has not changed, but the answers required have, and
this is the ultimate challenge.

The solution required is an organization that is
flexible and agile enough to change as the mission
situation does. The organization must be willing and
able to learn, and learn quickly. It should be able to
respond quickly to changing situations, including the
allotment of an additional budget if required. And troop-
contributing countries, whose support is so critical to
peacekeeping, must be willing to match capability to
requirement, rather than providing support based on
national interest.
Peacekeeping, in any guise, is challenging.
However, we should not be looking for the perfect
solution, simply the best possible one. At the start of
this address I referred to Dag Hammarskjold, who
identified the challenge for the United Nations early by
referring to "Chapter VI and a half" of the Charter. It is
perhaps fitting to end with him also.

Chapter VI peacekeeping is challenging, but so
is anything worthwhile. And peacekeeping is not just
worthwhile, it is essential. As Hammarskjold said, the
United Nations was not created to take humankind
into paradise, but, rather, to save humankind from
hell. Peacekeepers all over the world try to meet this
challenge on a daily basis. Some ofour peacekeepers die
trying to achieve it, as we have so tragically seen only
recently in the Central African Republic and yesterday
in Chad. Our challenge is to ensure that the ends, ways
and means required are available so as to give our
peacekeepers the best possible chance of success.

