Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): Since the renewal
of the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) a year ago,
consensus has been reached on the need to transform
the relationship between Afghanistan and its
international partners to one that sees greater transition
to Afghan responsibility and an increasingly supporting
role for the international community. The consensus on
this process emerged clearly at the London Conference
on Afghanistan of 28 January.

Now, the tangible shift in that relationship must
start. Concrete steps must be taken by the international
community to allow Afghans to be in charge of and
lead the fate of their country while providing the
capacity-building and support required for Afghan
institutions to take on this role, including in civilian
areas. At the same time, the Afghan Government must
concretely demonstrate that it can deliver on the
accountability required for a real transition process to
be sustainable. In that regard, we learned with
satisfaction this very morning that President Karzai has
signed a decree giving additional power to the High
Office for Oversight and Anti-corruption. Clearly, this
is a very positive development.

As also noted in the Secretary-General's report
now before the Council(S/2010/l27), in the midst of
heightened military operations, we face a crowded
political calendar, including in light of the planned
National Assembly elections in September, the Peace
Jirga announced by President Karzai in just over a
month, and, of course, the Kabul Conference after that.
There is a risk that the concept of transition, on which
we have collectively agreed to pin our political and
10-27766
security strategy in Afghanistan, will be overtaken by
such events.

Our focus must remain firmly on ensuring that
Afghanization actually becomes more than the slogan
it has been thus far, and that the political calendar
before us is premised upon it, with the Kabul
Conference formally marking the concrete and
systemic beginning of that process, most importantly in
the civilian and political spheres. The United Nations,
and UNAMA in particular, are supporting Afghan
counterparts - who must be in the lead in developing
the event's agenda - in the preparations for the
Conference. We would encourage the early formal
appointment of a lead ministry in these preparations,
which would provide a single counterpart for all those
involved. The London Conference has set a strategic
path that is clear in reaffirming the international
community's long-term commitment to supporting
Afghanistan and equally clear in reiterating
determination to move towards greater Afghan
leadership. We must follow this path with
determination now that we are possibly at the height of
international engagement in Afghanistan with a
Government that is legitimately eager to be in charge
of its future. Clearly, not to do so could lead to a
failure in our common efforts and strategies. That
cannot be an option.

(spoke in English)

On 6 March, President Karzai formally requested
the Secretary-General to provide technical and
logistical support and to help mobilize donor funding
for the National Assembly elections, scheduled for
September this year. In conformity with that request
and if we are mandated to do so, the United Nations
and UNAMA stand ready to play a role, alongside the
Afghan electoral institutions and other international
partners, in supporting the electoral process by
providing technical assistance, coordinating other
international actors supporting the process, and
channelling donor funds. If the transition to Afghan
responsibility is to be reflected in that electoral
process, it should be clear that the Independent
Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints
Commission are responsible for ensuring its
transparency and integrity and should perform their
mandates effectively, impartially and with the
confidence of all Afghan stakeholders. We stand ready
to work, along with others, with the Afghan electoral
10-27766
institutions and the Afghan Government towards that
end.

In that respect and with reference to the
announcement on 15 March by President Karzai that
two internationals will be part of the Electoral
Complaints Commission, President Karzai informed
Special Representative De Mistura during their first
meeting that he would like the United Nations to
nominate such international members. That is, of
course, a positive development, too.

The upcoming National Assembly elections can
be another milestone in highlighting the primacy of the
constitutional imperative in leading Afghanistan's
future, as well as our agreed common strategy of
transitioning to increased Afghan ownership and
leadership. On the basis of the commitment on
electoral reform agreed with the Afghan Government at
the London Conference, we need to collectively
support the Government in progressing on that reform
agenda for those and future elections. Our focus must
not be narrowly on those elections, but rather on
longer-term reform.

At the same time, we must be wary of sidelining
all other items on the political agenda and of allowing
the elections to absorb all or most of the energy and
resources of international and Afghan actors alike. On
the development side, for example, we must not lose
sight of the continuous need to ensure that our common
efforts are coordinated and in support of the
priorities - the Afghan priorities - that we have long
agreed with. Some progress has been made and has
been cited before, but sizable parts of Afghan territory
and large segments of the population are still
underserved; projects are still carried out that are
unsustainable or that duplicate what is already being
done by others; and, most worryingly, others are still
doing what Afghans could be doing. We greatly
welcome the appointment of the new NATO Senior
Civilian Representative and the new European Union
High Representative in Afghanistan. As lead
coordinator of international civilian efforts in
Afghanistan, Mr. De Mistura will rely on their support
and cooperation in furthering UNAMA's role.

At the same time, as we move towards increased
Afghan leadership, our collective efforts need to veer
towards strengthening Afghanistan's own capacity to
coordinate the assistance and aid that it receives, to
formulate and spell out its own development priorities
3
and what is required to address them, and to receive
and disburse funding where it identifies the greatest
needs.

Politically, we must not underestimate, on the one
hand, the importance and, on the other hand, the
complexity of initiating a political process of
reconciliation and reintegration. With over 70 countries
and organizations attending the London Conference,
there was an overwhelming consensus on the need for
such a process. The Government of Afghanistan
committed to developing a peace and reintegration
programme and the international community to
establishing a peace and reintegration trust fund.
UNAMA, with its repository of knowledge and
outreach, could play an important role and bring added
value to the programme and management of the fund.

Clearly, talk about talks has become more than
mere talk, and the rhetoric that peace cannot be
achieved by military means alone is being
complemented by concrete proposals and a clearer
policy. President Karzai's active engagement with
neighbours and regional players and convening of the
Peace Jirga in April are significant steps in that respect.
We should not, however, be under the illusion that the
process that has started will lead to immediate results.
It will need to be followed and coupled by multiple
confidence-building measures on both sides and to be
anchored on the common embracing of the progress
achieved since 2002. While it is desirable that Afghan
and international counterparts maintain a coordinated
stance on those initiatives, it is a process that should
continue to be Afghan-led.

(spoke in French)

As the Security Council will debate the renewal
of UNAMA's mandate in the coming days, it should
keep in mind that, while 2009 was a difficult year for
the United Nations in Afghanistan, the Mission - its
staff and its leaders - continued to implement
UNAMA's mandate with courage and determination.
Following the tragic attack on the Bakhtar guest house
in October, some staff had to be relocated owing to the
lack of accommodation and office space that met
security standards. Despite that, as members know,
UNAMA opened two additional field offices in 2009
and, thanks to the Mission's assiduous efforts in
constructing new accommodation and strengthening
existing premises, all staff initially relocated were
ultimately redeployed to Afghanistan by mid-March at
the latest.

Thanks to Headquarters support, and through a
combination of delegating authority and taking
exceptional temporary measures, UNAMA should be
able to reduce the post vacancy rate, which increased
following the announcement of new posts expected in
the budget and the changes in human resources
management and the recruitment procedures, to under
30 per cent this summer. A further decrease of the post
vacancy rate is expected from now to year's end.

To keep on course at such a critical time for the
country and the Mission, Special Representative
De Mistura promptly redeployed to Kabul on
13 March, which explains his absence today. He felt it
to be important that he reach Kabul as soon as possible.
He immediately started a series of fruitful discussions
with President Karzai and members of his Government,
as well as with other Afghan and international officials,
while setting out the Organization's strategy and
priorities in the short and medium terms, in accordance
with the mandate entrusted to it.

We anticipate that the Special Representative will
receive the Council's strong support in exercising his
duties as coordinator, with the help of his Deputy, the
Resident and Humanitarian Coordinators, and the
activities of the United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes in Afghanistan. As members know, a new
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Political Affairs has also been appointed.
That is Mr. Kobler, who will deploy to UNAMA in
early April.

Headquarters and UNAMA's leaders and staff
will continue to work jointly to ensure the mandate's
effective implementation for a stronger UNAMA. At
the same time, and I stress this, even as we pursue and
strengthen our efforts and implement the mandate in
the most cost-effective way wherever we are present,
without overstretching the available staff and
resources, the security requirements of all staff in
Afghanistan require a careful assessment of the critical
nature of the United Nations operations in Afghanistan,
including those of UNAMA. UNAMA's work as an
integrated Mission and that of all United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes must be continued,
sustained and strengthened when necessary, but that
must be done by ensuring that the programmes and the
staff fulfil duties of the highest priority.
10-27766

We thank the International Civil Service
Commission (ICSC) for having approved a three-
month extension of the special hazard pay for
Afghanistan. We will continue to seek the support of
the Council, as well as that of relevant budgetary
bodies and the ICSC, to ensure that staff posted to non-
family duty stations, such as Afghanistan, are
compensated, commensurate with other United Nations
staff, for their living conditions and the situation on the
ground.

An unprecedented level of international attention
and resources is invested in Afghanistan, in support of
priorities that have been agreed with the Afghan
Government and of a strategy of transition to greater
responsibility entrusted to Afghans that was also
jointly endorsed at the London Conference. We must
resolutely work together to take advantage of that
occasion and that opportunity to make the difference
that that unity of efforts, strategies, priorities and
resources allow.

