Ms. Sison (United States of America): We thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
commitment to conflict prevention and the sustaining
peace agenda. We stand behind the Secretary-General as
he implements an ambitious vision for a United Nations
that can better address the world's most complicated
and pressing challenges. The Security Council is in
a unique position and has a unique responsibility to
respond to crises too large for any one nation to address
on its own. Yet to meet such challenges, we must
ensure we have the tools and capabilities to respond the
realities of the world we live in.

Peacekeeping operations, for example, are
a powerful mechanism for the maintenance of
international peace and security and the protection of
civilians. The United Nations has more than 100,000
troops and police deployed worldwide - responding
to crises in ways no other institution can. Yet we must
ensure that those missions meet the needs of people on
the ground. This is not about producing more reports or
reorganizing departments; it is about taking a careful
look at each mission and asking difficult questions.
Are we using our resources well? Does each mission
promote a political solution? Are we effectively
protecting civilians? Are we fostering independence,
or dependence?

We did that just recently during the mandate renewal
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA). We supported an increase in MINUSCA's
troop ceiling, while also emphasizing the importance
of focusing on the quality of the troops deployed.
To that end, we pressed for stronger requirements in
the mandate for preventing and reporting on sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers and for reporting
on performance indicators of force effectiveness, more
broadly. In Liberia, the United Nations devised a
peacebuilding plan in preparation for the withdrawal
of the peacekeeping mission early next year. The plan
was developed in close coordination with the Liberian
Government and included the participation from civil
society, and the result is a plan that all parties can
buy into.

Yet the Security Council has generally used
peacekeeping missions as a tool in response to imminent
risks of mass violence or, too often, after conflict has
already broken out. To more comprehensively promote
peace and protect human lives, we must look first at
underlying challenges to peace and security, including
a failure to promote development or human rights or
to meet humanitarian needs. When left unaddressed,
those shortcomings can develop into threats to
international peace and security. Those factors can
not only exacerbate conflict but, in many instances,
directly lead to instability - a vicious cycle that is
often largely man-made and preventable.

In Yemen, for example, approximately 22 million
people out of a population of 29 million are in need of
humanitarian assistance. There are more than 984,800
suspected cases of cholera, and more than 7 million
people at potential risk for famine. Access constraints at
key ports only fuel that crisis and prolong the suffering
of the Yemeni people. And famine is not just a human
tragedy, it is an issue of peace and security. Earlier this
year, the Secretary-General warned us that we were in
the midst of the largest food security emergency since
the Second World War - with more than 20 million
people in north-east Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan
and Yemen facing famine. Those conditions were not
caused by drought or natural causes, but rather from
conflict and, in some situations, are a result of parties
more interested in power and personal gain than in the
safety and security of their own people.

Recent reports of human trafficking in Libya have
sparked moral outrage and drawn attention to those
abominable acts. Men, women and children fleeing
conflict or persecution often find themselves vulnerable
to forced labour or sexual exploitation - taken
advantage of by ruthless traffickers with no regard
for human dignity. The individuals responsible for
those horrific crimes are too often also engaged in
transnational trafficking of weapons and narcotics,
as well as in financing terrorist organizations. Those
challenges remind us every day of how high the stakes
are for strengthening democracy, increasing prosperity
and improving security - all of which are elements
necessary to building lasting peace.
Despite its shortcomings, the United Nations has
the power to develop solutions to the transnational
problems we face. Those complex challenges demand
a truly whole-of-United-Nations approach, as well
as deeper partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations and improved integration of the work of
United Nations partners and other stakeholders. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Support Office play an important role in bridging the
divides between the three United Nations pillars in
support of coherent peacebuilding efforts and analysis.
Once again, we are grateful for the Secretary-General's
participation in today's meeting and we encourage him
to continue bringing issues to the Council's attention
early and often when he believes that an issue requires
Council attention or action. Fragile States share many
common characteristics, such as weak governance,
environmental degradation and poverty, that are
interlinked with political instability, transnational
crime and violent extremism. Those issues overlap and
so too should our responses. Now let us all ensure that
we have the right tools to act.

