Mr. Liberty: Before I begin, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting me to brief the
Security Council today on my experience in Liberia.
As a Liberian-American, it is also among the highest
honours of my life to have the opportunity to address
the representatives of the Permanent Mission of Liberia
to the United Nations and, of course, the entire Council.

My name is Chid Liberty. I am an entrepreneur. My

family came to the United States when I was only five
years old to seek refuge from the deteriorating political
situation in Liberia. By the time I had reached my
teenage years, Liberia was in the middle ofa full-blown
civil war. The war in Liberia was brutal, characterized
particularly by the use of child soldiers and conflict-
related sexual violence. However, I am here to report
that today, through the social and political organizing
of civil society groups, such as Leymah Gbowee's
Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace, through the
regional intervention of our friends in the Economic
Community of West African States, with the help of
bold political home-produced leaders, such as Ellen
Johnson Sirleaf, and through the actions of this body,
Liberia is truly a peaceful country once again.
In January, Liberia completed its first transition
from one democratically elected Government to
another such Government in 71 years. Our election
was not perfect, but it was a testament to the Liberian
people's commitment to our stable peace. Through
months of challenges and investigating irregularities,
all sides remained committed to a fair election and a
peaceful transition.

Liberia's peace is about more than just our physical
safety. As for many here, as a young man in the United
States, Liberia became synonymous with those photos
ofyoung boys dressed in ripped army fatigues, carrying
semi-automatic weapons. I therefore cannot express
the feeling in my heart when, on my way to work in
Monrovia on gorgeous mornings, I see children dressed
head to toe in school uniforms. The only marching that
our children are doing is into the classroom and onto
the playground. Despite our low school enrolment rates,
Liberians are more committed than ever to educating
our next generation. My business, Liberty & Justice,
makes and distributes free school uniforms to children
who cannot afford them. Research of the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology shows that when school
uniforms are donated, attendance increases by up to
62 per cent and test scores improve. Out of every three
young girls who receives a donated school uniform, two
will delay their first pregnancy. We pay for the unforms
through the sales of our brand, UNIFORM, which is
sold predominantly here in the United States through a
partnership with Bloomingdale's.

Our peace is not just for kids. When I first got
back to Liberia in 2009, we had a poverty rate of
approximately 80 per cent and a formal unemployment
rate of 80 per cent. That really drove the decision of
myself and my partners to start a factory to provide
formal jobs for women, particularly those who were
internally displaced or vulnerable to chronic formal
unemployment. Women are left out of the formal
economy, especially in such major industries in Liberia
as mining, rubber and logging. With the help of United
States impact investors, we established the first fair
trade factory in Liberia and begin shipping orders
for American brands and, eventually, our own brand
uniform. I wish to note that the security guards at our
factory are all former child soldiers who now protect
the very women they used to victimize.

Today, Liberia's per capita gross domestic product
has almost recovered to its pre-war levels despite major
setbacks from the Ebola outbreak and a drastic slide in
commodity prices. However, this is not about statistics.
It is about real people. I am inspired to share the story
of one of our workers. Jenna came to the factory in 2010
without enough money to even afford a matching pair of
slippers. During the war, her first husband abandoned
her with a few ofher children and moved to Sierra Leone,
leaving Jenna and her children as refugees in their own
country. They lived in one of the camps for internally
displaced persons on the outskirts of Monrovia. One
day, Jenna's women's group told her that there was a
factory offering jobs and that she did not need to know
how to read or write. Fortunately for us, Jenna came.
Although she could not fill out any paperwork, it turns
out she has an incredibly rare talent - operating a
sewing machine. She quickly became and still is the
number one sewing machine operator in our factory.
Over the past eight years, she has learned to read and
write through programmes sponsored by the factory.
Today Jenna is employed, literate, remarried, food-
secure, healthy and happy, and has all her children
in school.

I am here mostly to give thanks. We know that the
commitments, financial and otherwise, were not easy to
make when this organ unanimously adopted resolution
1503 (2003). I am also here to report that United Nations
investments were not made in vain. The United Nations
Mission in Liberia officially ended its functions in
March, and I can say that Liberia is truly a post-conflict
success story. Mission accomplished. However, I would
be remiss in letting the mission end here.

As we look to the future, Liberia now more than
ever needs to strengthen our private sector. We have a
young population that needs to be educated, employed
and engaged in the democratic process. I hope we can
all agree that to continue the spirit ofthe Mission means
we all need to find ways to invest in Liberia's youth.
We need foreign investment in young entrepreneurs
that will create Liberia's jobs of the future, build our
domestic tax base, and support our civil society. Many
people think investing in Liberia is still too risky;
however, having seen Liberia lose a generation first-
hand, I know that the risk of investing in Liberia is
nowhere near as risky as not investing in Liberia.

I thank the Council for the honour of addressing
it today.

