Mr. Okamura (Japan): Please allow me to thank
His Excellency President Nikolic of Serbia and Her
Excellency Ambassador Citaku of Kosovo for their
briefings. I also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Tanin for his briefing and
continued service.

As indicated in the report (S/2017/95/Rev.1) of the
Secretary-General, the escalation of tension between
Pristina and Belgrade is a matter of concern. Violent
extremism, radicalization and terrorism continue to
pose a threat to security in Kosovo and the region.
However, the risk and intensity of violence are
considerably less than those in other regions often
taken up by the Security Council, such as Africa or the
Middle East. Limited peacekeeping resources should
be allocated to areas where there is an urgent need for
them. If the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is indeed still necessary
in its current configuration, as suggested by the
report of the Secretary-General, the Council must
identify the activities that specifically require such an
UNMIK presence.

The efficient and effective functioning of the
Council should also take priority. Indeed, improving
working methods is of keen interest to all Council
members. In that regard, we do not see any reason that
meetings on UNMIK need to be held as frequently
as during the time of the adoption of resolution
1244 (1999). A meeting and report every six months
is sufficient. In spite of it all, personally, I myself
appreciate the opportunity every three months to recall
my memories of Kosovo. I mentioned wine the last
time (see S/PV.7811); today I would like to talk about
business opportunities.

The Trepca mines hold the largest natural resources
in Kosovo and could potentially generate large sums of
tax revenue. However, it is regrettable that challenges
remain in the business of operating the mines. At
the same time, there are other types of businesses in
Kosovo. Allow me to share one example here. In 2013,
a Japanese company established a farm and factory in
Mitrovica, which produces shiitake mushrooms. By
making use of Japanese high technology, the company
has a production capacity of eight tons of mushrooms
a day. It exports its produce to 12 countries in Europe
and North America. I have not brought any mushrooms
with me today, and will not mention the name of the
company. But I can share its contact details and home
page later if anyone is interested.

Kosovo also has rich tourism resources. There
is a magnificent waterfall in Mirusha, and Gadime e
Poshtme is proud to be home to a mysterious limestone
cavern. People can enjoy trout raised in fish farms
in Istog at a restaurant adjacent to the farm. I even
found a good natural hot spring - known as onsen in
Japanese - near Peja, and I myself had a bath there.
The sulphurous white water is pleasant and warm, just
the right type of onsen for Japanese people like me.
Mosques in Prizren and Orthodox monasteries in Decani
and Gracanica are breathtaking. Such sites appear in all
Kosovo travel guides - such as the one I have here,
which members can find in book shops - and represent
great potential for tourism development in Kosovo. Let
us take a trip to Kosovo and explore the country.

I would like to emphasize the following to
the people of Kosovo. For Kosovo to be seen as a
genuinely mature democracy, the greatest challenge
is reconciliation between communities. Prior to the
conflict in Kosovo, Kosovar Albanians and Kosovar
Serbs lived in the same space. I have a female friend
in Kosovo who is Kosovar-Albanian. She was very
sad when the conflict broke out. Kosovar Albanians
and Kosovar Serbs once lived together, but Kosovar
Serbs were forced to flee in the wake of the conflict.
The majority of them have not returned. Reconciliation
must now be accelerated before the memories ofa more
harmonious time fade and are lost for good. As long
as animosity and injustice remain in Kosovo society,
tourists and foreign companies will hesitate to visit
or invest. In that regard, Japan highly values the high
level of commitment by both sides to resolve issues
even after several incidents that heightened tensions.
I ask both sides to demonstrate the rich, diverse
cultures and societies of Kosovo through efforts to
achieve reconciliation and tolerance, including the
establishment of the association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo.

In concluding my remarks, I would like to recall
three outstanding colleagues from my time as Chief
Political Officer in UNMIK 17 years ago: Ms. Nadia
Younes, Mr. Jean-Selim Kanaan and Ms. Fiona Watson.
Ms. Younes was UNMIK spokesperson, and her office
was right next to mine. Mr. Kanaan and Ms. Watson
were advisers to then Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kouchner. Mr. Kanaan was also my
partner on winterization projects in Kosovo. They all
worked very hard and contributed greatly to Kosovo's
recovery from devastation and chaos. Three years
later, a United Nations office was established in post-
Saddam Hussein Iraq. Then-Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Sergio Vieira de Mello, keenly
aware of the high calibre of the three officers, brought
them to Iraq. On 19 August 2003, Mr. De Mello
convened a regular senior staff meeting with those three
people present. A truck parked beside the building. A
strong explosion occurred, turning the building into
rubble. The attack killed whoever happened to be at
the site, including those persons just mentioned best,
the brightest of United Nations personnel. People with
talent and bravery like them are tirelessly working at
the forefront of peacekeeping missions to bring about
peace and justice, at times in dangerous environments.
We must never forget the dedication and sacrifice
that many brilliant people have made in order to
achieve peace.

In the hope that somehow they can hear me, I would
like to report to those three great colleagues of mine
that, in Kosovo, peace and stability, democracy and
economic development have made steady progress.

