Ms. Sison (United States of America): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing. I thank also Ms. Fatima Shehu Imam for
joining us; it is good to hear from her. It was very good
to have met her on the Council's trip earlier this year to
Maiduguri, and I thank her for the important work she
does in north-east Nigeria. The contributions of civil
society are so very critical.

The Lake Chad Basin is one of Africa's most
pressing challenges. For years the United States has
strongly supported efforts to eradicate the terror
perpetrated by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and this fight is far from over.
But all of us in the Security Council must recognize
that a military solution alone will not bring sustainable
peace to the Lake Chad basin.

Although the counter-terrorism mission is Vital, we
also need to support the stabilization and development
of liberated areas and demand respect for human
rights and accountability for human rights abuses and
Violations for all perpetrators. That is why, following
the Council's trip to the region, we adopted resolution
2359 (2017) and its mandate for the Secretary-General
to regularly report on the situation in the Lake Chad
basin so that the Council can respond to the grave
circumstances faced by so many in the region.

This first report (S/2017/764) is an important step
in that regard, and we are committed to ensuring that
the region remains on the Council's agenda. Discussing
the situation in the Lake Chad basin in the Security
Council should not be at all controversial. Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) are
clear and present threats to international peace and
security. We have seen unspeakable human rights
abuses committed in the Lake Chad basin. The region
is on the brink of famine, and we still do not have
unfettered humanitarian access to those in need. It is
therefore long past time for the Council to step up its
involvement. Boko Haram persists in its brutal tactics
and human rights abuses.

The United States is deeply troubled by the
increase in attacks and deaths that we have observed at
the hands of Boko Haram and ISIS since the adoption
of resolution 2359 (2017) earlier this year. In June and
July alone, according to the United Nations, 60 female
suicide bombers have launched attacks across Borno
state. Hundreds of civilians have been killed this year.
There is a long way to go to defeat Boko Haram and
ISIS in the Lake Chad basin, and that is why the United
States is deeply committed to its partnerships across
the region to eradicate those groups and to stop the
senseless violence.

As we discovered during the Council's trip in March
in the course of our meetings with women and girls
in Maroua, Cameroon, and Maiduguri, Nigeria, that
conflict, like so many others, has a disproportionate
impact on women and girls - a point that Ms. Imam
just underscored for us. The fact that Boko Haram
increasingly relies on young girls to commit suicide
attacks is the clearest example. We were so struck
by that terrible reality during our trip. Just as those
girls lives where beginning, they were abused and
brainwashed to commit the most unspeakable of acts,
thereby cutting short their all-too-brief lives and those
of the innocent victims around them.

There is no question that Boko Haram and ISIS must

be destroyed, but success against those groups requires
more than a simple show of force. The most successful
counter-terrorism campaigns are those that adhere to
international humanitarian law, respect the human
rights of all citizens and hold violators of human rights
accountable. We therefore remain troubled by reports
of regional security forces using inhumane and brutal
tactics or failing to distinguish terrorist combatants
from civilians. Failing to uphold and protect human
rights or hold security forces accountable only serves
to boost the recruitment efforts of the very terrorists
whom we seek to eradicate. Regional Governments
must ensure that their security forces protect civilians
and uphold their fundamental human rights. There
must be a better way to both investigate and prevent
those and other abuses from happening.

We were concerned to read in the Secretary-
General's report about the delayed opening of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) in Chad to enhance regional
monitoring and reporting. We believe that the Council
should consider mandating a formal OHCHR mission
to Visit the region to report first-hand on abuses by all
parties. But the challenges in this conflict do not end
when areas are liberated from Boko Haram and ISIS.
In those areas, local authorities need to quickly restore
the basics: the rule of law, respect for human rights and
basic services. That is how we can all ensure that groups
like Boko Haram and ISIS do not return. Such efforts
to restore local governance deserve strong international
support. Governments in the Lake Chad basin also need
to establish the conditions for millions of internally
displaced persons and Nigerian refugees to voluntarily
return to their homes in safety and dignity.

We echo the Secretary-General's call on Nigeria
and Cameroon to work with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to achieve
the full implementation of the tripartite agreement to
ensure no forced returns of refugees, and call upon
all other Governments to avoid any involuntary or
unsafe returns of those displaced. The United States
remains committed to supporting the Governments of
the Lake Chad basin in meeting those very difficult
challenges. We have contributed over $640 million to
the international humanitarian response in the Lake
Chad basin since October 2015, of which more than
two-thirds was provided this past year alone.

Many other countries have stepped up to provide
assistance to the region, including the Niger's
$4.4 million-dollar contribution to its own national
appeal. We commend those pledges, but more must
be done. We would therefore urge all Member States
to examine ways in which they can support counter-
terrorism, the humanitarian response in all the affected
countries, economic development, human rights and
stabilization in the region.

The United States will continue supporting regional
leadership and the people of the Lake Chad basin in
their arduous efforts to rid the region of Boko Haram
and ISIS and establish stability, good governance and
prosperity. We urge our fellow Council members and
the entire United Nations system to continue focusing
our collective attention and efforts on the region and
its challenges.

