Mr. Sadeghi (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to thank you very much, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate. I also wish to
thank Mr. Smith for the briefing to the Council this
morning.

The global fight against terrorism, with the
United Nations at the forefront and playing a leading
and central role, remains a priority for the international
community. Undoubtedly, the role that the United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies, including the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED)
should play to help Member States tackle this problem
is of high importance.

Despite certain achievements made by the United
Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms in dealing with

the menace of terrorism, the international community's
efforts to tackle this threat have faced certain
impediments along the way, which need to be
addressed appropriately. For instance, an opposing
unilateralist trend has, from the very outset, run the
risk of arresting the momentum and undermining the
universal consensus and thus damaging the overall
effective fight against terrorism. The application of
double standards by certain Powers in tackling terrorist
activities and in fighting terrorism is yet another
disturbing problem that the international community
has witnessed for years, if not decades. Therefore, the
counter-terrorism bodies of the United Nations should
address such shortcomings more seriously and with
more dedication.

Indeed, the success of the CTED and other
counter-terrorism mechanisms of the United Nations in
discharging their immense responsibilities depends on
adopting and pursuing an integrated, non-selective and
balanced approach to their implementation of the
relevant Council resolutions.

Iran has taken serious steps in implementing the
Security Council resolutions on terrorism, including
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005). We have
presented five national reports on our implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001), and have included a section
on the measures we have taken to implement resolution
1624 (2005) in our latest report to the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. The concrete steps that our
country has taken to implement the provisions of those
resolutions, including intensifying our efforts to exert
control over and maintain security on our borders, are
elaborated in those reports.

Moreover, Iran has fought a costly and deadly
war against drug trafficking, which originates in
Afghanistan. Given the fact that drug trafficking has
served as one of the main sources of financing for
certain terrorist groups that are based in Afghanistan,
our efforts to fight drug trafficking have
unquestionably made a fundamental contribution to the
global fight against terrorism. Thus far, Iran has
shouldered this burden almost single-handedly. In
order to continue this fight, it is imperative that the
international community make a more serious
contribution, and pay greater attention, to this
important aspect of fighting terrorism.

As one of the first victims of terrorism in the
region, Iran has been unwavering in its efforts to fight
this threat and has always strongly condemned this
vicious menace in all its forms and manifestations. We
have been suffering from the atrocious terrorist
activities that have been perpetrated in Iraq and
Afghanistan against our diplomats and nationals.
Iranian diplomats and an Iranian journalist were among
the first victims during the Taliban occupation of
Mazar-e-Sharif in Afghanistan in 1998. The terrorist
activities in Iraq have also inflicted much pain and
suffering on our nation. Just two days ago, a group of
Iranian pilgrims who had made their way to Karbala to
pay tribute to their late Imam were martyred there by
terrorists, together with dozens of innocent Iraqi
people.

The increasing heinous and cold-blooded State
terrorism perpetrated by the Israeli regime in the
Palestinian territories are also of serious concern to the
international community. With deep anguish and
concern, the entire world has been witnessing the
unspeakable crimes of the Israeli regime against the
Palestinian people. The State terrorism perpetrated by
that regime in the Palestinian territories and its
shocking war crimes have been continuing, in the
absence of any meaningful action by the Security
Council.

As I said earlier, the application of double
standards in dealing with terrorism and terrorist groups
is yet another important matter of grave concern that
seriously undermines the international community's
collective fight against terrorism. The Islamic Republic
of Iran has been subjected to various acts of terrorism
by certain terrorist groups over the past three decades.
In that regard, a particular reference should be made to
the terrorist Mujaheddin e Khalq Organization (MKO),
which has thus far carried out more than 600 terrorist
operations in Iran, resulting in the killing and
wounding of many civilians and officials and in
damage to our nation's property. That terrorist group
has also designed numerous atrocious ploys to incite
acts of terrorism within and outside the country. The
MKO was long supported and sheltered by the former
Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein and was also engaged
in Saddam's bloody campaigns against the Iraqi
people.

Despite its heinous and appalling record of
terrorist acts and incitement to terrorism - which are
well known - and despite the fact that it was officially
designated as a terrorist group by the United States and
the European Union (EU), the elements and members
of the MKO continue to enjoy support and receive safe
haven in the United States and some European
countries, including some EU member States. That
support clearly violates the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

There are certain other terrorist groups that, with
the support of some Western countries, have committed
acts of terrorism against the Iranian people. Over the
past several years, the Jundullah terrorist group has
attacked and killed dozens of people in the eastern and
south-eastern parts of the country in an attempt to
create an environment of intimidation and insecurity.
Unfortunately, the terrorist acts of these groups have
not been unequivocally rejected and condemned by
certain countries in the West, and, in clear violation of
Security Council resolutions on terrorism, these
terrorist groups have even been given the chance to
operate freely in certain European countries and in the
United States and to plan and incite terrorism against
our nation, including by using the media.

A case in point was the outrageous act committed
on 1 April 2007 by the Voice of America's Persian
Service television channel, in which the channel
supportively and sympathetically provided the head of
the Jundullah terrorist group with an opportunity to
incite terrorism and violence in Iran and to shamelessly
describe his vicious terrorist activities. That was a
flagrant violation of the Security Council resolutions
on terrorism and a clear example of public
endorsement of and incitement to terrorism.

We strongly believe that terrorism and terrorist
groups should be condemned and fought without
discrimination and that there can be no justification for
any inaction, negligence or use of double standards in
fighting this menace.

