Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, my delegation would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of May. You can count
on my delegation's cooperation as you discharge your
responsibilities. I should also like to congratulate His
Excellency Ambassador Kovanda, the Permanent
Representative of the Czech Republic, on the wisdom and
skill he displayed in guiding the work of the Security
Council during the month of April.

My delegation extends a cordial welcome to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia and wishes him to
know that we understand better than anyone the situation in
his country because of the similarities between our two
countries. My delegation commends the Secretary-General
for his report on Georgia dated 1 May 1995. It also notes
with satisfaction the ongoing consultations aimed at
introducing a new Constitution with a view to a
comprehensive political settlement.

My delegation is however concerned at the insecurity
in the region and the violations of international
humanitarian law through the premeditated policy of
systematic elimination on the part of one party to the
conflict, with the aim of taking control of a territory by
terrorizing and massacring innocent civilians. Unfortunately,
this policy is being pursued in the name of misplaced
nationalism, ancient grievances and an avid thirst for
vengeance.

My delegation is concerned at the objection of the
Abkhaz side to facilitating the speedy return of displaced
persons and refugees. It seems to us that the most recent
proposal by the Abkhaz to repatriate a mere 200 individuals
a week is, in a sense, motivated by a policy of exploitation
that seeks to take advantage of the situation facing refugees
and displaced persons to attain other goals. For this reason,
my delegation recommends that the observers' mandate be
strengthened so that human rights violations may be
detected. It suggests that individuals with competence and
experience be sent to Georgia, as opposed to the neophytes
that were sent to my country.

As you are aware, genocide and ethnic cleansing are
not the problem of the society or individual country
concerned; they are a universal problem. In this context, the
United Nations adopted an international convention to
which most countries have acceded. My delegation is
astonished at the failure of the countries of the region to
take action to support and save the victims of this inhuman
behaviour.

My delegation supports the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) until 12 January 1996. It also firmly supports
the proposal to establish an international tribunal to bring
the persons guilty of human rights violations to justice.
This tribunal should not be a mere clone of existing
tribunals but should be adapted to the situation prevailing
in the region and respond to the specific problems facing
the population there. My delegation also supports the idea
of establishing a federation as the key to resolving the
Georgia-Abkhaz conflict.

At a time when preparations are in full swing at the
United Nations for the commemoration of its 50th
anniversary, a few Member States are falling victim to
genocide and ethnic cleansing. The basic principles which
underpin this Organization are being flouted. The cry of
"never again" which rang out almost 50 years ago
remains a dead letter because certain Members of the
Organization are disregarding it or encouraging those who
are doing so, while others still, through their silence, are
accomplices. We do not see how the Organization will be
able to face the community of nations with its head held
high if these fundamental principles which are the very
raison d'etre of the Organization are not respected.

As the wise men of the President's country have put
it, it is never too late to do good. That is why my
delegation calls for appropriate action, by which we mean
effective action, to salvage what can be salvaged. In this
context, my delegation will cast a vote for this draft
resolution.

