Mr. Feltman: The Council is convened today
at a potential turning point in the crisis in Mali.
The military struggle over northern Mali has been
engaged. The Secretary-General has applauded France
for its courageous decision to deploy forces to arrest
the troubling push by extremist groups southward.
He greatly appreciates the efforts of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the
African Union (AU) and the troop contributors to the
African-led International Support Mission in Mali
(AFISMA) to accelerate its deployment.

The Secretary-General has been clear in his
instructions for the United Nations system to move
with all speed to contribute, within the Organization's
mandates and capabilities, to resolving the crisis in
Mali within the framework of resolution 2085 (2012).

I am pleased to be joined here today by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Djinnit, who
has been working tirelessly and cooperating closely
with national and regional actors to resolve the situation
in Mali.
As we focus today on solutions in Mali, let us
not forget that the factors behind the sudden collapse
10 months ago of one of West Africa's most vaunted
democracies, and the takeover of half of the country
by extremists, run deep. Solutions will not likely
come quickly or simply. Dangers line the path ahead.
Whether the international community is successful in
helping Mali to restore its democracy and recapture
its territory in a lasting way will depend on the
breadth of its vision and the comprehensiveness of its
response. Vigorous military actions must be matched
by an equally strong focus on the political challenges
in Mali. They must be carried out with full attention
to human rights and humanitarian concerns, and they
should be reinforced by strategies to address the many
transnational threats that combine to breed extremism
and weaken governance not just in Mali but across the
Sahel.

As the members of the Council are aware, the
dynamics in northern Mali have shifted dramatically
in recent days. The fall of Korma on 10 January, as part
of an apparent attempt by extremists to push southward
towards Bamako, had the effect of galvanizing the
concerns of Mali and its friends and accelerating the
regional and international response to the crisis.

The capabilities of the armed groups occupying
northern Mali have proven to be strong, as they are
better equipped and trained than initially anticipated.
This was illustrated on 14 January, when radical forces
opened a new front in Diabaly, only 350 kilometres
from Bamako. The extremist armed groups' advance
into eastern Mali was successfully repelled and the
fighters have reportedly fled these areas. Yet it appears
that in the western area, armed elements have moved
closer to the Mauritanian border. Meanwhile, the latest
reports indicate that the cities of Konna and Diabaly are
now under control of the Malian army.

Military sources in Bamako have indicated that in
deciding to resume hostilities, the extremists intended
to capture Bamako and that the risk of infiltration and
further attacks by these groups on southern towns,
including Bamako, remains high.

With regard to developments in the subregion
related to Mali, on 20 January Nigerian troops on
the way to Mali were attacked in northern Nigeria by
Boko Haram, and three soldiers were killed. Member
States with access to intelligence and other reports not
available to us may have additional information about
the situation in Mali and the region, and we would
welcome any information that can be shared with us.

On 19 January, ECOWAS held an extraordinary
summit in Abidjan to review the latest developments
in Mali, particularly the modalities for an accelerated
deployment of African forces. The summit endorsed
the appointment of AFISMA's military command,
called on all troop-contributing countries to make their
contingents immediately available, and authorized
AFISMA contingents to engage in operations with
their units. The summit called upon the United Nations
to immediately furnish the logistical and financial
support for the deployment of AF ISMA. The summit
also called on the Government of Mali, the AU and
ECOWAS to establish a functional mission headquarters
for AFISMA in order to facilitate coordination and
deployment, and to establish a joint coordination
mechanism on resolution 2085 (2012) to facilitate
regular consultations on political leadership, resource
mobilization and disbursement, as well as reporting,
monitoring and evaluation.

The deployment of AFISMA troops and
headquarters staff officers began on 18 January. As of
20 January, 855 troops from Benin, Nigeria, Senegal
and Togo had been deployed, along with a full Nigerien
battalion at the border with Mali. There is general
agreement amongst key stakeholders in Bamako that the
envisaged AFISMA strength of 3,300 personnel needs
to be increased if AFISMA is to engage effectively in
offensive operations and enhance force protection.

The deployment of the Force Commander and
establishment of the force headquarters have set the
conditions for the planning effort, supported by planners
provided by international partners. The planning
process also provides an opportunity to review and
revise, as necessary, the AFISMA troop requirements,
command and control structures, liaison mechanisms
and other important matters.

On 21 January, the President of the ECOWAS
Commission and the Chair of the ECOWAS Committee
of Chiefs of Defence Staff visited Bamako. They met
with the AFISMA Force Commander and other officers,
and visited AFISMA troops already on the ground, as
well as the French forces. They also met senior Chadian
officers to discuss the deployment of the 2,000-strong
Chadian troops and their coordination with AFISMA.

Due to the accelerated deployment of AFISMA
troops, critical equipment, logistical and other support
for the troops are urgently required. In accordance
with paragraph 10 of resolution 2085 (2012), the United
Nations is supporting AFISMA headquarters in planning
activities, including assessing the units' equipment and
operational readiness. AFISMA is currently facing
critical gaps, including communications capacity,
air mobility and medical capabilities. Additionally,
it is expected that the deployed contingents will have
only very limited capacities for self-sustainment. The
Malian defence and security forces also have capacity
gaps requiring immediate attention.

The African Union and ECOWAS are finalizing
a comprehensive list of priority requirements, while
the Malian Minister of Defence has indicated that a
comprehensive list of the needs of the Malian Defence
And Security Forces has been submitted to Interim
President Traore'. These will inform the donors'
conference that the African Union has called to take
place in Addis Ababa on 29 January.

In a welcome development, on 17 January the
European Union established a Common Security and
Defence Policy mission, headed by Brigadier General
Francois Lecointre of France, that is expected to be on
the ground by mid-February to support the training
and reorganization of the Malian Armed Forces. The
mission will not be involved in combat operations.

As noted in his letter to the Security Council,
the Secretary-General is firmly committed to using
the tools of the United Nations, as authorized by
the Security Council, to help to address the crisis in
Mali and to promote the implementation of resolution
2085 (2012). His letter outlines several options for the
Security Council's consideration, and he also identifies
several concerns regarding capacity, human rights and
the safety and security of United Nations personnel
and facilities. The Secretary-General is confident that,
in exercising its responsibility to debate, and perhaps
authorize, the use of United Nations assets, Security
Council members will consider carefully both his
proposals and his concerns. The options proposed in
his letter are as follows.

One option would be for all logistics support to
AFISMA to be provided through bilateral channels. That
option could be funded through one or a combination of
bilateral, United Nations trust fund or United Nations
assessed contributions channels.

A second option would be for the United Nations to
provide a logistics support package to AFISMA in all
phases of its operations. Given that a finalized concept

of operations for AFISMA is under development, it is
currently not possible to produce a detailed plan for
such a support package. Nonetheless, at the request of
the Council, the Secretariat has conducted additional
planning for a logistics support package. The elements
of a possible United Nations support package to
AFISMA are contained in the annex to the letter
that the Secretary-General submitted. This option
would be financed through United Nations assessed
contributions.

A third option would be for bilateral partners
to provide logistics support to AFISMA during the
combat phase of operations, and for the United Nations
to provide support to it during the deployment and in
the stabilization phases of its operations. This option
would significantly reduce some of the risks to the
Organization and personnel who are associated with
the second option.

Meanwhile, the start-up team for the establishment
of the United Nations multidisciplinary presence in
Mali arrived in Bamako over the weekend and renewed
contacts with stakeholders to continue discussions on
the implementation of all aspects of resolution 2085
(2012), including the political and the security processes.
The head of the United Nations team in Bamako,
Mr. Joao Honwana, is already on the ground and has
begun discussions on a transitional road map, including
regarding reconciliation, with Malian partners.

In his meetings with Malian authorities, he
emphasized the need for the political and military
tracks to go together, as well as the need for a clear
vision on the part of Malian authorities on what needs
to be done, around which international support can be
rallied to move the transitional process forward. He
also raised the need for raising awareness of the risks
of ethnic tensions and retaliation taking place in Mali.
In that regard, I note again that the multidisciplinary
office includes human rights expertise.

The Malian Government has expressed its full
agreement on the need for the military and political
processes to evolve jointly, and informed the United
Nations team that it was moving swiftly with an
inclusive consultation exercise with key civil and
political actors on the transitional road map, prior to
its submission for approval to the National Assembly
within two or three weeks. The Malian Government
also reiterated its desire for a discrete and light United
Nations presence in Bamako, with interlocutors with
whom they could frankly exchange views and rely on
for advice. The authorities also noted that Mali needed
a broader reconciliation process, which could be carried
out only once basic State authority and control had been
re-established in the north. On elections - an essential
element of the political process - Malian officials
were of the view that elections would have to take place
once critical northern positions had been brought back
under Government control.

Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Djinnit has also continued to engage
national and regional actors to shore up support
for the implementation of resolution 2085 (2012).
On 17 January, he met with President Dioncounda
Traore' in Bamako and highlighted the importance of
the political process. On 18 January, he attended the
ECOWAS Mediation and Security Council meeting in
Abidjan, and on 19 January Mr. Djinnit participated in
the ECOWAS Summit of Heads of State. He provided
clarification on the United Nations role in support to
the immediate deployment of AFISMA, following a
request from the President of ECOWAS Commission to
the Secretary-General dated 17 January.

There is serious concern about the well-being
of the population in the north of the country, where
malnutrition rates were already reaching emergency
thresholds before the resumption of the conflict.
The insecurity has forced many humanitarian actors
to reduce an already limited presence, or in some
cases evacuate the area. The few non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) still active the north of Mali
point to the region's growing isolation, with the main
supply roads from the south and Algeria now cut off.
The isolation is increasingly exacerbating the existing
shortage of food and other commodities, with fuel
shortages already having an impact on the functioning
of hospitals and urban water-supply systems.

Despite the challenging environment, the United
Nations and its partners are working to address the
most pressing needs. Food distribution by the World
Food Programme of the United Nations (WFP) is
ongoing for 12,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs)
in Bamako. UNICEF is currently working with NGO
partners to provide and distribute aquatabs in Gao
after the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western
Africa seized the fuel used for the water distribution
network. The WFP is also preparing to deliver food to
the three northern regions of Timbuktu, Gao and Kidal,
to be implemented as soon as possible, as well as the
provision of food assistance to 22,000 IDPs and 32,000
IDPs in the Mopti and Segou regions, respectively.

There are also mounting protection concerns, with
reports of retribution attacks against civilian Tuareg
and Arab populations and continued allegations of
the recruitment of child soldiers and the use of sexual
violence as a tool of war. Meanwhile, on 16 January,
the International Criminal Court announced that it
was opening an investigation into alleged war crimes
committed on the territory of Mali since January 2012.

The situation underscores the need to ensure
that parties to the conflict avoid harming civilians
and comply with international humanitarian law
and international human rights norms, including
facilitating the rapid and unimpeded passage of relief
consignments, equipment and personnel. In that regard,
the Human Rights Due Diligence Policy applies to
any United Nations support to the military operation
undertaken. The policy establishes a set of principles
for United Nations entities contemplating or involved
in providing support to non-United Nations security
forces. Key elements include an assessment of risk,
transparency with receiving entities an effective
implementation framework.

For 10 months now, the world has watched with
horror as the people ofnorthern Mali have been subjected
to almost unspeakable brutality at the hands of armed
extremists and terrorists. Friends of the Malian people
in the region and beyond were shocked by the abrupt
collapse of constitutional order in Mali and the threat
to Mali's territorial integrity and unity, exacerbating
an already dire humanitarian situation. The Council,
along with regional and subregional organizations,
debated how best to assist the people of Mali to address
the full spectrum of the severe political, security,
humanitarian, and human rights challenges that they
faced. As we have discussed before, the problems of
Mali also need to be seen in the context of the broader
Sahel region, as we cannot expect to alleviate the crisis
in the Sahel without simultaneously improving the
situation in Mali, which can spill over, and has in fact
done so, into neighbouring countries.

In recent weeks, African and international leaders,
including the members of the Council, have by their
actions demonstrated their resolve to assist the people
and institutions of Mali. We welcome the clear, unified
message that we have heard from Council members
and beyond that the military and political tracks must
proceed hand in hand, with full attention paid to the
humanitarian situation and to human rights.

We fully concur that ongoing military operations
should take place within the framework of a political
process to ensure sustainable peace, stability, and
national reconciliation. Likewise, the ongoing military
operations should provide the necessary political space
for negotiations between the Government and groups
that have renounced violence and distanced themselves
from terrorist networks. The United Nations will
continue to impress upon the Malian leaders the need
to agree quickly on a transitional road map to restore
effectively constitutional order. We urge others to
reinforce that message, for reliance on an exclusively
military approach will not allow for the building of a
lasting solution for Mali.

The Secretary-General and other senior officials
will be in Addis Ababa over the weekend for the
AU Summit. The Summit will provide additional
opportunities for discussions between United Nations
officials and our African and international partners on
how collectively we can help the Malian people.

