Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Another tragic chapter of the history of the
Middle East conflict has now been written. For almost
a month, before the eyes of the entire world, innocent
civilians in Lebanon and Israel have been dying and
hundreds of thousands of Lebanese citizens have been
forced to abandon their homes. Serious damage has
been done to Lebanon's civilian infrastructure.
Personnel of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) have been in an extremely difficult
situation and have suffered casualties.

These wounds will take a long time to heal -
both in Lebanon and in the memory of the world
community. From the very first days of the
confrontation between Israel and Lebanon, Russia has
insisted on an immediate ceasefire to prevent further
casualties and to bring an end to suffering among the
civilian population both in Lebanon and in Israel.

We are convinced that the prime cause of the
tragedy that has unfolded in Lebanon, and of the
broad-scale humanitarian disaster, was not solely the
train of events with which we are all familiar, but also
the lack of a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East. It is possible that similar events will continue to
shake the Middle East until decisive action is taken to
resolve the region's fundamental problems. In that
context, it is increasingly essential to engage in
comprehensive consideration of all aspects of the
Middle East situation, without exception, on the basis
of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

It took an unjustifiably long time to draft the
Council resolution we have just adopted. Russia did
everything it could to accelerate the process, both in
our contacts with the parties and around the negotiating
table. It was this that guided us when we proposed our
draft resolution yesterday, calling for a humanitarian
ceasefire in Lebanon and for urgent diplomatic efforts
to resolve the crisis.

But, as it proved possible today to produce an
agreed text of a broader Security Council draft
resolution on Lebanon, the Russian Federation decided
to support that text. It reflects Russia's key demand for
an immediate cessation hostilities, it takes into account
the legitimate demands of Lebanon and it includes
provisions that meet the security interests of Israel. We
call upon the parties to show the necessary political
will and strictly follow the course of action outlined in
the resolution.

06-4649]

For its part, Russia will continue steadfastly to
promote the achievement of a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East, pursuant to the decisions
taken by the Security Council.

