Mr. Assaker (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council at a time of
sensitive and difficult issues.

I also wish to commend the efforts of your
predecessor, and to thank the Security Council and the
Secretary-General for their efforts and support
following the assassination of Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri and his companions.

By the same token, I pay tribute to the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission (UNIIIC), established by the Council, for
its ongoing efforts under the leadership of Mr. Serge
Brammertz, whose earnest and high professionalism
we appreciate.

We have read with close attention the third report
of the UNIIC and welcome the strenuous efforts that
were made in preparing it. We also welcome the close
cooperation between the Commission and the Lebanese
authorities, which will continue in the framework of
the Council's resolution. We view with hope the
contents of the report reflecting the cooperation of all
parties and we call for the continued development of
such cooperation in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

The Security Council is meeting today just as
certain decisions of the Lebanese national dialogue
have been announced, reflecting the consensus
achieved among the Lebanese parties. Those decisions
reiterate the resolve of the Lebanese people and their
leaders to discover the real truth behind the
assassination of Rafik Hariri and his companions, to
achieve justice, and to identify and demarcate the
remaining Lebanese occupied territories in accordance
with the measures and principles adopted and accepted
by the United Nations. The participants also expressed
their attachment to the establishment of strong
relations and parity between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic based on mutual respect for sovereignty
and independence.

Revealing the truth behind the murder of Prime
Minister Hariri is a priority for Lebanon and the world.
All Lebanese also agree to and demand the
establishment of an international tribunal to try all
those involved in that terrorist crime. The tribunal will,
in turn, promote consensus and internal stability in
Lebanon.

All are aware that the issue is beginning to
assume legal form following the consultative visits and
the understanding reached in prior weeks between the
authorities concerned within the Secretariat and the
Lebanese judicial delegation. The Government of
Lebanon hopes that its request for the creation of the
tribunal will be favourably received and supported by
the Security Council and anticipates that a final
formulation regarding the structure and operation of
the tribunal will be reached as soon as possible.

Meeting the demands of the Lebanese people to
punish those involved in this enormous terrorist crime,
whoever they may be and wherever they are to be
found, and to unveil the truth behind other murders and
attempted assassinations that preceded and followed
it- from the attempt against Minister Marwan
Hamadi to the assassination of the martyr Gebran
Tueni - will strengthen stability in Lebanon and
throughout the region. Furthermore, those demands
seek the fulfilment of justice and will deter the
perpetrators from repeating such terrorist acts,
especially in the light of Lebanon's suffering over the
years from frequent attempted and successful
assassinations. Discovering the truth and holding the
perpetrators accountable will do a great service to the
future of Lebanon, a country which Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri and his companions loved and died for.

The truth will promote the independence and
sovereignty of our country. It will also help the
Lebanese Government, with the support of its people,
to strengthen the foundations of the capable, strong and
just State to which all Lebanon aspires.

