Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Recently, the situation in Croatia has deteriorated
drastically, marked by a rapid escalation of military conflict
and attacks on United Nations peace-keeping personnel,
plunging innocent civilians into an abyss of misery and
forcing large numbers of refugees to leave their homeland.
The humanitarian situation in the region is extremely grim,
and the Chinese delegation is deeply concerned about this
situation.

The current situation in the former Yugoslavia, rather
than cooling down, has heated up and grown even more
tense and turbulent. Once the flames of war spread, the
situation will be uncontrollable and unmanageable. This
will not only bring huge calamities to the people in the
region, but also pose a serious threat to peace and stability
in Europe and the world as a whole. Therefore, we strongly
urge the parties concerned, taking into account the
long-term interests of all ethnic groups in the region, to
stop all military action immediately and peacefully settle
their conflicts through negotiations. At present, it is
imperative that the problem of the large exodus of refugees
and other grave humanitarian problems be resolved. At the
same time, we strongly call on the parties concerned to
ensure the safety of the personnel of the United Nations
Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO).

We have consistently held that the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries of the
former Yugoslavia should be fully respected and that
countries in the region should recognize and live in amity
with each other and work together to advance the process
of a comprehensive political settlement. We support the
diplomatic and political efforts made by the international
community to this end.

The draft resolution before us urges the parties to the
conflict to immediately stop hostilities and resume
negotiations at an early date and calls for an urgent
solution to the humanitarian problems, particularly that of
refugees, so as to restore stability in the region. It also
calls upon the parties to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of UNCRO personnel. The Chinese delegation
will therefore vote in favour of it.

Here, I wish to reiterate that the Chinese delegation's
reservation with regard to the references in the draft
resolution to Chapter VII of the Charter and resolution
816 (1993) remains unchanged.

