Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Zerrougi, for her comprehensive briefing. We closely read the recent report of the Secretary General (S/2020/1150) on the efforts of peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We concur that the security situation in the eastern provinces remains fraught. We are particularly troubled by the Kivus and Ituri, where inter-ethnic violence and attacks against civilians continue unabated. The Allied Democratic Forces continue to pose a significant threat, as clashes with the Congolese army have significantly increased in recent months. Against that backdrop, we are deeply concerned about the growing number of civilian casualties, which has led to renewed grievances against peacekeepers in Beni and other cities. Attacks by illegal armed groups and inter-ethnic conflicts persist even in the relatively calm Tanganyika. The situation in the country is compounded by the political crisis, which has already led to the President's decision to disband a coalition with supporters of former President Kabila Kabange. We count on a reduction in political tensions in Kinshasa through a resolution of problems at the constitutional level. At the same time, there are glimmers of hope. The Congolese authorities have managed to defeat the most recent Ebola outbreak. Despite the generally complicated humanitarian situation, effective measures are being undertaken to prevent the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We express our support for President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's efforts to involve the neighbouring States in resolving the problems in the east of the country. We believe that regional organizations, in particular the Southern African Development Community and the _ International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, play an important mediation role in the peace process. We trust that the new regional strategy prepared by the Office of the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region of Africa will give additional impetus to those processes. We note the contribution to the stabilization of the eastern provinces made by MONUSCO through nimble responses to myriad security threats. There are also non-military ways to address the problem of illegal armed groups, including a strategy for the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former fighters that is currently being developed and rooted in partnerships with local communities. We welcome measures to expand cooperation between MONUSCO and the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo and to improve the effectiveness of the efforts of the Blue Helmets, including the Force Intervention Brigade. This month, the Security Council has the important task of extending the mandate of the peacekeepers for another year. We stand ready to work constructively on the relevant Security Council draft resolution. We trust that its authors will manage to craft a balanced document focused on the specific objectives of the mission. We continue to believe that any decisions regarding the configuration of MONUSCO, including the Force Intervention Brigade, should take into account the situation on the ground and thoroughly consider the priorities of Kinshasa and the troop-contributing countries. In that regard, we support a flexible approach to the issue, as reflected in the joint strategy for the phased and responsible withdrawal of peacekeepers from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, based on the criteria and targets proposed in that document. In conclusion, let me assure you, Mr. President, of our country's readiness, including as a member of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, to continue to actively contribute to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the stabilization in the Great Lakes region as a whole.
