Mr. Isnomo (Indonesia): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this important open debate.

We would like to associate ourselves with the
statement delivered by the representative of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Since at any given time 178 Member countries of
the United Nations are not in the Security Council,
it is crucial that the Council function in a manner
that makes it transparent, effective and accountable
vis-a-vis all United Nations Members. In that regard,
Indonesia welcomes the positive actions taken by the
Council over the years, such as more open debates,
more consultations with the Presidents of the principal
organs and sub-organs and also with troop- and
police-contributing countries, as well as including
voices from multilateral and regional institutions,
civil society, non-governmental organizations and the
private sector to enrich the discourse.

Flowing from General Assembly resolution 69/321,
the joint initiative of the Presidents of the Security
Council and General Assembly to make the process
for the selection of the next Secretary-General open
and consultative is also a milestone step. Furthermore,
the fact that elections for non-permanent Council
members were held six months in advance was another
positive development.

Yet there remains a significant gap between the
expectations of the global citizenry, which has entrusted
the Council to act on its behalf, and the Council's
functioning. First and foremost in that regard is the
exercise of the veto or the threat to exercise the veto,
which has obstructed necessary action by the Council
in the face of mass atrocities and severe violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
on too many occasions. The examples of Palestine and
Syria are two such cases. While Indonesia calls for
the abolishment of the right of the veto in the Council,
in view of the present entrenched realities, it would
support steps that would regulate the use of the veto
responsibly. The Council should work out a workable
mechanism in that respect.

Secondly, as world conflicts become more complex,
the Council must ensure that all stakeholders concerned
with United Nations special political missions and
peacekeeping operations are consulted properly and
that their strengths are harnessed. The recent reviews
of United Nations peace operations, peacebuilding and
resolution 1325 (2000) have underscored the primacy of
prevention, politics, dialogue and regional partnerships.
Fundamental to enabling sustainable peace and realizing
the aims of these reviews is the Council's deeper and
meaningful interaction with relevant stakeholders,
including troop- and police- contributing countries. A
shared understanding, cooperation and collaboration
among them throughout all phases of peace operations
are critical. Following the adoption of resolution
2282 (2016) on the review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture, my delegation also looks
forward to a close and robust partnership of the Council
with the Peacebuilding Commission and other relevant
United Nations and non-United Nations partners.

Thirdly, Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter of
the United Nations should be fully implemented by
taking into consideration the views of the affected
non-member countries. Their perspectives, along with
those of regional organizations, can be invaluable in
building workable approaches to resolving root causes
and advancing reconciliation.

Fourthly, there should be balanced, harmonious
and collaborative relations between the Security
Council and the General Assembly. Consistent with
Article 11 of the Charter, the Council should take into
account the recommendations from the Assembly on
matters pertaining to international peace and security.
In that respect, the Council must not shy away from
discussing non-traditional issues that, in today's reality,
have proven to have direct and significant linkages to
international peace and security, including the issue of
development. Suffice it to say that peace and security
could not withstand the test of time if development
were neglected.

To keep myself within the time limit and the spirit
of the concept note (S/2016/585, annex), I would like
to conclude by underlining that, as important as the
need to improve the Council's working methods and
procedures is, better procedures alone are not the
solution. The Council must be effective, fair and just
in resolving conflicts in accordance with international
law, and that will occur when the Council is reformed
comprehensively, becoming democratic, accountable
and representative of the plurality and realities of
the world today. For its part, Indonesia stands ready
to contribute to efforts to achieve a comprehensive
Security Council reform.

