Mr. Serrano: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
to participate in this important debate. Let me also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for Somalia, Ambassador Diarra, for their
important messages. I also welcome the presence of the
Prime Minister of Somalia, Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed. On this occasion, I would like to restate that
the European Union remains committed to providing
support to Somalia and to all those who are making
efforts to bring peace and security to the country.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Montenegro; the countries of the Stabilisation and
Association Process and potential candidates, Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this declaration.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
by the situation of violence and unrest in Somalia and
by its dramatic impact on the lives of the civilian
population, especially women and children, who have
been the primary victims. The European Union has in
particular also repeatedly expressed its grave concern
over the recruitment and use of children in the conflict.

In addition to the already dire security situation,
the recent short rainy season resulted in rising food
insecurity in central and southern regions, increasing
the number of people needing humanitarian assistance
by 20 per cent in the past six months to a total of
2.4 million. Following her recent visit to Somalia,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Valerie Amos said that Somalia had become one of the
world's worst humanitarian crises, and that the
situation could easily worsen if immediate action were
not taken.

The European Union will continue to provide
humanitarian assistance to the most vulnerable
populations, in accordance with the humanitarian
principles of independence, neutrality, impartiality and
humanity, while also taking into account the broader
regional dimension and the substantial number of
Somali refugees in neighbouring countries. However,
the European Union is deeply concerned over the lack
of access to and respect for the integrity and
independence of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, and calls on all actors to ensure free and
unhindered access.

In Mogadishu and its surrounding areas, violent
clashes between Al-Shabaab and forces loyal to the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) have
continued to occur on an almost daily basis. That
illustrates the urgent need to link security with a
political strategy, built on inclusive outreach. Security
cannot be guaranteed by military means alone.

Tensions in the contested regions between
Puntland and Somaliland have recently increased. The
European Union calls on all parties to refrain from
violence and to turn to dialogue to resolve their
differences.

We are also concerned by the continuing political
instability, following the recent unilateral decision of
the Somali Parliament to extend its mandate for an
additional three years. In order to improve the
legitimacy, representativeness and credibility of any
possible new institutional arrangements after August
2011, the Transitional Federal Institutions must be
reformed. The constitutional process must be
broadened and not limited to those Institutions.

In conformity with relevant Security Council
resolutions, the European Union has developed a
multipronged strategy for Somalia, in support of and in
partnership with the Transitional Federal Government,
the African Union, the United Nations, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
countries in the region and other international partners.
That support extends to the Djibouti political process,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
8

development of the rule of law and the security
capacity of the Transitional Federal Government, and
the fight against piracy.

For the sake of brevity, I will not go into details
on all aspects of the European Union's engagement in
Somalia, but would refer participants to the written
version of my statement. However, it is important to
mention that we greatly appreciate the efforts of the
AMISOM. troop-contributing countries, Uganda and
Burundi. The courage and commitment of their troops
deserve admiration. I am also glad to inform the
Council that the first intake of 1,000 soldiers, trained in
the framework of the European Union training mission,
has been deployed in Mogadishu to reintegrate under
AMISOM. responsibility.

The European Union continues to worry about the
level of violence of pirate attacks, and remains in the
forefront in the fight against piracy through its
Operation Atalanta. The European Union
acknowledges the urgent need to respond through a
multipronged approach that tackles the root causes. We
need to support countries in the region in building
regional maritime capacities. It is also urgent to take
action in the fight against impunity for piracy crimes
and to support the development and enhancement of
legal, judicial and penitentiary measures in the
countries of the region. The Kampala process, bringing
together the TFG, Puntland and Somaliland, should be
further developed.

There is no purely military solution to the conflict
in Somalia. The strengthening of AMISOM, in
particular, must go hand in hand with an upgraded and
comprehensive political strategy, based on widening
the TFG support base. Regrettably, the Transitional
Federal Institutions have been unable to reach out to
others, and, as a consequence, subregional authorities,
such as those in Puntland and Galmudug, are
expressing their frustration. That must be addressed.

We support efforts to shorten the extension of the
transitional period, but at the same time it is necessary
to ensure that any extension is linked to reforms.
Indeed, in order to conclude the transitional period and
to finalize the constitution, we believe that the TFG
should develop more effective governance and
consensus-building during the run-up to August 2011
and beyond.

For that purpose, it is urgent that the Transitional
Federal Institutions advance a reform agenda to enable
11-25878
the delivery of services to the Somali people and to
build legitimacy and credibility. A Somali-driven
reform of the Federal Institutions, as well as a national
security strategy setting the parameters for the
stabilization of Mogadishu and conflict-torn parts of
southern and central Somalia, are essential. We note
the commitment of Prime Minister Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, as reiterated today, and we count
on the TFG's constructive approach in increasing the
legitimacy of institutions in Somalia.

The challenges of Somalia need to be dealt with
through a comprehensive approach, covering political
reconciliation, security and development, as well as
human rights. In that regard, the participation of
Somali women in the decision-making process and in
the political sphere, which has decreased in the past
years, should be encouraged as a way to promote peace
and reconciliation.

Bearing in mind the impact of the Somali
situation on other countries of the region and beyond, it
is therefore of key importance that the international
community remains actively engaged in fully
supporting the efforts of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Somalia, Ambassador
Mahiga.

It is essential to put in place an influential
approach, allowing for dialogue, understanding and
moving the Somali peace process forward. The next
meeting of the International Contact Group on Somalia
will be helpful in that regard.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the firm
commitment of the European Union to continue to
work for peace and stability in Somalia.

