Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the United Kingdom for having convened this
meeting during its presidency of the Security Council,
providing us with an opportunity to take stock of
the situation in Somalia one month after the London
Conference on Somalia. Mr. Minister, I also welcome
your personal participation. Allow me also to welcome
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Somalia, Ms. Adan.

Somalia has indeed entered a new era. The
transition has concluded. Legitimate authorities that
enjoy the trust of the majority of the population are
consolidating their efforts to promote peace and to
establish representative institutions in Mogadishu
and beyond. The country, which for far too long has
been ravaged by war, is now on the right path, that of
political and security progress. However, considerable
challenges remain.

With the support of the international community,
including the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the Somali authorities will have to establish a
federal system, revise the Constitution and prepare for a
referendum on the future Constitution and for elections
to be held in 2016. Women should be fully involved in the
political process. In parallel, a process of reconciliation
should be undertaken between the Federal Government
and regional entities, particularly in Kismaayo, where
the situation is especially worrisome.

We believe that particular attention should be
given to the regional dynamics. The establishment
of a regional framework could help build confidence
among the States of the Horn of Africa, define the
necessary security guarantees and strengthen economic
cooperation in that part of Africa. In that context, we
welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental Agency
on Development to support stabilization in Somalia.

Security is a precondition for the reconstruction of
Somalia. Despite the remarkable efforts of the Somali
National Security Forces, their allies and the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Al-Shabaab
still controls a large part of the country. We therefore
welcome the adoption by the Somali authorities of
strategic plans aimed at developing the security and
police forces, as well as the judicial system. During the
London conference, my country was among those that
committed itself to financially supporting security-
sector reform. The Federal Government of Somalia
will have to be in a position to coordinate the activities
of international donors in that area. It must also
work to establish a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General,
who believes that AMISOM. has reached its limit in
terms of its capacity to retain control of the liberated
areas and to continue its offensive operations. We
therefore support the Secretariat's intention to carry
out this summer, jointly with the African Union, an
assessment of AMISOM, with a view to reinforcing the
complementarity of United Nations and African Union
efforts.

Improved security conditions on the ground will
also help to address the root causes of piracy. In that
context, the adoption of the new Somali strategy
for maritime security is welcome. Luxembourg will
continue to provide assistance in that area by making
maritime surveillance aircraft available to the European
Union's Atalanta Mission.

I will conclude my remarks by briefly addressing
the human rights situation, which, regrettably, remains
of great concern. The number ofjournalists killed and
of incidents involving sexual violence, particularly in
camps for internally displaced persons, and acts of
violence against children continue to be alarming. It is
important that the Somali authorities ensure that those
responsible for such violations of human rights are
brought to justice.

In that context, Luxembourg welcomes the
commitment undertaken by the Federal Government of
Somalia to combat sexual violence and to implement
the action plans adopted in 2012 aimed at putting an
end to the recruitment and use of child soldiers and to
the murder and mutilation of children. It is important in
that regard that security-sector reform provide for the

establishment of measures prohibiting the recruitment
and use of children by the Somali armed forces.

We are convinced that with the decisive support of
the international community - the Brussels conference
to be held in September will represent an important
step in that respect - and of the Security Council in
particular, the Government and the people of Somalia
will be able to continue to advance along the path of
peace, security and prosperity.

