Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank the Security Council
for the invitation to participate in this debate in my
capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

The report of the PBC on its third session
(S/2009/444) presents a detailed appraisal of the
activities undertaken by the Commission in the period
under consideration. It is encouraging to note that
much progress has been achieved since the
Commission was established. The same applies to the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), which has been
instrumental in providing catalytic funding to post-
conflict countries.

In this connection, I would like to commend the
Chair of the Organizational Committee, Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz, for his dedicated efforts to enhance
the role and visibility of the Commission. Our gratitude
also goes to the Chairs of the country-specific
configurations and the Chair of the Working Group on
Lessons Learned.

The developments highlighted in the annual
report are most welcome. In the case of Guinea-Bissau,
we have been able to address the priorities established
in the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding adopted
last year, despite the tragic assassinations of March and
June and the many challenges ahead. We are now
engaged in the process of reviewing the Framework,
which will result in conclusions and recommendations
on the way forward in the next year.

Since I was appointed chair of the country-
specific meeting, I have visited Bissau five times on
different occasions and circumstances. In all of my
visits, I have been able to witness the importance
attached to the Commission and the commitment of
Guinean authorities to the peacebuilding process. The
successful conclusion of the presidential elections and
the inauguration of a new Government represent a
golden window of opportunity for peace and stability,
around which we should focus our activities. Guinea-
Bissau is a rich country, endowed with abundant
natural resources, and needs our continuous support to
fulfil its potential.

This debate on the PBC is timely, taking place as
we consider the report of the Secretary-General on

peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and begin a discussion on the 2010
review process. A number of recommendations have
been made. It is now up to us to see how best they can
contribute to strengthening the United Nations capacity
to deal with peacebuilding challenges in a coherent,
expedient and cost-effective manner. Based on our
experience with the Guinea-Bissau configuration, we
appreciate the importance of enhancing coordination
among different actors on the ground, strong leadership
teams and rapid and flexible funding instruments.
Those are valid guidelines to address the challenges
facing countries emerging from conflict.

The question of funding is key. We all know how
difficult it is to ensure adequate levels of financial
assistance under the uncertainties usually associated to
post-conflict scenarios. We therefore praise the work of
the Peacebuilding Fund, which has been able to
delivery catalytic assistance in priority areas. Its new
terms of reference will allow for more flexible and
rapid disbursements, in close synergy with the
Peacebuilding Commission. In the case of Guinea-
Bissau, an initial allocation of PBF funding focused on
four priority areas identified by the Government. It is
my hope that a second tranche will be announced soon
after we finalized the review of the Strategic
Framework. We are aware that the PBF is not supposed
to address all peacebuilding issues. However, we
expect that its catalytic role in providing seed money to
fund priority peacebuilding activities can show the way
in attracting supplementary resources to allow such
activities to be scaled up.

A successful peacebuilding strategy should also
rely on coordination, bringing together all actors,
including the international financial institutions and
United Nations agencies, funds and programs on the
ground in order to maximize synergies. By the same
token, cooperation with regional organizations is
indispensable, given the transnational nature of many
peacebuilding challenges. The consultations with the
African Union during the recent PBC mission to Addis
Ababa highlighted the importance of closer and more
frequent interactions with an institution that plays an
important role in peacebuilding in Africa. I also found
that the visit I paid to the headquarters of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
Abuja on 11 November was very useful in
strengthening coordination between our work and the
work of ECOWAS on matters of common concern
regarding peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, it goes without saying that a strong
United Nations presence on the ground is sine qua non
for shortening the gap between New York and the
country concerned, enhancing coordination and
assisting the Government. In Guinea-Bissau, we
welcome the decision to upgrade the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau into an
integrated Office and hope it will enjoy positive
consideration in the Fifth Committee so that it can start
its operations at full capacity as soon as possible.

We hope that the experience of the PBC in its
various configurations can inform the beginning of an
open, transparent and comprehensive review process in
2010. The PBC is yet to reach its full potential, as
outlined in its founding resolutions. It is now time to
heed the lessons learned and allow the PBC to grow,
consolidate its position at the centre of the
peacebuilding architecture, and make a difference in
the lives of millions of people in war-torn societies.

