Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): It is not customary
for the Secretary-General to appear at regular reviews
of the East Timor issue; I think his presence here
earlier this morning was a very powerful demonstration
of the strong support that he and the United Nations
have given East Timor - support which has, frankly,
brought us to the relatively happy situation that we
have today.

Perhaps nothing illustrates this better than the
presence in the Council today of Mr. Xanana Gusmao
and Mr. Mari Alkatiri, and we welcome them here. We
also thank them for their candid and enlightening
statements. We would also like to take this opportunity
to congratulate Mr. Gusmao personally for his
overwhelming victory in the elections for the first
President of independent East Timor, and we welcome
the commitment of the East Timorese leaders to work
together. One clear demonstration of this is the letter
that Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Alkatiri sent to the President
of the Security Council requesting the Council to
authorize a continued peacekeeping presence in East
Timor. The Security Council should respond positively
to that letter, for, as Mr. Gusmao said earlier, "Our
success is your success".

By helping East Timor, the United Nations is,
indeed, helping itself, because it is consolidating a
major success story. It is unfortunate that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, is not here to receive the well-
deserved tributes that have been paid to him this
morning. Success was not guaranteed when Mr. Vieira
de Mello arrived in East Timor; indeed, the odds were
stacked against him. This makes his success even more
remarkable. We also want to join our colleagues in
congratulating Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma on his
appointment. We note that he is a very tall man, with a
very distinguished record in public service; but I think
he should know that he will have some big shoes to fill
when he goes to East Timor.

We also want to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for introducing the Secretary-
General's report and for his comprehensive briefing.
Once again, the Secretary-General has produced
another excellent report on East Timor; it provides an
insightful analysis of the situation of East Timor just
before its independence on 20 May.

We are all well aware of the progress that East
Timor has made in the past two and a half years. In
paragraph 2 of his report in document S/2002/432, the
Secretary-General described it as moving

"from widespread devastation to the

establishment of the foundations for the

administration of a new country and to the

rehabilitation of a basic infrastructure that can

support economic and social activity."

At the same time, the Secretary-General is also
spot-on in highlighting, in paragraph 3 of the report,
that

"a number of issues that present challenges to the
short- and longer-term security and stability of
the new State have not yet and could not have
been fully resolved. These range from border
demarcation, return of refugees and regulation of
commercial activity in the border area, to
strengthening of nascent governmental structures,
including law enforcement and the judicial
system, as well as the consolidation of the
framework for economic and social
development."

The Secretary-General concludes that

"It is therefore essential for the international
community to remain engaged in East Timor for
some time beyond independence, to ensure
stability and to build upon the achievements of
UNTAET."

We are pleased that a strong consensus is
developing within the Council that we, the Council
members, should support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General; that has clearly been demonstrated
in all the statements that we have heard so far.

The picture is plain for all of us to see. While
East Timor has made significant progress, we cannot,
as of now, say that it will be a viable nation State
immediately on independence. The lesson of the
history of the past few decades is relatively clear:
independence, even if it comes after a hard-fought
struggle, may still be a relatively easy victory. Success
after independence, unfortunately, has been relatively
rare.

There is therefore a great deal more for the
United Nations and the international community to do
to help East Timor to fully get on its feet. The actors
who have brought East Timor to where it is today
should not shy away from the responsibility of
continuing their support for the leaders and people of
East Timor as they work to build a viable and
sustainable State. This will, of course, include the
maintenance by the United Nations of a strong
peacekeeping presence to consolidate and strengthen
stability in post-independence East Timor, as well as
the presence of United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and bilateral and other donors to provide
assistance for further building up East Timor's
economic and social structures.

The dangers of premature withdrawal and
disengagement from East Timor are too serious for
such a move even to be contemplated. East Timor
could unravel, and all its achievements and the
investments made by the international community
would go to waste. The fragility of East Timor should
not be underestimated. As the saying goes, "Prevention
is better than cure" - and it is certainly much less
costly.
Peace and stability in East Timor is also crucial
for the peace and stability of the entire region; they are
closely intertwined. How the United Nations and the
international community handle East Timor will have
repercussions for the region as a whole. A viable and
secure East Timor will contribute to the stability of the
region and help it in its efforts to consolidate its new-
found independence. Clearly the whole region has a
stake in East Timor's success.

The Secretary-General has also made a very
strong case in his report, in great detail, for the
proposed mandate, structure, size and planned
reconfiguration of the United Nations successor
peacekeeping mission in East Timor after
independence. The mission is appropriately called
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

It is noteworthy that the Secretary-General has
not only maintained the proposals that had been
gathered in support by the Security Council in its
presidential statement of October 2001, but he has also
added important flesh to the bones. The details
contained in his report show the amount of meticulous
effort that has gone into the planning of UNMISET,
and all those involved should be commended and
congratulated.

To the Secretary-General's credit, it is hard to see
how his proposals can be faulted for the lack of any
necessary details. Each of his proposals has been more
than adequately justified. What remains is for the
Security Council to give its unanimous endorsement of
UNMISET, as proposed by the Secretary-General, to
fulfil the mandate and key programmes required. In a
nutshell, it is a Mission with a civilian component that
includes a Civilian Support Group of 100 core
functions and a Serious Crimes Unit; a military
component of 5,000 troops; and a civilian police
component of 1,250 officers at the very start, which
will be gradually downsized over a two-year period,
according to a milestone-based approach.

But there is one other important point that we
would like to stress this morning. The drawdown of
UNMISET should be based on the realities of the
situation on the ground, and not carried out
mechanically according to some abstract timetable. We
cannot tell the future as we sit here. We cannot tell
what the situation will be like in East Timor or in its
vicinity a year from now. We should be sensitive and
flexible as we work on the continued commitment of
the United Nations to East Timor.
There is no doubt that a significant United
Nations security presence is essential in post-
independence East Timor. While the security
environment continues to improve, internal and
external threats to East Timor still exist.
Come independence, East Timor will be - and this is
natural - a fledgling democracy. There is every
potential for domestic law and order as well as external
security problems to arise.

The East Timor Defence Force and the East
Timor Police Service are still in their infancy and will,
quite naturally, take some time to become fully
operational. This process will be even lengthier if
international material and financial support for their
full establishment is not forthcoming. Scaling down the
United Nations military and civilian police presence
too quickly therefore could entail the serious risk of
jeopardizing the stability and security that has been
achieved due precisely to such a presence. Indeed, it is
not inconceivable that those who are intent on mischief
could be lying low until the United Nations reduces its
security presence.

As such, downsizing the United Nations military
and police presence, on the basis of clear benchmarks,
is the only appropriate approach to take. We believe
that the Security Council should particularly bear in
mind the important benchmark of the demarcation of
the border and the establishment of an effective border
control system.

The requirement for a Civilian Support Group of
100 core positions to be included in the civilian
component of the following United Nations
peacekeeping operation is also well justified. As stated
in the Secretary-General's report, these core functions
are critical to the viability of the Government, political
stability and the provision of basic services. We note
also that Mr. Gusmao and Mr. Alkatiri, in the letter that
they both sent, also highlighted the importance of these
100 civilian posts.

The first few years of any nation are a testing
time. Hence, while the United Nations should not
continue its Transitional Administration role in East
Timor after independence, it is critical that the United
Nations continue to provide the assistance necessary to
ensure the sustainability of the administrative
institutions and the completion of the required tasks.

When all is said and done, what the Security
Council must do - and this is our obligation - is to
give its clear endorsement of the recommendations of
the Secretary-General for the establishment of
UNMISET. This is a historic opportunity for the
Council to reaffirm its pledge to make East Timor a
real success story. We all know that this means a
continuing strong United Nations presence and
engagement in post-independence East Timor.

Often questions are asked about the value of
having open debates in this chamber such as the one we
are having today. But if the result of this morning's
discussion is to redouble the commitment of the
Council to ensuring the success of East Timor, then I
would say that the debate that we have been having this
morning has indeed been a very valuable exercise.

