Mr. Klein (spoke in French): I have the honour to
describe for the members of the Security Council the
progress made by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in preparing to
carry out the core functions of its mandate from now
until the end of this year.

UNMIBH's work is about to come to an end; and
the work of my excellent colleague and friend Paddy
Ashdown has just begun. But our joint presence in the
Council today underscores the primary responsibility
of the Security Council in supervising the process of
implementing the Dayton Peace Agreement. Our
presence here also sends a clear message to the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, namely, that the
international community intends to continue to remain
committed to ensuring the full completion of the
process that began in 1995.

(spoke in English)

In light of the recent elections, permit me to
briefly comment on the current political situation as it
affects United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), before turning to the specific
work of the Mission and the arrangements for
transition to the European Union Police Mission
(EUPM).

With respect to the results of the recent elections,
this is not a time for pessimism or complacency. The
strong showing of nationalist parties does not mean
that the peace implementation process will stop. But it
does present a more challenging political environment
that will require strong intervention and continued
commitment to keep Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
path of reform.

I fully concur with the High Representative's
assessment that voting for opposition parties that are
called nationalist does not mean voting for ultra-
nationalism in the style of Milosevic and Tudjman.
There are three reasons for this: first, this was a protest
vote against non-nationalist non-performance. Parties
most closely associated with the disappointing
Governments of the past two years were punished,
regardless of their nationalist or non-nationalist status.
Opposition parties of whatever political colour did
well. In a time of severe economic downturn, this
should not come as a surprise.

Secondly, all opposition parties campaigned on
platforms of more, not less, reform. They correctly
judged the mood of frustration and disillusion in an
electorate that is fed up with criminality, corruption
and inaction. In an indictment of the entire current
political class ofleaders, youth did not vote at all.

Thirdly, economic necessity and the realization
that power can change through the ballot box has now
started to temper the rhetoric of the nationalist parties.
Pragmatists and reformers are emerging. Indeed,
UNMIBH has received better cooperation from the
"nationalist" authorities in the Republika Srpska entity
and the Mostar area than from the non-nationalist
coalition at the Federation Ministry of Interior level,
where progress has been protracted and difficult.

But we should not be lulled by mere promises.
Already, there are ominous signs of renewed political
interference in the police forces. One of UNMIBH's
key goals has been to draw a clear line between the
role of political authorities and the apolitical role of
members of law enforcement agencies. Laws clarifying
this distinction have been adopted throughout the
country. It is, therefore, of deep concern that some
Ministers of Interior and members of political parties
are seeking to exercise undue pressure on some of the
police commissioners, who have been selected through
open competition on the basis of professional
competence and political neutrality. Recent threats
against them and their families must draw the strongest
condemnation.

The challenge for us all is to hold the newly
elected politicians to their promises of reform. The
High Representative has wisely chosen to focus on
programmes, not parties, and has defined the essential
steps that must be taken for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
enter its European future. But he will require the
strongest support to implement the reform agenda.

I am particularly gratified that the rule of law has
been placed at the centre of the reform programme. As
you are aware, UNMIBH was given a thin slice of the
international mandate in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our
focus has been on police reform and restructuring, but
this is just one element in the rule oflaw.

Reform of the judiciary and the entire legal
system lags far behind and requires strong measures,
which have only just begun. We cannot afford to have a
common criminal space in Bosnia and Herzegovina, on
the one hand, but many divided and dysfunctional legal
and judicial jurisdictions, on the other.

Turning now to the progress of UNMIBH, I am
pleased to say that, for us, the elections were an
unqualified success. All local and international
observers reported that the elections took place in
conditions of full security. Nearly 1,100 International
Police Task Force officers monitored local police
through 561 joint and independent patrols. Local police
planning and performance were outstanding. This
achievement builds on the very impressive record of
local police throughout the year in developing and
implementing security plans for minority returns and
sensitive public events, such as religious gatherings,
commemorations and major sports events.

The fact is that Bosnia and Herzegovina now has
a lower general crime rate than many countries in
Western Europe. This has underpinned the largest
number of returns of refugees and displaced persons
since the war. Security is no longer an impediment to
return anywhere in the country.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is no longer the principal
entry point into Europe for illegal migrants. Last month
the State Border Service achieved 100 percent control
of the land borders together with three international
airports. The number of suspected illegal migrants has
been reduced from nearly 25,000 in the year 2000 to a
few hundred so far this year.

In other words, our success is not abstract -
there are real results on the ground and in the wider
region. This gives us confidence in passing the baton of
police reform to a smaller and more specialized
successor mission under the European Union. These
achievements are based on the progressive completion
of the six core programmes of our mandate
implementation plan. All programmes are now in their
final stages.

With respect to our core programme of police
reform, on 18 October we began announcing final
certification of the 16,832 local police officers, who in
1999 were only provisionally authorized to work in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is the culmination of an
exhaustive process in which every police officer has
had to pass seven separate checks, including wartime
background, professional performance, lawfulness of
housing, verification of educational credentials,
completion of compulsory training, proof of citizenship
and a clear criminal record. At this stage, it appears
that some 500 to 600 provisionally authorized officers
may not be entitled to certification, mainly because of
unlawful housing, false diplomas or wartime conduct.
This is in addition to the 234 officers who have already
been dismissed for misconduct or wartime background.
Certification of the remainder will be completed by
mid-November.

On police restructuring, I am pleased to report
that three police administrations, Brcko district, the
Republika Srpska and the Una Sana canton have
received UNMIBH accreditation as meeting the basic
standards of democratic policing. This means that local
police change management teams have implemented
the essential recommendations of our intensive systems
analysis of their organizational structure and
procedures. Accreditation of the remaining twelve
police administrations is scheduled in November,
providing that they meet all the necessary criteria. In
this regard, I am concerned that police in the Western
Herzegovina canton and in canton 10 continue to
display discriminatory official insignia in defiance of
the High Representative's directives. Accreditation for
them is not possible under such circumstances.

UNMIBH's landmark project to minimize
political interference in police work by establishing the
post of an independent police commissioner chosen by
open competition is in its final stage. Permanent police
commissioners are in place in nine cantons and the
process is almost complete in the Republika Srpska.
The two difficult areas that remain are canton 10 and
the Federation Ministry of the Interior where
obstruction and delay compelled the High
Representative to recently impose an independent
selection process.

Facilitating the recruitment and deployment of
police to areas where they are part of a minority ethnic
group and improving the recruitment of women have
been two of the most resource intensive projects
undertaken by UNMIBH. Through fifteen intakes at the
two police academies established by UNMIBH, twelve
refresher courses for pre-war police and seventeen
rounds of voluntary redeployment, almost ten per cent
of the police forces (1,644 officers) are now from
minority groups in each specific area. There are now
490 serving female police officers, with a further 235
female cadets still in training.

In fourteen out of fifteen different judicial
districts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, our Criminal
Justice Advisory Unit (CJAU) has completed a
specialized training course for criminal investigation
police to be able to improve the quality of their crime
reports for use by prosecutors. CJAU has also made an
invaluable contribution to court monitoring of sensitive
trials.

I am also pleased to be able to report that this
week marks the completion of our three-year project to
establish, train and equip court police serving all 174
courts in the Federation. A special unit has also been
trained for protection of judges and witnesses. In the
Republika Srpska, the necessary legislation was passed
in July. Recruitment, training and deployment to serve
151 courts will be completed in November.

With the establishment of the State Information
and Protection Agency (SIPA) and the appointment of
its directors earlier this month, Bosnia and
Herzegovina now has all the mechanisms and
institutions to participate fully in the regional and
international fight against terrorism and organized
crime. From the situation three years ago, when police
chiefs did not even talk with each other, we now have
two multi-ethnic State-level institutions - SIPA and
the SBS; a four-nation, soon to be five-nation Regional
Task Force; and a fully functioning inter-entity and
inter-cantonal police cooperation mechanism.

My major concern in this area is the practical
problem of funding. While there are many competing
pressures on the limited State budget, these
fundamental crime-fighting institutions are too
important to be allowed to fail or degrade through low
and irregular salary payments. Indeed, together with an
efficient customs service, they are the front line against
corruption and the haemorrhaging of State revenue.

I would also commend the work of UNMIBH's
Special Trafficking Operations Programme (STOP),
comprising 50 IPTF monitors and 150 local police
working full time against trafficking in human beings.
Their work and their success have not been given the
recognition they deserve. In the past year, 227 sex
establishments have been identified and 147 have been
forced to close. Over 740 raids have been conducted,
some 2,140 women have been interviewed and 230
victims of trafficking have been assisted to go home.

The effectiveness of STOP has forced both
traffickers and the STOP teams to adapt their
operations. Our latest innovation has been to establish
a rapid intervention force to enable victims to be
removed from nightclubs quickly and taken to a safe
house. These raids hinder bar owners from conducting
their business whilst also acting as a deterrent to
customers. But the problem of trafficking will not be
resolved until it is taken seriously by local prosecutors
and the judiciary. This is another area where
weaknesses in the rule of law diminish the impact and
effectiveness of police work.

Finally, with respect to our core mandate, I would
note the substantive input of our public affairs unit to
democratic policing and public accountability. An
integral part of the accreditation process was the
drafting of standard operating procedures for public
affairs units to be established in all police
administrations. I am also pleased to report that, by the
end of this year, the Trust Fund for the Police
Assistance Programme will have disbursed almost
$16.5 million for police equipment and facilities, thus
enabling the closure of the Trust Fund next year as part
of UNMIBH's liquidation process.

Additionally, I am pleased to inform the Council
that the priceless Sarajevo Haggada has been repaired
and restored and that a fitting setting has been found
for it in the National Museum. The United Nations
Trust Fund For Sarajevo and individual donors
provided the funding support. The redesigned room in
the National Museum will be dedicated on 2 December.
The Haggada is an invaluable symbol of the
multicultural heritage of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its
repair and display is just one of the contributions the
United Nations is making to reconciliation.

Looking ahead to January 2003, I am pleased to
say that arrangements for a seamless transition to the
European Union Police Mission (EUPM) are in place.
The EUPM. planning team of 30 personnel has been
working out of UNMIBH headquarters since May
under the guidance of the current IPTF Commissioner,
who will also be the first serving EUPM
Commissioner. The drawdown of IPTF and the gradual
build-up of EUPM. have been carefully coordinated,
with the first EUPM. deployment scheduled for 4
November. This coincides with the repatriation
schedule for current IPTF monitors. Since the
elections, over 500 IPTF monitors have departed,
leaving 900 monitors in theatre, and 18 smaller IPTF
stations have been closed.

In numerous meetings and briefings with
European Union delegations, including a visit by the
Political and Security Committee, we have emphasized
the need for continuity and specialized expertise in our
most important and innovative policing projects. The
hiring of UNMIBH local staff to work with EUPM
would facilitate this.

I am glad that EUPM. has agreed to give priority
to the State Border Service, the State Information and
Protection Agency and the maintenance of effective
counter-trafficking measures. I am also glad that
EUPM. intends to take a robust approach to organized
crime, with thorough strategies and significant
resources to mentor and assist local police forces to
fight this malignant cancer.

I have always maintained that the success of
UNMIBH will be judged not only by what it achieves,
but also by how it leaves. The Brahimi report called for
greater cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in peacekeeping. This first
operation by the European Union under the European
Security and Defence Policy is the practical
embodiment of the recommendations of the Brahimi
report.

Seven years of UNMIBH and a decade of United
Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
about to end. I believe that an objective assessment
would show that our record was mixed, not disastrous.
UNMIBH is a success. The Council's support and the
quality of the women and men of UNMIBH from 96
nations and 43 police-contributing States, and the
Secretariat that stands behind them, have been
instrumental to that success.

We have all learned many lessons. I hope that we
have the wisdom and the will to apply them as we face
new situations of great complexity. My experience in
UNMIBH has reaffirmed three fundamental points.
First, that the introduction of the rule of law in a post-
conflict situation is the foundation for democracy, for
economic progress and for an exit strategy for
peacekeepers.

Secondly, reconciliation and healing are
impossible if notorious war criminals are not brought
to justice. The continued liberty of Karadzic and
Mladic is a blight on everything we are trying to
achieve and a sign of the impotence of the West in the
face of evil.

Thirdly, as the tragic events of 11 September last
year and more recently in Bali showed, there is no
vaccine that can protect us from a globalized world.
Instability, dysfunctional societies and the detritus of
war cannot be allowed to fester unattended or to be
abandoned in midstream.

(spoke in French)

I am convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
on the right path. There may be some bumps along the
road, but the direction is clear. With the necessary
resolve and will, the success of UNMIBH will be the
first stage in the common success of the international
community and the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

