Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me again salute your
presence here today, Mr. President - a testimony to the
importance your country attaches to the application and
enforcement of sanctions regimes not only in Angola, but
around the world.

I should like to recognize, too, the presence among
us of the Minister of External Relations of Angola.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia -
and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes the convening of this
meeting immediately following the meeting we held here
yesterday to establish a working group of the Security
Council on sanctions. Indeed, it is most appropriate that
this Council is now taking further decisive action on the
question of sanctions against UNITA following the report
of the Panel of Experts from the sanctions Committee and
the efforts of its Chairman, Ambassador Bob Fowler.

The decision of this Council, with the concurrence
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the late Maitre Beye, to impose sanctions on UNITA has
been a major part of the policy of the international
community to compel Mr. Jonas Savimbi and his
followers to embark on the path of peace and to abide by
their own commitments, as expressed in the Lusaka
Protocol. Resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173
(1998) were thus adopted. Sanctions have had a relevant
impact on the situation on the ground, as they have
prevented UNITA's leaders from travelling abroad freely
and made the procurement of weapons and supplies more
difficult and expensive.

However, and as the report of the Panel of Experts
makes clear in its findings, there have been a number of

 

significant violations of the sanctions regimes imposed on
UNITA. These violations cannot be accepted and must stop.
We must ensure the full and effective implementation of
the sanctions regimes to prevent UNITA from pursuing the
military option. Indeed, the European Union welcomes fully
the provisions of the draft resolution to be adopted today by
this Council. The present resolution allows for the work
done by the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999) to be followed up by a monitoring
mechanism. We are looking forward to its findings. We
welcome the Council's expressed intention to review the
situation with regard to violations of sanctions not later than
18 November 2000.

The European Union remains deeply committed to a
peaceful and political solution to the conflict in Angola and
will continue to make every effort to achieve that objective.
The suffering of the Angolan people after decades of war
and the continued humanitarian disaster that the country is
facing must be ended as soon as possible. The
transformation of UNITA into a genuine political party and
its acceptance of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
would go a long way towards ensuring this objective. There
can be only one Administration in Angola and that is the
Government of National Unity and National Reconciliation.
There can be only one army in Angola and that is the
national army.

For its part, the Government of Angola must continue
to make every effort to create the necessary conditions for
a smooth extension of the state administration to the areas
previously controlled by UNITA, in respect for the
principles of democracy, good governance, human rights
and human dignity. The European Union believes that the
United Nations has an important role to play in assisting the
Angolan Government to attain these goals. In this regard,
it is most fitting that this Council adopted just last week a
resolution endorsing the decision of the Secretary-General
to extend the mandate of the United Nations Office in
Angola (UNOA) for a further six months. We support the
work of UNOA in Angola in accordance with resolutions
1268 (1999) and 1294 (2000). Indeed, the European Union
remains ready to consider how to assist the Government of
Angola in facing the challenges of rebuilding and
reconstructing the country within a democratic environment.
Particular attention will continue to be given to
humanitarian assistance in order to alleviate the suffering of
the Angolan population affected by the conflict.

The adoption of the draft resolution before us today
will be a concrete sign of the international community's
commitment to finding peace in Angola. This is an
endeavour that demands much from a number of countries
and requires the cooperation of all involved. The
European Union urges all Member States to ensure
thorough and consistent application of all the provisions
of the sanctions against UNITA. The European Union is
committed to rigorous enforcement of the sanctions. On
our part, we reaffirm our determination to continue
supporting international efforts to tighten United Nations
sanctions against UNIT A. The European Union and its
member States have already instituted a number of
measures specifically designed to improve the
enforcement of the sanctions regimes. In this regard, the
European Union also stands ready to examine what
assistance it might provide to the Southern African
Development Community countries in their efforts to
implement the sanctions regimes.

It is important that decisions of this Council be
respected and be seen to be respected. We must therefore
be creative in finding methods and resources to follow up
and improve the implementation of the sanctions. The
efforts of both the Committee on sanctions against
UNITA and the Panel of Experts have given us a
welcome opportunity to do just that.

The European Union attaches great importance to the
social and economic development of the whole southern
African subregion. For this to be a reality, the peace and
stability of Angola are vital components and we must
continue to strive to attain this elusive goal.

