Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July. We wish you every success and are confident
that, with your well known wisdom and experience,
you will guide the work of the Council to a successful
conclusion that will strengthen international peace and
security. I wish also to thank your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of France, for the wisdom
with which he presided over the work of the Council
last month.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is deteriorating daily, owing to the
intensified building of colonial settlements and the
continued construction of the illegal expansionist wall,
all of which is intended to annex additional Palestinian
lands. This only exacerbates the suffering of the
Palestinian people. Many Palestinians have died as a
result of Israeli practices, which include extrajudicial
killings. The movement of Palestinians and Palestinian
goods continues to be limited by the many checkpoints
scattered throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories. In spite of the Sharm el-Sheikh
understandings, the Israeli authorities continue their
policy of destroying houses and the institutional
buildings and agricultural lands that are the basis of the
Palestinian people's livelihood. This has given rise to
growing unemployment and poverty.

Israel's continued construction of the illegal
expansionist wall in the Palestinian territories,
including in areas around East Jerusalem, is in clear
violation of the principles of international law and the
9 July 2004 advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice. It also runs counter to commitments undertaken
by Israel, the occupying Power, and to provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention.

It is extremely important that Israel's total
withdrawal from Gaza be followed by its withdrawal
from all the other occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem. The Security Council must
tell Israel that withdrawal from the Gaza Strip means
complete withdrawal both from Palestinian lands and
from Palestine's territorial waters, as well as respect
for Palestinian airspace, and that it must be followed
by negotiations on final status. Moreover, the Israeli
withdrawal should not be used as an excuse for
continued colonization of the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem; rather, it should
be a step towards the implementation of the road map.

I wish in conclusion to stress once again how
important it is that the international community and, in
particular, the Security Council shoulder their
responsibility with regard to the suffering Palestinian
people, a nation like all others, which aspires to a life
in peace in an independent State on its own national
territory, with Jerusalem as its capital, and which seeks
full and genuine independence in a viable State in
which it can express its Palestinian national identity.

