Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate the opportunity to
present the latest report (S/2009/309) of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office (BONUCA) in that
country.

There were significant developments in the
Central African Republic during the period under
review. Those included the efforts to implement the
outcomes of the historic inclusive political dialogue
held in December 2008. The dialogue itself was widely
welcomed, especially by the people of the Central
African Republic, as the most far-reaching endeavour
towards genuine national reconciliation since the
eruption of the current crisis in the mid-1990s.

Members will recall that, in its presidential
statement of 7 April 2009, the Security Council welcomed
the successful convening of the dialogue and reiterated

"its full support for this process, as an effective
framework to foster national reconciliation and
stability in the Central African Republic".
(S/PRST/2009/5, first paragraph)

The post-dialogue period has, in the main, been
characterized by two, sometimes contradictory, trends.
On the one hand, significant efforts have been and
continue to be made to implement the recommendations
of the dialogue with a view to consolidating the
momentum for peace in the country. A broad-based
Government was formed, a Disarmament, Demobilization
and Reintegration Steering Committee was established
and a Follow-up Committee was set up to facilitate the
implementation of the recommendations of the dialogue,
with the participation of the United Nations and other key
international partners.
09-37565

On the other hand, there has also been a
resurgence of rebellion in the north of the country - a
development that contradicts the spirit of reconciliation
that the dialogue sought to engender. For instance, on
21 June, there were reports of rebel attacks in Birao.
After several hours of fighting, forces of the Central
African Republic and of the Union des forces
democratiques pour le rassemblement repelled the attack.
The total number of casualties remains unknown. The
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
and Chad (MINURCAT) has relocated 18 international
personnel of non-governmental organizations to
MINURCAT headquarters at Birao. Underlying those two
contradictory developments is a third element, namely,
the increasing fragility of the peace process in the Central
African Republic and of the country itself.

I have just returned from a visit to the Central
African Republic. I was able to see for myself the
impact of years of instability and insecurity on the
country. But I also heard words that reflected the
profound faith that the Government and the people of
the country have in the United Nations, which they
View as a reliable partner for the realization of their
aspirations to a better future. The problems are huge,
but I am convinced that the United Nations can help to
move them towards a solution.

As the Council is meeting here today, the
National Assembly of the Central African Republic is
holding an extraordinary session to discuss and adopt a
new electoral code to guide the preparations for and
conduct of legislative and presidential elections in
2010. We are concerned by claims by opposition
political parties that some key provisions of the code
submitted to the Assembly by the Government are at
variance with the version of the document that was
adopted by the ad hoc Committee charged with
revising the electoral code. The organization of
peaceful, transparent and credible elections is
contingent on the adoption of an electoral code that is
accepted by all stakeholders.

Another key measure linked to the electoral code
is the establishment of the independent electoral
commission, as called for by this past December's
inclusive political dialogue. That commission, to be
made up of different shades of political opinion and
civil society, would ensure a credible, transparent and
inclusive electoral process. We have received a request
for electoral assistance from the Government, and once
09-37565
the commission is established we will dispatch a
needs-assessment mission promptly to Bangui to assess
ways in which the United Nations can contribute to the
process.

The Secretary-General has called on the Central
African Republic authorities to ensure that elections
are held on schedule, as provided for in the Central
African Republic Constitution, in order to prevent a
constitutional power vacuum that could further
complicate an already fragile political environment,
including the possibility of renewed violence. We have
also urged all political leaders to avoid intimidation,
harassment and incitement and to work to eliminate the
current climate of mistrust and suspicion in the
political landscape of the Central African Republic. It
is especially important for the Government to
guarantee security and a level playing field for all
participants if the electoral process is to proceed
peacefully and with credibility.

Another important challenge facing the peace
process is that of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of the country's ex-combatants,
who have agreed to end rebellion and join the peace
process. While the concrete launching of DDR
operations has yet to begin, critical preparatory work
has advanced, with technical documentation adopted,
provisional lists of potential ex-combatants submitted
to the United Nations, and initial funding of about
$4 million released from the Peacebuilding Fund to
kick-start the project. During my meeting with
President Bozize, he reaffirmed his determination to
take personal control of the DDR process and to make
available the financial assistance of 8 billion CFA
francs - about $16 million - pledged by the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) to finance DDR projects. At this point, I
would like to say what a critical role Ambassador
Grauls played in his most recent visit to the Central
African Republic in ensuring that this money was
available for this very valuable process.

Subsequently, we were informed that a total of
5 billion CFA francs - about $10 million - of the
CEMAC funds had already been disbursed. The
Secretary-General has appealed to the international
community to provide additional support for the
successful completion of the estimated $30 million
DDR programme, on which the imperatives for
security and peaceful elections hinge.
3

DDR is only part of a broader programme of
security sector reforms. Its success will strengthen
efforts to make progress towards security sector
reforms in the Central African Republic. A successful
security sector reform (SSR) would in turn help
institute, for the first time in nearly three decades, 3
multi-ethnic, professional and republican military and
security establishment for the defence of democratic
institutions and not in the service of partisan and
mono-ethnic political movements. The Secretary-
General has appealed for international support for
programmes being put forward by the Central African
Republic authorities in support of the national security
sector reform strategy, including the organization of
the donors' round table on security sector reform
scheduled for October this year.

During my visit to the Central African Republic, I
had the opportunity to visit the military component of
the peacebuilding mission of the Economic Community
of Central African States based in Bangui. This force of
520 troops is making a major contribution, in
partnership with the United Nations and other partners,
towards the stabilization of the Central African
Republic. I salute their courage and determination and
commend their Governments for the concrete
demonstration of political will and solidarity in support
of peace in the Central African Republic.

Two days from now, the Bretton Woods
institutions will examine the possibility of granting
debt relief to the Central African Republic under the
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative. As
pointed out in the Secretary-General's report, the
country's macroeconomic reforms have been widely
acclaimed by international partners and are credited for
turning a previously bleak picture into one in which not
only is economic growth happening, but in which long-
term prospects are rated as encouraging and deserving
of enhanced donor support. Should those reforms
continue and should the overall climate of political
stabilization persist, it is reasonable to be hopeful
about the possibilities of reducing the desperately high
levels of poverty and misery in the medium term.

The best way forward now is to address the
multifaceted problems besetting the Central African
Republic through the implementation of the recently
adopted strategic framework for peacebuilding. It is
vital that the Central African Republic take full
ownership of the road map, which identifies three key
pillars for sustainable peacebuilding, namely, security
through DDR and SSR, good governance, including
respect for human rights and the rule of law, and
development. The United Nations will work in
partnership with the Central African Republic to
support its efforts to implement these strategic
priorities.

Allow me to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation for the important contribution being made
to that end by the Peacebuilding Commission,
especially its country-specific configuration for the
Central African Republic, led by Ambassador Jan
Grauls of Belgium, who, as an example of his
commitment to the goal of promoting the sustainable
stabilization of the Central African Republic, last
month undertook his fourth mission to the country in a
year. He has been a strong voice of the international
community for reform and progress in the Central
African Republic.

Members will recall that the Council has
endorsed the Secretary-General's proposal to transform
BONUCA into a United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA). The purpose is to maximize the United
Nations contribution to the Central African Republic,
minimize the risks of duplication and simplify
consultations with our partners, including the Central
African Republic authorities.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council sets out the proposed structure and staffing of
BINUCA, as requested by the Council in April. As the
transition process proceeds, the Secretary-General
proposes that BINUCA become fully operational by
1 January 2010. We will use the intervening period to
finalize recruitment of personnel and to address related
logistical and other preparatory tasks so that the new
Office can take off smoothly, as scheduled, on
1 January 2010.

I am delighted to have with us here today the
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Central African Republic and
head of BONUCA, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, who
departs in a few days for Bangui to take up her
important assignment. The Central African Republic
authorities, during my recent Visit, welcomed her
appointment, thanked the Secretary-General for his
continued support and reiterated their cooperation with
BONUCA. I also want to express my appreciation to
Mr. Sammy Kum Buo, the Director of the Africa II
Division of the Department of Political Affairs, who
has aptly filled in for the past three months as Officer-
in-Charge in Bangui. He has done an excellent job in
bridging the gap.

In conclusion, allow me to add my voice to that
of the Secretary-General and other world leaders who
have paid tribute to the late Gabonese President for his
mediation in various conflicts across Africa. President
Bongo was a strong advocate of peace whose passing
has been felt not least in the Central African Republic,
a country that was close to his heart. Six months ago,
he personally travelled to Bangui twice within two
weeks to attend the opening and closing ceremonies of
the inclusive political dialogue. The Comprehensive
Peace Agreement for the Central African Republic,
which forms the foundation of the current peace
process, was signed exactly one year ago yesterday, on
21 June 2008 in Libreville, Gabon, under his
chairmanship.

