Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
carefully listened to today's briefing by Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
My delegation supports the comprehensive statements to
be delivered this afternoon by the representatives of the
Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and of Djibouti on behalf of the States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Allow me to add the following observations.

Egypt underscores that Palestine's accession
to non-member observer State status in the United
Nations pursuant to the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012 is a first step
towards full membership of the State of Palestine at the
United Nations on the basis ofthe borders of4 June 1967.
We call on the Security Council to respond as soon as
possible to the request from the State of Palestine dated
23 September 2011 for full membership at the United
Nations (S/2011/592, annex I).

Egypt condemns the continuing illegal Israeli
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, in particular around East Jerusalem. We call
on the international community to take a firm stand
against those illegal practices.

Egypt condemns the ongoing Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people on occupied land,
including its siege of the Gaza Strip and pressure on
the Palestinian Authority, as well as Israeli settlers
continuing to resort to violence against unarmed
Palestinians. We call on the international community
to work towards an immediate release of the thousands
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees held in Israeli
detention centres. We condemn the flagrant violations
against them, including the deaths of the two prisoners
Arafat Jaradat and Maysara Abu Hamdiyeh. We also
pay tribute to the struggle of the prisoner Samer Issawi.
We hold Israel fully responsible for protecting his life
and call for his return to the West Bank.

The Quartet mechanism must be reviewed. The
group has made no progress in the past few years, to
the point that it cannot even agree on whether to meet.
Egypt supports the recent efforts of the United
States of America to resume working for peace
following the visit of President Obama to the region.
We hope that those efforts will lead to genuine progress
this year that moves the Palestinian question forward
towards the establishment of an independent and
sovereign State of Palestine on the basis of the 4 June
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. We
welcome the easing of the fiscal restrictions imposed
on financial support to the Palestinian side and look
forward to Israel lifting all financial sanctions.

Egypt is working for stability in the Gaza Strip. We
continue our efforts towards national reconciliation,
which certainly merits the clear support of the
international community and the parties concerned,
not the imposition of obstacles. We express our concern
about Israel's continuing defiance of all attempts to
calm the situation, including its ongoing aggression
against Palestinians and the strengthening of the
economic embargo on the Gaza Strip, as well as the
restrictions on areas to Palestinian fishermen.

We believe that Egypt's efforts to preserve
maintain stability on the Sinai peninsula, including
through security cooperation with all parties, have led
to the investigation of undocumented media reports of
two missiles recently being launched against Israel. To
date, we have no specific evidence of the truth of such
allegations.

Israel continues to call for an immediate end to
acts of violence and bloodshed in Syria by providing
urgent assistance to the Syrian refugees and support
to the host countries of those refugees. We underscore
the need to maintain the unit and territorial integrity
of Syrian land and the cohesion of Syrian society. The
events taking place in Syria today in no way justify the
continuing occupation of the Syrian Golan. We call for
the immediate implementation of relevant resolutions
regarding the legitimacy ofthe occupation of the Golan.
We call for no settlements in the Golan and Israel's
withdrawal from the territory.

In the light ofwhat I havejust said, Egypt again calls
on the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
in order to deal with the Palestinian question with the
seriousness that it requires. We further urge the Council
to take the necessary measures to put an immediate
end to the illegal Israeli settlement activities towards
an ultimate solution, in particular since the question of
Palestine has been and continues to be the fundamental
reason for instability in the Middle East, thereby
threatening international peace and security.
