Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the United States presidency for convening
this debate on the situation in the Great Lakes region. We

welcome the presence at this very important meeting of
United States Secretary of State John Kerry and other
high-level officials. We are also grateful to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, World Bank President Jim Yong
Kim, Special Envoy Mary Robinson, African Union
Commissioner Ramtane Lamamra, and the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda for their statements.

Today's meeting is being held against the
background of renewed hostilities initiated by the
Mouvement du 23 mars in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Azerbaijan condemns attacks by the
rebel group, which have caused civilian casualties
and displacements, and undermined regional and
international efforts towards a negotiated resolution of
the conflict. Indeed, the situation in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly the destabilizing
activities of the armed groups, grave human rights
violations and abuses in conflict-affected areas, and the
humanitarian impact of the crisis, represent the most
significant challenges. Concerns about the increasingly
difficult political environment and security situation
in the country require redoubled efforts at the national
and international levels.

The signing of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region on 24 February was undoubtedly an
important achievement that added new impetus to
diplomatic and political efforts and raised expectations
that the crisis in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo could be resolved. It is important that all relevant
actors involved consistently demonstrate the necessary
political will and spare no effort to translate the goals
of the Framework into tangible outcomes.

What has been clear at the outset is that the
diplomatic and political efforts should in no way lead
to the consolidation of illegal actions or be seen as an
opportunity for endless discussions of unsubstantial
and unacceptable claims, as has been the case in some
other situations of armed conflict. It is critical that
responsibility and accountability, as these notions are
understood in international law, have been from the
very beginning among the key elements guiding the
common approach of the international community.

In its presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2013/11), the Security Council demanded that
all armed groups cease immediately all forms ofviolence
and that their members fully disband and disarm, and
emphasized the renewed commitment of all countries
to neither tolerating nor providing assistance or support
of any kind to armed groups. We also welcome the
Council's principled stand on the need to end impunity
for violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law committed during the conflict.

The Force Intervention Brigade is an essential
element of efforts to address the threat posed by the
presence of armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the same time, it is clear that
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
cannot be resolved by military means alone. Being
complementary to the political process, the impact of
the Intervention Brigade will be effective only if the
national and regional commitments under the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework are implemented
in a proper and timely manner.

An important prerequisite of conflict resolution
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is regional
support. We commend the African Union, the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
other regional actors, as well the countries of the region,
for their contribution to finding a lasting solution to the
conflict. It is crucial that they continue to work together
towards the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. It is also imperative that all
countries of the region respect each other's sovereignty
and territorial integrity, as well as the principles of
non-interference, good-neighbourliness and regional
cooperation.

We welcome the initial steps taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to fulfil its commitments under the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, including those aimed
at ending impunity for serious human rights violations
and abuses and moving forward on security sector
reform. These efforts will undoubtedly contribute to
strengthening the population's confidence in the State's
institutions and help lay solid foundations for the
development of the country.

The sustained engagement and support of the
international community are crucial in promoting
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the entire region. We commend the personal efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and his Special Envoy
Mary Robinson. The joint visit of the Secretary-General
and the President of the World Bank Group, and the
announcement of a development package of $1 billion
by the World Bank, added the potential for significant
incentives in moving the peace agenda and prospects
of enhanced regional integration forward. Greater
coordination among donors is essential to ensuring
that assistance supports national and regional efforts to
address the root causes of the conflict.

Azerbaijan also commends the contribution of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the troop-
contributing countries to maintaining peace, security
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and strongly condemns all attacks against peacekeepers.

In conclusion, I would like once again to thank
you, Madam, for convening this important debate,
which has provided a useful opportunity to reiterate
the international community's sustained engagement
on the Great Lakes issue and its strong support to the
Framework initiative.

