The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite the representatives of Egypt,
Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Norway, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite His Excellency Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President
of the Palestinian National Authority, whom I
welcome, to participate in this meeting in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the
previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
extend an invitation to participate in this meeting,
under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, to His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa,
Secretary General of the League of Arab States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

This is a moment of great urgency. The
international community is mobilizing, as attested to
by the presence of President Abbas, the Secretary-
General of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States and Ministers from Arab
States, countries members of the Council and other
States. The number of victims is in the hundreds, and
in the thousands if the wounded are included. Many are
civilians. Just today we have seen the tragedy at the
Al-Fakhoura School, near Jabaliya. In the face of that
tragedy, my country has decided to do everything
possible to bring an end to the violence.
Following two days of discussions in the
region-in Sharm el-Sheikh, Jerusalem, Ramallah,
Damascus and again in Sharm el-Sheikh - the
President of the French Republic has achieved the
undertaking of negotiations on a permanent ceasefire.
At a press conference with President Sarkozy,
President Mubarak has in fact just proposed a plan
aimed at finding a way out of the crisis. In particular,
President Mubarak has called for Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and Palestinian factions to meet in order to
take every step necessary to end the escalation,
including border security and the reopening of border
crossings. We await Israel's response, but we have the
hope that it will be positive. The Security Council
should encourage and support those promising efforts.
All States of the region should support this momentum
and contribute to this hopeful initiative aimed at
moderation and restraint.

The immediate priority is to end the violence. My
country has condemned Israel's ground offensive
against Gaza, just as it has condemned the continued
launching of rockets. We call for an immediate
humanitarian truce. The fate of civilians is the most
urgent concern.

France reiterates is call for a complete and
immediate cessation of rocket launchings, and for a
halt to all Israeli military operations. France would also
like to reiterate the need to establish the necessary
conditions and guarantees for a lasting ceasefire, the
main elements of which are well-known. They include
supervision of the implementation of the ceasefire; a
return to normality in Gaza, which includes the
permanent opening of crossing points; and a halt to the
smuggling of weapons into Gaza. International
oversight mechanisms may prove to be necessary, and
we are prepared to contribute to them.

Beyond that, it remains crucial to return to peace
negotiations. There is no military solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, not in Gaza or anywhere
else. The solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
must be based on the process charted at Annapolis and
on the establishment of a viable Palestinian State living
side by side with Israel in peace and security. In
particular, we must work on the basis of the Arab Peace
Initiative to address the Israeli-Palestinian and Israeli-
Arab conflicts in a comprehensive and practical
manner.
09-20097

Europe encourages the essential reconciliation

that must take place among Palestinians. We support
efforts by everyone to that end.

France has acted with all its partners in the
international community, in particular those in the
European Union, to put an end to this crisis. My
country believes that the Security Council has an
essential role to play, which should take into account
the reality of the situation on the ground in order to
effectively establish the conditions for a lasting
ceasefire. In that regard, I shall listen to the various
statements to be made here. I hope that we will be able
to take decisive action in the Council in support, in
particular, of Egypt's efforts, as well as those of the
League of Arab States committee and others, along the
two fronts that I have outlined, namely, an immediate
halt to Violence and the establishment of the necessary
conditions for a lasting ceasefire.

I welcome the presence among us of His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, to whom I
give the floor.

