Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to make this statement of behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). At the outset, I
wish to express NAM's appreciation to Nigeria for
organizing this open debate and for the useful concept
note (S/2015/599, annex) prepared for this important
meeting. We also appreciate the briefing by the
Secretary-General.

The Non-Aligned Movement underscores
the important role that regional and subregional
arrangements and agencies, composed of non-aligned
and other developing countries, can play in the
promotion of regional peace and security, as well as in
economic and social development, through cooperation
among countries in the regions. We have always
highlighted the importance of synergy among regional
and subregional initiatives to ensure complementarity
and the added value of each process towards their
common goals, such as political stability, economic
growth and social and cultural development.

The Non-Aligned Movement has called for
the intensification of the process of consultations,
cooperation and coordination among the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
arrangements or agencies in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, including
with regard to their mandate, scope and composition,
which is useful and can contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security.

In that context, we welcome the determination
of the United Nations to enhance its relationships
and cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the African Union (AU),
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. The
Movement also expresses its support for the continuing
efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping capabilities
and emphasizes the importance of implementing the
Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme and the joint
action plan for United Nations support to the African
Union in peacekeeping in the short, medium and long
terms, in all relevant areas.

The Movement takes note of the report prepared by
the African Union-United Nations panel on modalities
for support to AU peacekeeping operations and of the
report by the Secretary-General entitled "Support to
African Union peacekeeping operations authorized
by the United Nations". The Movement recommends
the enhancement of effective partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union in order to
improve the planning, deployment and management of
African peacekeeping operations.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
adoption of the United Nations integrated strategy for
the Sahel and international efforts aimed at mobilizing
resources and assistance in support of the efforts of
States of the region to address the complex security,
political and humanitarian situation. The Movement
underscores that the strategy should be implemented
in close cooperation with the States of the Sahel, West
Africa and the Maghreb, as well as the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Community of Sahel-Saharan States and the Arab
Maghreb Union.
As peace and development are mutually reinforcing,
NAM, recalling the United Nations Declaration on the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
calls upon the international community to renew its
commitment to NEPAD and other related initiatives for
Africa, noting the efforts exerted by the African Union
and other regional economic communities in the area of
economic integration.

The Movement also recalls international, regional
and national efforts aimed at, and advancing, the goal
of nuclear disarmament. In that regard, we note with
appreciation the efforts of the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States (CELAC), including
the adoption of a special declaration on nuclear
disarmament at its second Summit, held in Havana
on 28 and 29 January 2014, and further underline the
importance of CELAC as an international and regional
actor and a contributor to the region's further integration
into the international arena.

The Non-Aligned Movement also welcomes
the entry into force of the Constitutive Treaty of the
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) as a
contribution to the cultural, social, economic and
political integration of the region, and the observer
status for UNASUR in the General Assembly, which
began in 2011.

The Movement also notes the importance of the
Forum for East Asia-Latin America Cooperation as
the only forum between East Asia and Latin America
to enhance mutual understanding and trust and to
increase political, economic, social and cultural ties
and dialogue.

We support the continued efforts and commitments
by the member States of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) to advance and strengthen
the ASEAN Community-building process and to
maintain and enhance ASEAN's centrality in the
evolving regional architecture, so as to better meet
the challenges and dynamics of global development,
with the objectives of maintaining and promoting
peace, stability and prosperity in the region. We also
note ASEAN's endeavours in developing the ASEAN
Community's post-2015 vision for adoption by ASEAN
leaders at the end of 2015.

The Non-Aligned Movement also welcomes the
holding of the second and the third Africa-South
America Summit of Heads of State or Governments,
which took place, respectively, on Margarita Island,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, on 26 and
27 September 2009, and in Malabo in February 2013,
as an expression of strengthening friendship, solidarity
and South-South cooperation between both regions.

In conclusion, NAM. firmly believes that peace and
security, as well as economic and social development,
can be achieved through such cooperation among
regions.

