Mr. Kodera (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset,
I would like to extend my appreciation to you for

convening today's debate. It is very timely, because the
Second Summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region was successfully concluded just
last Friday in Nairobi. I would also like to thank
Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, and
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula, Executive Secretary
of the Great Lakes Conference Secretariat for updating
us on the outcome of the Summit and on the process
that led to its being convened.

Despite the difficulties posed by the need to
reschedule the meeting several times, the Second
Summit was convened and the Pact on Security,
Stability and Development in the Great Lakes Region
was signed. Japan, as a member of the Group of
Friends of the Great Lakes Region, welcomes the fact
that the Summit produced such a successful outcome.

Let me briefly touch upon the Pact. The Pact
includes a protocol on non-aggression and mutual
defence in the Great Lakes region. As the protocol is a
comprehensive security agreement covering the whole
of the Great Lakes region, we consider it to be an
epoch-making accomplishment. The Pact also includes
protocols to promote democracy and good governance
and to advance economic development and the local
regional integration process, as well as to address
social and humanitarian issues on a regional basis. I
believe that the Pact will provide appropriate guidance
to each of its States parties in their future efforts to
achieve peace and stability in the region.

In February of this year, at Addis Ababa, Japan
hosted the Conference on the Consolidation of Peace,
in the framework of the Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD), with
co-organizers that included the United Nations. At the
Conference, which was attended by more than 400
participants from 73 countries, the importance of
ownership on the part of African countries and the need
for a comprehensive and integrated approach in the
consolidation of peace were reiterated. We welcome
the Pact particularly because it also reflects what was
discussed at the TICAD Conference.

Japan applauds the considerable efforts made by
all parties concerned. We also commend those who
assisted the summit process, including the joint
secretariat of the African Union and the United
Nations, Mr. Fall and other international partners.
Allow me also to recall that the orderly holding of
democratic elections in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo played a significant role in the
successful conclusion of the Summit.

We welcome the establishment of the regional
follow-up mechanism. It was decided that the
Conference Secretariat for the follow-up mechanism
should be located in Bujumbura, Burundi, and
Ambassador Liberata Muramura of Tanzania was
nominated to serve as the Executive Secretary. Japan
considers that the mandate of the Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region should be
incorporated into the regional follow-up mechanism
when the mechanism begins its functions.

In connection with the future engagement of the
United Nations in the Great Lakes region, I would like
to note that the Peacebuilding Commission has already
begun to address the case of Burundi as its first
country-specific activity. In the implementation of the
Pact, good coordination and cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Commission is also needed.

As the consolidation of peace is a major pillar of
the TICAD process, since 2003 Japan has extended
assistance to Africa amounting to over $400 million. In
the light of the importance of the Great Lakes region to
peace and stability in Africa as whole, my Government
has placed special emphasis on providing assistance in
such areas as disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, including the integration of child
ex-combatants; demining; humanitarian aid, including
food; the repatriation of refugees and internally
displaced persons; and the reconstruction and
development of communities. In order to contribute to
the process of consolidating peace, we have made a
special effort to provide assistance in such areas as
economic development, including agriculture; social
development, including sanitation and education; and
capacity-building.

In addition to economic assistance, Japan has
been engaging in political dialogue with the countries
concerned. Just to mention some of the recent
dialogues, Japan's Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Masayoshi Hamada, visited Burundi at the end of
October and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
early December, and the heads of State or Foreign
Ministers of Tanzania, the Sudan, Rwanda, the
Republic of the Congo and Burundi recently visited
Japan. In each instance, we took the opportunity to
reiterate the importance of stabilizing the region.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that it is
Japan's intention to give all possible support to such
efforts, so that lasting peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region may be attained. We also look forward to
further enhanced efforts by the Governments in the
region towards that end, under the principle of
ownership.

