Mr. Churkin (spoke in Russian): We had hoped
that the unanimous adoption of resolution 2202 (2015)
and today's discussion in the Security Council, the first
since reaching the Minsk agreements of 12 February,
would send a unifying signal and pave the way for
greater harmony in the Council's work than before on
the issue of the Ukraine crisis. Our hopes were partly
realized. We continue to hope that this clear, concise
resolution will guide the parties towards implementing
the decisions adopted in Minsk.

However, we were disappointed by the discussion,
because some colleagues decided to begin with their
usual rhetoric, which was often offensive. Particularly
offensive were the attempts to rewrite the Minsk
agreements in these conditions. Some delegations
picked out certain parts of the agreement to interpret the
Minsk agreements. The situation now is very simple:
we need to look at the provisions of the resolution and
implement the document as it was adopted, as is the
usual fashion.

I should also mention the expression used by
Ms. Power in referring to an "upside-down world". She
accused Russia of starting the crisis, but did we topple
the legally elected President? Throughout all of the
events that took place in Ukraine a year ago, Russia
continually called for a bloodless political solution. We
supported the 21 February agreement. We then insisted
on its implementation, even after the lawfully elected
President had been toppled.

We supported the 17 April communique that called
for constitutional dialogue. We supported the initiative
by the Chair of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). What was the impetus
for the armed conflict that we are seeing? The impetus
was the support by certain Western countries of the
decision of the Kyiv leadership to militarily suppress the
dissatisfaction of the people in the east. They set fire to
them in Odesa and burned them alive in Mariupol. They
launched a military operation in Donbas and started to
send in heavy guns. What is war? War is when there is
an attack and there is a defence. That is what we have
been seeing in recent times. That is what happened in
Debaltseve.

Kyiv could have acted nobly after reaching the
12 February agreement. They could have allowed their
soldiers surrounded in Debaltseve to save their lives.
Instead, they first denied that they were surrounded,
and then they began issuing orders not to lay down
weapons. There are certain rules to the game; you
cannot let heavy equipment out of a surrounded area
because that would simply qualify as regrouping. What
we are seeing is a regrouping of Ukrainian armed
forces after the September agreements in Minsk. Such a
courageous decision by the Ukrainian authorities could
have saved the lives of civilians. Instead, Kyiv preferred
to get carried away by patriotic rhetoric and called for
actions that have led to the most tragic consequences.
Ms. Power spoke of the difficult situation for
civilians in Debaltseve. What about the citizens in
Debaltseve who could not leave the city? One's heart
bleeds for them. And are the people in Donetsk any
better off? Why did she say nothing about them?
Ukrainian security forces have been shelling Donetsk
for months, but no one seems to be bothered about that.
Many other villages and towns have been razed to the
ground as a result of the actions of Ukrainian security
forces. Why did no one in the West say anything about
those situations? We have been flagging those situations
all along. For some reason, however, there has been no
reaction from our Western colleagues. The September
Minsk agreements have not been upheld as we initially
hoped because the shelling of towns has continued.
The OSCE monitors therefore need to do their work,
including in and around Debaltseve. For that to happen,
however, safe conditions must be established. We all
must recall that these are unarmed people. Yes, they
are in armoured cars, but without certain minimum
security conditions they cannot effectively control or
monitor anything.

To be honest, I am surprised that our Ukrainian
colleague today returned to the issue of the
14 humanitarian convoys. Convoys have saved hundreds
of civilian lives in Donbas and Luhansk under shelling,
while being surrounded and subject to the active
blockade established by the Ukrainian authorities
against the people of those cities. We have always
Kyiv to cooperate with us in organizing the convoys.
Each and every time they have refused to cooperate; I
believe that the Ukrainian customs officers inspected
the convoys only once. We will not allow anyone to
play games with these issues. Kyiv needs to help us
save people's lives. People need to get through the
winter. Russia has been providing aid, and we are very
satisfied and pleased with the assistance we have been
able to offer.

Two colleagues mentioned Crimea. I have just
one word to those statements: 93. Recently, a German
public opinion group conducted a poll among Crimean
residents and came to the conclusion that 93 per cent of
the people in Crimea supported unification with Russia.
In addition, 82 per cent said that outright; 11 per cent
said they would prefer it; 4 per cent were against it. That
is even slightly more than the percentage in favour in the
referendum on Crimea's unification with Russia. With
regard to territorial integrity, resolution 2202 (2015)
confirms the territorial integrity of Ukraine - and this
in February 2015.

