Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for her briefing to update the Council on the
referral of the situation in Darfur. My delegation
commends the Office of the Prosecutor for its sustained
efforts to fulfil the mandate given to the Court by the
Security Council a decade ago. We agree with the
assessment contained in the Prosecutor's twenty-first
report and regret the persistence of major impediments
to bringing those responsible for crimes in Darfur to
account.

The sad reality of today's meeting, like that of the
previous ones, is that we need to reflect on yet another
six months that have added to the suffering of the
people of Darfur. As the latest reports clearly indicate,
the ongoing security and humanitarian crisis in Darfur
continues to be marked by widespread violence,
impunity and displacement. Civilians continue to be
targeted by both Government and armed militias, and to
suffer from indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks,
including on ethnic grounds. Raids on villages and
camps of internally displaced persons camps dominate
the daily life of innocent people, including women and
children. The humanitarian situation is dire, while the
delivery of humanitarian assistance continues to be
hindered. Humanitarian aid workers and peacekeepers
are subject to constant attacks throughout Darfur.
Widespread sexual and gender-based violence has
become a horrible feature of Darfur's conflict - and
the list goes on, as detailed in the Prosecutor's report.

Earlier this year, in its resolution 2200 (2015), the
Security Council expressed its deep concern regarding
the increased violence and insecurity in Darfur in recent
months. It emphasized the imperative for all armed
actors to refrain from acts of violence against civilians.
Similar concerns were also voiced at the recent briefing
and consultations on Darfur. As the Prosecutor advises
in her report, numerous trends in Darfur may amount
to crimes under the Rome Statute, and while we concur
that the Prosecutor's Office needs to think strategically
and prioritize its workload, we urge it to continue to
closely monitor various crimes allegedly committed in
Darfur.

There is no doubt that the situation in Darfur is
complex and multifaceted, but one thing is clear. Attacks
against civilians there are largely possible because
of the prevailing climate of impunity, and because
violence breeds more violence. That cannot continue,
and all perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law must be brought to
justice. The Government of the Sudan should do more
to end attacks against civilians, ensure accountability
and bring justice for the victims.

One message from the Prosecutor has also been
clear and consistent at this and previous meetings. It
is of the utmost importance that the Government of the
Sudan and other parties meet their obligation under
resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the Court,
including in the execution of those arrest warrants
issued by the Court that remain outstanding. The
Court's latest decision against the Republic of the
Sudan for non-compliance is a serious reminder that
the Security Council needs to follow up on its referral.
The Council has a special commitment with regard to
the situation in Darfur, and needs to act vigorously to
ensure that its own resolution is fully implemented.

The report of the Prosecutor, however, reminds us
that a lack of cooperation persists on the part not only
of the Government of the Sudan but also of other States.
The lack of cooperation undermines international
efforts to fight impunity, although there are some
encouraging responses from national judiciaries. We
therefore urge all States to cooperate fully with the
Court in its investigations and prosecutions in Darfur.
We also take note of the Prosecutor's suggestion that
this is not a challenge only for those States parties to
the Rome Statute that the suspects may visit.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania's
full support for and cooperation with the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.

