Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this meeting.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar,
as well as Ambassador Raz, for their valuable
contributions to the work of the Council on the situation
in Afghanistan.

In its search for peace, stability and prosperity,
Afghanistan is now passing through a critical juncture.
Tired from years upon years of invasion, occupation
and foreign military presence, as well as a vicious
cycle of terror, insecurity and instability, the people of
Afghanistan from all walks oflife are calling for peace.
This call has never been as loud and strong as it is today.
Now, peace is the main, most serious and strongest
demand of all Afghans. This call must be heard and
this demand has to be realized. This is imperative for
Afghanistan itself and for regional and international
peace and security.
To be durable, peace must be established by the
Afghan people and for the Afghan people. This means
that it cannot be dictated to them and that the real
concerns and genuine interests of all Afghans cannot
be ignored. What the regional and international players
are expected to do in this regard is only to support the
realization of the long-standing aspiration of that great
nation to peace. This must be done by facilitating an
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled
peace process, as the right to determine the future of
Afghanistan belongs exclusively to Afghans themselves.

In this context, and underscoring the need for
further consolidation of the foundations of democracy
and the rule of law, we welcome the recent convening
of the consultative peace loya jirga. By reaffirming a
commitment to Islamic principles and national values, as
well as safeguarding national sovereignty and territorial
integrity, the loya jirga stressed that establishing and
strengthening peace in Afghanistan must uphold the
integrity of the Islamic Republic system and the current
Constitution, as well as other achievements that are the
results of many years of sacrifice and struggle by the
people of Afghanistan.

It is unfortunate that the United States, instead
of acknowledging the positive role that Iran plays in
preserving peace and stability in Afghanistan, is
accusing Iran of fomenting insecurity in that country.
The sole purpose of this unfounded claim is to cover
the United States failed policy in Afghanistan over the
past 18 years.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, which has always
supported the realization of the aspirations of the people
of Afghanistan, stands ready, in close cooperation and
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan, to
fully and genuinely support and facilitate the peace
process in order to establish and consolidate an inclusive,
just and sustaining peace in this neighbouring country.

While the time-bound and responsible withdrawal
of all foreign forces is a strong national demand, this
should be complemented through the preserving and
strengthening of the defence and security institutions
and forces of Afghanistan. This is essential, taking into
account the existing security challenges in the country,
in particular those emanating from the presence and
criminal activities of dangerous terrorist groups, such
as Da'esh, which has been helped in the transfer of its
elements from Syria and Iraq to Afghanistan. Da'esh
is not only destabilizing Afghanistan, but represents a
serious threat to certain central Asian countries.

The strengthening of Afghanistan's defence and
security forces is also necessary to counter another
major challenge facing this country, namely, opium
poppy cultivation and illicit trafficking in narcotic
drugs, with all its adverse socioeconomic and security
impacts, which destroy the fabric not only of Afghan
society, but also that of neighbouring countries. It fuels
terrorist and other criminal activities as well.

Furthermore, proper socioeconomic conditions
can also greatly contribute to the preservation and
consolidation of peace and stability. Therefore, due
consideration must also be paid to the development
of Afghanistan's economy, the realization of which
requires continued strong regional and international
support. In addition to the promotion of peace and
tranquillity, conducive socioeconomic conditions are
also required for the reconstruction of the country and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons.

Iran, for its part, is hosting 3 million of Afghans
refugees and fighting narcotic drugs that are heading
mainly to Europe, without proper and meaningful
international assistance. It is high time for the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
to assist Afghanistan in this regard.

The Islamic Republic of Iran is further expanding
its trade and economic relations with Afghanistan,
including by providing our port facilities, and is
determined to continue supporting the fraternal people
and Government of Afghanistan in all areas in their
search for the peace and prosperity that they deserve.

The meeting rose at 6.50pm.
