Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to thank Special
Representative Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and
for the work he and his team have been carrying out in
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Zahir Tanin for
his statement. I would also like to join my colleagues
in expressing our condolences and our appreciation for
Ambassador Holbrooke's diplomatic work. Brazil also
expresses its gratitude for the work done by the
countries that will end their terms in the Council at the
end of December.

As 2010 comes to a close, today's debate
provides a good opportunity to take stock of an
eventful year, in particular with respect to the relations
between Afghanistan and the international community.
The overall balance is positive, despite the need for
further progress.

The Summit between NATO and the Government
of Afghanistan last November completed the
framework for the process of transition to increased
Afghan responsibility for its security that was initiated
with President Karzai's second inaugural speech and
the London Conference. The message of the
declaration signed in Lisbon is clear from its very title:
Enduring Partnership. The transition process,
consistent with the London and Kabul commitments, is
to be carried out consistent with NATO's long-term
commitment to a sovereign, independent, democratic,
secure and stable Afghanistan. The challenge now is to
translate that commitment into concrete realities on the
ground.

The fact that Afghanistan has been exceeding the
force-generation targets for its army and police is
encouraging evidence of its determination to assume
greater responsibility for its own security. Afghans
deserve continued international support for such
efforts, including through the provision of necessary

equipment and capabilities. Such cooperation is crucial
for bringing down today's record high number of
civilian casualties, more than three-quarters of which
were caused by armed opposition groups as well as by
pro-Government forces. Although important progress
has been made to protect civilians, more should be
done to spare them further suffering. Redoubling
efforts towards peace and reintegration is vital in that
regard, as it is quite clear that a durable solution will
not be possible exclusively through military means.

My delegation is encouraged that a number of
alleged combatants from the rank and file of armed
opposition groups have already approached Afghan
authorities to express their intention to lay down arms
and return to their communities. We hope that this
development can become a consistent and firm trend
that paves the way for substantive peace talks at the
senior-official level.

Another important development was the
participation of High Peace Council and Government
officials in the conference on justice and reconciliation
convened by civil society organizations and UNAMA.
Increasing consultation with civil society regarding
Afghan peace, reconciliation and reintegration efforts
can contribute significantly to ensuring peace and
strengthening the achievements of recent years,
especially with respect to human and women's rights.

The parliamentary elections showed that Afghan
authorities could learn the lessons of the past and move
forward towards consolidating democracy. Even
though there were a number of allegations of
irregularities and despite security, logistical and
political challenges, the electoral institutions were able
to investigate and address complaints effectively. The
will of the Afghan people and the decisions of the
independent electoral institutions are to be respected
by all without undue interference. However, as always,
improvements can be made, including some that
actually depend on the security situation, such as
increasing voter turnout and making progress in long-
term electoral reform.

Brazil welcomes the progress that the
Government of Afghanistan has made in its Kabul
process commitments. We appreciate in particular the
establishment of a monitoring and reporting framework
to track progress on the implementation of the national
priority programmes, the achievement of more than 70
per cent of the October benchmarks and the detailing
of short- and medium-term implementation plans for
the programmes. As the Afghan Government shifts its
focus to their implementation and delivery,
international support will be all the more critical and
urgent.

In that connection, we note the paucity of
information regarding the international community's
progress in keeping its commitments to the Afghan
Government. One possible measure to fill that gap
could be to set up a monitoring and reporting
mechanism on the fulfilment of international
commitments to increase budget aid and realign off-
budget aid.

The Fourth Regional Economic Conference on
Afghanistan, in Istanbul, and the progress on the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit and Trade Agreement
were important milestones in regional cooperation with
Afghanistan. The implementation of the Agreement
and of the conclusions of the Conference can make a
significant contribution to the social and economic
development of Afghanistan and to its full integration
in its sub-region. We also commend the holding of the
Afghanistan International Investment Conference, in
Dubai.

The response to the attack against the United
Nations compound in Herat showed the Organization's
ability to learn from past misfortunes. We commend
the enhancement of security arrangements for United
Nations facilities in Afghanistan and the increase in
secure accommodation. The establishment of the
support office in Kuwait and the acquisition of the
Alpha compound have helped to reduce the deficit of
international staff in UNAMA, although the vacancy
rate remains high. We encourage the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to continue their efforts in support of
UNAMA's ability to carry out its mandate.
In closing, allow me to express Brazil's
expectation that, as 2010 was the year when
Afghanistan and the international community renewed
their partnership and set out a framework for a
responsible transition, 2011 will become the year when
we deliver on our mutual commitments and help bring
about the prosperity, the stability and the peace the
Afghan people rightly deserve.

