Mr. Pleuger (Germany): My delegation wants to
associate itself with the statement of the Greek
presidency of the European Union, which will be
delivered later in this meeting.

My delegation is grateful for the briefing by
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi and for his
introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(5/2003/421). His briefing and the Secretary-General's
report of 14 April describe the positive changes and
achievements over the past three months. But at the
same time, they also show that Kosovo and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) require unrelenting attention and continuous
support.

I thank the Special Representative and his
UNMIK team for their tireless efforts in keeping
Kosovo on track. They have succeeded in spite of
numerous attempts to slow down a process which aims
at meeting the benchmarks set out by the Special
Representative.

In that context, we feel that the "standards before
status" policy needs to be upheld. Recent developments
in the Kosovo Assembly, in particular the attempt to
circumvent the reserved powers of the Special
Representative, testify to this. The Assembly has
unfortunately proven that continued control is
warranted in order to realize a democratic and multi-
ethnic Kosovo respecting minority rights. The current
process of transferring competencies to the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government is not in contradiction
with ensuring continued control by UNMIK.
Accountability is at the core of this issue. The
Provisional Institutions must convince us that they are
willing and capable of exercising their responsibilities
in a way that benefits all Kosovans.

The Kosovo Serbs are part of Kosovo society.
They enjoy, under the Constitutional Framework, far-
reaching rights for representation and participation in
the political arena. Their four-month boycott in the
Kosovo Assembly was to their own detriment. Their
active contribution in shaping political life and the
nascent Kosovo society is crucial to safeguarding the
specific rights that have been given to them. We urge
that important and valuable part of Kosovo society to
participate in the process of transferring competencies
to the Provisional Institutions. At the same time, we
recognize that some rightful expectations of Kosovo
Serbs with regard to the return of displaced persons
and with regard to decentralization need to be tackled
with renewed vigour.

With regard to the criticism of UNMIK's
performance that has been voiced from various corners
inside Kosovo, but also from Belgrade and from the
international community, I would like to say the
following. We all stand for the joint international effort
that is UNMIK's reason for being. That peace mission
can only be as good as the support it receives from the
international community. The Mission relies to a great
extent on the readiness of local and regional partners to
cooperate constructively. Unfortunately, that sort of
willingness for constructive cooperation has recently
been missing to a certain extent.

Solving the status issue, one way or another, in a
rushed manner will not solve the underlying problems
of Kosovo and the region as a whole. There is still
plenty to do for the Kosovans, UNMIK and the
international community before questions of status can
reasonably be addressed. Germany strongly holds the
view that this order of things must be retained.

