Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
My delegation wishes fully to associate itself with the
statement to be made shortly by the Ambassador of
Austria on behalf of the European Union.

France is deeply preoccupied by the recent
upsurge in violence in Israel and in the occupied
Palestinian territories, which has left in its wake
numerous civilian victims, in particular children. We
wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to the
families of the Victims as well as to the Palestinian and
Israeli peoples.

France condemns in the most energetic terms the
deadly suicide attack committed this morning in Tel
Aviv. That attack has once again given rise to feelings
of horror and of condemnation. Nothing could possibly
justify such a hateful act, and we are shocked by
comments made by the Hamas spokesman in that
connection. We condemn also the launching of
homemade rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israel. We
welcome the clear-cut position taken by President
Mahmoud Abbas against violence, and we call on the
Palestinian Government to publicly denounce terrorism
and to take immediate measures to prevent such
attacks.

My country has on several occasions expressed
its concern at the increasing violence in the Gaza Strip.
The use of force by Israel, in particular indiscriminate
artillery fire against the Gaza Strip, poses a threat to
the civilian population. While recognizing Israel's right
to defend itself against terrorist acts, we call on the
Israeli Government to show the greatest restraint and to
cease such practices contravening international law, in
particular extrajudicial assassinations.

France appeals for calm and restraint. We call on
the parties to respect the arrangements agreed last year
at the Sharm el-Sheik summit. Recent incidents also
demonstrate the importance of keeping open channels
for discussion between Israel and Palestine. In that
connection, we deplore the Israeli decision to close the
Jericho liaison office and encourage the parties to
continue to engage in dialogue.

My country wishes to express its concern at the
grave deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
Palestinian territories, in particular in the Gaza Strip.
Israel must discharge its obligations under the Fourth
Geneva Convention and honour its commitments under
past agreements. We call for respect for, and the
prompt implementation of, all the provisions of the
Agreement on Movement and Access, signed in
November last. The full reopening of the Karni
crossing is crucial in that respect. We call on the Israeli
Government also fully to reimburse to the Palestinian
Authority all tax income collected on its behalf, in
keeping with the Paris Protocol.

As I have noted recently in this forum, France
and Europe as a whole do not wish to punish the
Palestinian people or sacrifice the institutional
achievements that have been made over the past
decade. With respect to the recent decisions taken by
the European Union, my delegation would like to
emphasize that European assistance to the Palestinian
Authority is suspended only partly and temporarily.
The European Union remains the main donor to the
Palestinian Authority. France deems it important that
assistance earmarked for the Palestinian people be
maintained. Thus humanitarian assistance, broadly
speaking, will continue, as will most of our
cooperation projects, in particular in vital areas such as
health care.

Direct budgetary assistance has, however, been
temporarily suspended until alternative channels can be
defined, to ensure that such assistance can be clearly
targeted to priority needs such as education and health
care. The Council of Ministers of the European Union
plans to periodically review this issue so as to assess
the Palestinian Government's attitude towards the three
principles set out by the European Union, the Quartet
and the Security Council, that is, the renunciation of
violence, the recognition of Israel's right to exist, and
the recognition of previous agreements between Israel
and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). The
purpose of that policy is not to punish the Palestinian
people, but instead to encourage the new Palestinian
Government to adopt the principles of the peace
process that have been endorsed since the Madrid
Conference by the international community and the
PLO.

France believes that the recent escalation of
violence calls for a strong political response on the part
of the international community. In that connection, we
regret that the Security Council last week was not able
to agree on the balanced draft presidential statement
submitted by Qatar, which my delegation supported.

In this fragile context, we deem necessary a
robust initiative on the part of the Quartet that would
bring the parties back to the negotiating table. We
welcome the stance taken by President Mahmoud
Abbas and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in favour of a
resumption of the peace talks. We must take them at
their word. France once again solemnly appeals to the
two parties to refrain from any unilateral action or
undertaking that could prejudge the outcome of final
status negotiations or threaten the viability of a two-
State solution.

In that regard we remain very concerned at the
continuation of the Israeli settlement policy in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, at the route of the separation barrier, which
contravenes the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice and General Assembly resolution ES-
10/15, and at the obstacles to access to the Jordan
Valley for resident or riparian Palestinian populations.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the deep
attachment of France to the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, based on the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference, the land for peace initiative, the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut Summit and
Security Council resolutions.

