Mr. Paolillo (spoke in Spanish): Last week, when
the debate on the role of the United Nations in
promoting justice and the rule of law began in this
Council, the Secretary-General underscored what, in
the view of Uruguay, is the most serious and sensitive
problem raised by this issue.

I refer to the conflict - which frequently arises
in the process of restoring democracy - between the
need to ensure the rule of law and justice on the one
hand and the need to return to institutional normalcy
and achieve national reconciliation on the other. As the
Secretary-General stated, "At times, the goals of justice
and reconciliation compete with each other"
(S/PV4833, p. 3).
Uruguay has some experience in this matter.
After an interlude in the 70's that interrupted for eleven
years the process of democratic development that had
for 100 years characterized the history of the country,
Uruguay returned to the path of democracy. The new
Government led the nation down the difficult path of
transitioning from repression and authoritarianism to
democracy and freedom.

This path was difficult because the democratic
Government was not only required to heal the wounds
that society had sustained during the de facto regime
but was also required to respond to the need for
institutional stability and to establish the conditions
necessary for the full enjoyment of freedoms within the
rule of law.

The crimes and violations of human rights
committed before and during the de facto
Government's rule had to be punished. This was an
elementary demand of justice.

However, the country found itself in special
political circumstances that placed the democratic
Government in a difficult political and moral dilemma:
the Government could either seek to ensure justice -
and thus frustrate or at least delay the objective of
ensuring the democratic continuity, social peace and
national reconciliation sought by all Uruguayans - or
it could give priority to the latter objectives at the cost
of sacrificing the former.

The democratic Government, exercising the
authority conferred upon it by the Constitution, chose
the second option, enacting laws that granted amnesty
for all political crimes as well as for all related
common and military crimes committed both by
military and police officials of the de facto
Government and by members of opposition groups.
This was a painful but unavoidable decision for
Uruguay, a country that aspires to see an end to
impunity and that is a party to the statute of Rome and
firmly supports the International Criminal Court.

Two things should be mentioned here. First, the
Uruguayan people ratified the law on amnesty for
military and police personnel through a popular
referendum. Secondly, a reconciliation commission
comprised of representatives of all political sectors was
established in Uruguay, which, over the past several
years, has examined the cases of persons who had
disappeared and succeeded in resolving many of them.

Certain sectors of public opinion and some
intergovernmental organizations disapprove of
amnesties and governmental acts of clemency and
argue that these actions are incompatible with the
obligations arising from international instruments that
promote respect for human rights.

At a theoretical level, it is very easy to respond to
this dilemma with statements in favour of the
establishment of justice, which is a supreme and
universal value shared by all. In the real world, the
response is neither as easy nor as obvious. As the
Secretary-General said, "the relentless pursuit of
justice may sometimes be an obstacle to peace. If we
insist, at all times and in all places, on punishing those
who are guilty of extreme violations of human rights, it
may be difficult or even impossible to stop the
bloodshed and save innocent civilians. If we always
and everywhere insist on uncompromising standards of
justice, a delicate peace may not survive." (S/PV4833).

I wish to note that the international community
has recognized to a certain degree the need to defer the
demand for justice under exceptional circumstances to
ensure the maintenance of peace. I am referring to
article 16 of the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, which authorizes the Security Council to request
that the Court suspend investigations or prosecutions
that have been initiated - and it bears repeating, those
that have been initiated. The request must be made in
accordance with a resolution adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter, which means that the Council may
use that authority when it considers that moving
forward with proceedings already initiated before the
Court could interfere with the Council's mission to
maintain international peace and security.

Article 16 of the Rome Statute thus constitutes a
clear recognition that justice and the maintenance of
international peace and security can sometimes be
incompatible goals. To be more precise, resolutions
1422 (2002) and 1487 (2003) are not, in our View,
correct applications of article 16 of the Rome Statute.

I would like to thank the Security Council for the
opportunity to voice the views of my Government on
this very important item. I also wish to express our
hope that international organizations, Governments,
non-governmental organizations and, in general, all
those who are involved in some way in the quest for
justice and the rule of law shall consider the ideas and
recommendations contained in the excellent report of
the Secretary-General on this subject, which touched
on the need to proceed with caution and seek balance
to ensure respect for the various competing values at
stake.

