I welcome Ambassador Barbara Woodward to the Council. I am so excited that I will be able to spend at least a couple weeks with her and welcome her. We are very excited to have her here and looking forward to working alongside here. I also thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Under-Secretary-General LaCroix so much for their remarks today. Three months ago, we met to discuss the latest developments in the Sudan and the role of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS). At that time, the Sudan's transitional Government and opposition groups had just signed the ambitious Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. That agreement set the groundwork for long-term peace, justice and stability for those who, for far too long, have endured atrocities and cycles of violence and atrocities. As we said then, the United States is encouraged by the willingness of the parties to this agreement to come to the table in a spirit of good faith to address the long-standing causes of instability and conflict in Sudan. However, we remain deeply concerned about the situation on the ground. As the Secretary-General details in his most recent report (S/2020/1155), spikes in civil unrest, insecurity in Darfur and ongoing ethnic and tribal clashes in Eastern Sudan signal a difficult path forward. Failure to address the root causes of conflict could upend the Juba agreement and reverse recent progress. One step in the right direction is the Sudanese Government's national plan for the protection of civilians. The United States is particularly encouraged by the plan's outline for developing an early-warning system and devising specific nomadic routes. However, we recognize the limitations the transitional Government faces in trying to implement the plan. As they proceed, we encourage the transitional Government to engage in robust outreach, transparent information-sharing and consultations with affected communities. UNITAMS, in particular, can play a valuable role in supporting civilian protection efforts and helping with the political transition and peace processes. But the Mission cannot truly deliver on its mandate if it lacks leadership. We encourage the appointment of a Special Representative to begin leading UNITAMS as soon as possible. Six months is far too long to have existed without leadership, especially given the needs on the ground. With the anticipated departure of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) from the Sudan, it is vital that its drawdown occur in a responsible manner and that there be a smooth transition to the new special political mission. There are key UNAMID responsibilities that should continue under UNITAMS and are within its mandate, including robust training of police, rule of law support and other issues listed in the Juba agreement. The United States is committed to supporting the transitional Government. We anticipate that the Sudan's State sponsors of terrorism designation will be rescinded very soon, based on the President's certification that the Sudan has met the necessary statutory criteria. We are confident that this development will herald a new phase in the relationship between the Sudan and the United States and open new and expanded opportunities in the Sudan's relationship with the international community. Lastly, we commend the Sudanese people for their generosity in welcoming their Ethiopian neighbours. It is heartening and so reassuring to see people who are already facing significant challenges themselves embracing humanity and sharing what they have.
