Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me start by thanking
you, Madam President, for convening this open debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
rule of law (S/2013/341).

We believe that the establishment of the rule
of law at the national and international levels alike
constitutes one of the core values and principles of the
United Nations. Through the universal standard-setting
power of the General Assembly, the enforcement power
of the Security Council and the judicial power of the
International Court of Justice, the United Nations plays
a vital role in promoting and enhancing the rule of law.

For a world order based on fairness and the rule of
law, all nations - rich and poor, weak and powerful,
small and large - must respect international legal
systems and multilateral treaties and support the
fair and just application of customary international
law in the multilateral decision-making process. A
greater voice and representation for developing and, in
particular, least developed countries in the multilateral
system across the board remain absolutely crucial to
ensuring the principles of equity, fairness, transparency
and democracy at the international level. That will be
even more critical as we embark upon the post-2015
development agenda for equitable, pro-people and pro-
planet sustainable development, peace and stability.

We must demonstrate unwavering faith in the rule
of law to achieve some of our pressing outstanding
tasks concerning meaningful reform of the global
financial structures, a rules-based development-
centric multilateral trading system, an equitable and
responsible legal regime to address climate change and
a balanced and rights-based approach to address the
emerging challenges of population dynamics as a key
driver of sustainable development.

Bangladesh believes in peace and justice within the
State and in inter-State relations. As the world's eighth
largest democracy, Bangladesh firmly believes that the
rule of law is a necessary precondition for sustainable
peace, stability and development in any society.

At the national level, we are committed to, and
steadfastly working towards, the promotion of the rule
of law and justice in all spheres of our lives.

It is noteworthy to mention that, to uphold the
constitutional obligations and the rule of law in our
multiparty democracy, the Bangladesh Election
Commission, which is an independent entity, has
recently conducted our national elections in a fair, free,
transparent and credible way that is overwhelmingly
supported by the public.

In the last tenure of the present Government,
it undertook much-needed reform in the fields of
the administration, the judiciary and the electoral
systems in Bangladesh. One important reform is
the effective separation of the judiciary from the
executive organ of the Government. The Government
has also strengthened the anti-corruption commission,
enabling that independent constitutional body to act
as the watchdog against all types of institutional and
personal corruption and misuse of powers. The present
Government has also established an independent
human rights commission to safeguard the rights of all
citizens and to ensure that the international standards
of human rights and personal freedoms are protected in
the country.

Measures have also been taken to ensure that
law-enforcing institutions operate with accountability
and work within the framework of international legal
norms and principles. To strengthen the rule of law and
democracy, end the culture of impunity and prevent the
perpetration of genocide and crimes against humanity,
Bangladesh, following international standards, formed
its international crime tribunal and ratified and joined
the International Criminal Court the year before last.
We also strengthened the commissions on information
and other regulatory agencies.

A citizens' charter of rights has been instituted in
all public institutions to ensure that the Government
delivers the rule of law and public services to every
citizen. I am particularly pleased to report that we
could deliver justice and rights to our women. Our
membership in all 14 international treaties on counter-
terrorism, our amendments to existing national laws on
counter-terrorism and anti-money-laundering between
2009 and 2012 to bring them into line with international
treaties following the Palermo Convention of 2011, and
our adoption of the human-trafficking act, the mutual
Legal assistance in crimes act, the anti-terrorism act
and the anti-money-laundering act all reflect our
commitment to counter-terrorism and the rule of law.

Bangladesh is a staunch supporter of resolving
conflict through peaceful and non-military means.
Peace in our world today is threatened - by, among
other things, civil and ethnic wars, hate crimes,
misunderstandings, injustice, religious intolerance,
double standards, transnational crime, depravation,
poverty, terrorism, piracy, climate change impacts and
the financial and energy crises. That has enhanced
more than ever the need to reaffirm our faith in the
just, equitable and fair application of international law,
the Charter of the United Nations, principles of justice,
legal statutes, the culture of peace and the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

We fully support efforts to uphold the sovereign
equality of all States, to respect their territorial integrity
and political independence, to refrain from the use or
threat of use of force in a manner inconsistent with
the Charter of the United Nations and to uphold the
peaceful resolution of disputes in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law. The rule of
law, which is a necessary condition for good governance
and guarantees the transparency and accountability
of Governments and their responsible conduct, is
an important enabler of sustainable development.
Institutions for the rule of law and good governance
need to be effective, credible, efficient, accountable
and democratic in order to achieve a just, equitable,
peaceful, prosperous and sustainable society for all.

