First of all, let me express my gratitude to Mr. Jose Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy of the Dominican Republic to the United Nations, for the invitation to today's open debate of the Security Council. We commend him for the choice of this very timely and critical issue for consideration on this month's agenda during his presidency. I would like to thank His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres; Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth; Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf, Project Coordinator of Youth Without Border Organization for Development, Yemen; and Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, Founder of the Young Adult Empowerment Initiative, South Sudan/Uganda, for their very informative addresses. Let me thank the organizers of today's event for the opportunity to speak on the important topic of youth, peace and security. In 2015, the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 2250 (2015), in which it encourages States to consider creating mechanisms that would enable young people to engage constructively in peacebuilding to prevent violence and establish world peace and to clearly identify youth as an important partner in global efforts to strengthen peace and counter extremism. In September 2018, the Secretary-General introduced Youth 2030: The United Nations Strategy on Youth, which emphasizes the intention of the United Nations to increase its efforts to work with the youth and for its interests in order to provide every young person with the opportunity to fully realize their potential, highlighting the positive contribution of young people as key agents of change. Kyrgyzstan is making significant efforts to comply with the requirements of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015). In that context, Kyrgyzstan is interested in active cooperation with the United Nations and all international partners to fulfil the requirements of these important resolutions. The Kyrgyz Republic fully supports the vital and positive role of the youth in solving problems concerning maintaining peace and security, developing friendly relations among nations, cooperating in resolving development problems, reducing poverty, promoting respect for human rights, environmental protection, fighting diseases and many other challenges and issues facing humankind. The National Development Strategy of the Kyrgyz Republic for 2018-2040 sets out that young people should be actively involved in the country's development processes, an effective youth development system, the conditions and the necessary legal framework for the effective implementation of the State youth policy aimed at shaping young people into one of the main assets of the development of the State and society and the promotion of youth initiatives in the political, economic and social spheres. In August 2017, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic also adopted a youth policy development programme for 2017-2020, which contains a vision for the future, goals, the main priorities, tasks and key public policy measures aimed at developing the youth of Kyrgyzstan, including the creation of the relevant legal and infrastructural conditions, by the end of 2020. It should be noted that the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic is actively working with the United Nations system to increase youth participation in the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). There are many successful international projects aimed at peacebuilding, capacity-building, counteracting the spread of violent extremism, strengthening friendly relations among young people of the States of the region and involving young people in decision-making related to security, conflict and peace. We fully support the vital and positive role that young people are playing in the coronavirus disease outbreak response in relation to peace and security in Kyrgyzstan today. In particular, in 2019 the United Nations system in Kyrgyzstan, in partnership with the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic, launched a new programme for young activists to promote the SDGs among young people in Kyrgyzstan and to mobilize them towards achieving the SDGs at the local, national and international levels. At the regional level, the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia (UNRCCA) and Central Asian States launched a new initiative in 2019, entitled the UNRCCA Preventive Diplomacy Academy, aimed at implementing the United Nations Youth Strategy and the youth and peace and security programme in Central Asia. The well-being, participation and empowerment of young are key factors in sustainable development and world peace. Achieving the Goals of the 2030 Agenda requires strong and inclusive partnerships between youth and all stakeholders in order to address youth development challenges and recognize the positive role of youth as a partner in promoting development and peace. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and actively cooperate with all Member States, the United Nations system and all international partners to achieve our goals.
