Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the United Kingdom, as President of the Security
Council, for organizing this open debate.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their valuable inputs.

Mediation, an essential tool in the settlement
of disputes, should be seen in the larger context of
promoting the rule of law at the international level. One
of the pillars of the Organization is that international
relations must be ruled by law instead of power.
Accordingly, under the Charter of the United Nations,
States have two complementary obligations: first, to
refrain from the threat or use of force, and, secondly,
to settle their international disputes by peaceful means.
Despite acceptable progress in both directions, we
have had failures that need to be rectified; There are
instances of uneven implementation of laws that require
adjustment, and there are opportunities that need to
be explored.

For instance, on the eve of this century, a country
was invaded by a permanent seatholder of the Security
Council - occurring in total disregard of the Council
and in blatant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations. Not only is that same Power now pursuing a
policy of withdrawal from international organizations
and agreements - thereby jeopardizing the sanctity of
international treaties - but it also openly invites all
Member States to either disobey a specific resolution
of the Council - I refer to resolution 2231 (2015) - or
face punishment. If left unchecked, that alarming trend
will further tarnish the credibility of the Organization
and of the Council, thereby eroding the rule of law and
leading to disorder.

Among the Charter provisions requiring
proportionate, smart and astute application, one can
refer to the application of Chapter VII on the functions
of the Council. The Security Council has been
increasingly, excessively and expeditiously resorting to
the functions set out in Chapter VII, as if there were
no other provisions in the Charter. As a result, in some
cases, the sovereign rights of States as well as human
rights have been seriously violated. Therefore, Chapter
VII must be invoked as intended - as a measure oflast
resort - if necessary.

Mediation is one of the less-explored opportunities
provided by the Charter. Therefore, awareness of its
usefulness in the peaceful settlement of disputes should
increase. In order to be effective, mediation should
be conducted in an objective, transparent and neutral
manner. As an essential element in enhancing trust
among the parties concerned, that is largely dependent
upon the independence, impartiality and integrity of
the mediators. The exclusive purpose of the mediator
should be to facilitate a process towards a just and
comprehensive conclusion and help the parties to arrive
at a solution themselves.

In conclusion, I pay tribute to the former Secretary-
General, the late Kofi Annan, who held roles as
mediator. He, as Foreign Minister Zarif of the Islamic
Republic of Iran has said, was an unwavering champion
for peace, justice and therule of law.

