Mr. Moreno Fernandez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 States members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

First of all, Mr. President and my friend, I would
like to welcome you as you assume your
responsibilities as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to
express our appreciation to your country for organizing
this important debate and for its outstanding work in
the presidency of the Security Council. I wish also to
pay tribute to Their Excellencies Mr. Romano Prodi,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini
Zuma for their statements, which were clearly of the
highest interest to the members of our Movement.
Today's debate is a welcome endeavour in our
joint quest to advance cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. I thank the African
Union-United Nations panel for its report on modalities
for support to African Union peacekeeping operations
(S/2008/8l3), which it submitted in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1809 (2008).

The non-aligned countries, which currently
provide more than 80 per cent of peacekeeping
personnel in the field, including personnel from
African countries, wish to reiterate their support for
continuing efforts to strengthen African peacekeeping
capacities. In that context, the Movement emphasizes

the importance of implementing the Joint Action Plan
for United Nations support to African Union
peacekeeping in the short, medium and long term,
focusing primarily on collaboration in the areas of
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, in particular
assistance to the development of an African Standby
Force.

The Non-Aligned Movement takes this
opportunity to underline the need to enhance and
clarify the strategic relationship between the United
Nations and the African Union, specifically between
the United Nations Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, and between the
United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as the basis for a more efficient
partnership in addressing issues of mutual interest.

We subscribe to the recommendation of the
panel's report that in defining the division of
responsibility, it is important not to create the
perception that the United Nations is subcontracting
peacekeeping to the African Union. The objective
should be to maximize the African Union's strengths in
terms of its contribution to conflict prevention and
mediation, and its capacity to undertake peacekeeping
operations in conformity with Chapter VIII of the
Charter.

The Movement shares the view that resources
should be made available to peacekeeping operations
carried out by African Union in a sustainable and
predictable manner without undermining the value of
the flexibility needed to respond quickly to crisis.

Non-aligned countries recognize the need to
support the African Union in developing the
institutional capacities which will enable it to
implement its mandate in a coordinated and
appropriate manner, in particular the need to build
integrated capacities to plan, manage and support
conflict-prevention and peacekeeping activities in
Africa in close cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

The Movement would like also to underscore the
need to identify innovative financial and logistical
support mechanisms that focus on the requirements of
the African Union at the continental level. In this
regard, the Movement takes note of the financial
mechanisms proposed by the African Union-United
Nations panel and looks forward to receiving further
information on their implementation.

We stress the importance of close coordination

among all international partners and donors supporting

African Union peacekeeping capacity-building,

including the necessary support for the creation of

effective and appropriately funded training
programmes.

The Non-Aligned Movement strongly believes
that the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations and that the role of regional arrangements
should be in strict accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter and should not in any way be a substitute for
the role of the United Nations or circumvent the full
application of the guiding principles for United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

In that connection, the Movement reiterates that
the establishment of any peacekeeping operation or
extension of the mandate of existing operations must
strictly respect the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, as well as the basic
principles governing such operations: consent of the
parties, the non-use of force, except in legitimate self-
defence, and impartiality.

Peacekeeping operations must not and cannot be
used as a substitute for dealing with the root causes of
conflict, but should address them in a consistent, well-
planned, coordinated and comprehensive manner,
together with other political, social, economic and
development instruments.

The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
reaffirms the need to establish a logistics base to
support United Nations peacekeeping in Africa, since
most United Nations peacekeeping activities are
carried out there. That would further increase the
deployment of missions in Africa, thus ensuring cost-
effectiveness and supporting capacity-building of the
African Union in the area of peacekeeping operations.

Permit me to conclude by emphasizing that
Africa's challenges are multidimensional and cannot be
addressed separately. The issues of conflict prevention
and resolution and peacekeeping are inextricably
linked to sustainable social and economic
development.

Finally, we hope that this debate will contribute
to the adoption of concrete and appropriate measures to
strengthen the relationship between the United Nations
and the African Union.
