Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Representative Sandra Honore Braithwaite for
her briefing and for her admirable contribution to the
work of the United Nations and to stress how much we
appreciate her efforts. The mission was well executed.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/604), which notes the steady progress that Haiti
has made in consolidating its institutional and political
stability. In that regard, the adoption of a Government
road map that emphasizes accountability and
transparency while at the same time fighting corruption
is indeed encouraging. The Special Representative
rightly underlined that aspect earlier. A joint legislative
agenda to be followed by both the executive branch
and the legislature will also be a significant element in
strengthening their collaboration in implementing the
reforms outlined by President Jovenel Moise. We also
support his goal of moving forward with a broad-based
national dialogue to forge a common vision around
reform priorities that address the most pressing social,
economic and political challenges, and we agree with
the Secretary-General on the need for the inclusion of
electoral reform in this agenda in order to strengthen the
national capacity to administer elections in the country.

Ethiopia also welcomes the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General for
full restoration of the independence of the judiciary
in order to consolidate Haiti's democracy and
continued development.

Haiti remains relatively stable, but it certainly
needs long-term support to address its vulnerability
and economic fragility. We join other colleagues who
have called for this to be given high priority. In fact,
that is why the sustained engagement of all bilateral and
international partners is very much critical to secure
sufficient and timely assistance for the sustainable
development of Haiti.

The Security Council mission to Haiti last month
was indeed a demonstration ofthe continued engagement
of the United Nations, and we are pleased to have
participated in this important mission. We would like
to seize this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Bolivia for its role and leadership. The significance
of the United Nations presence and transition to the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti to
the country's stability, development and institutional
consolidation in the area of the rule of law, police and
human rights is indeed paramount.

We are encouraged to note the reduction in the
number of suspected cases of death from cholera in
recent months in Haiti despite the impact of Hurricane
Matthew last year. However, the limited resources that
have been made available to fund the cholera response
is a matter of concern. The new approach of the United
Nations to deal with this issue should be supported to
respond to the needs of the people of Haiti, and to the
victims of the cholera outbreak and their families in
particular. That is all the more appropriate, fair and just
in the light of the responsibility that the United Nations
has, as indicated by the representative of Egypt when
he took the floor.

Finally, I would like to express our appreciation
to Ms. Honore Braithwaite again for her significant
contribution to Haiti's stability, as well as to all
departing the civilian staff of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
uniformed personnel for their steadfast commitment
in achieving the Mission's mandate. Ethiopia, as one
of the police-contributing countries to MINUSTAH,
is pleased to have made a very modest contribution to
those efforts.

