We thank the Russian delegation for the organization of the open debate yesterday (S/2020/1084) on the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We also welcome the announcements by Russia and by China of their engagement with the Informal Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security. During negotiations for this draft resolution, Belgium, along with a majority of Council members, consistently pleaded in favour of maintaining recently agreed language on crucial aspects of the women and peace and security agenda. Indeed, our understanding of the women and peace and security agenda and gendered dynamics have evolved over the last 20 years, and the normative framework reflects these shifts. Should the draft resolution be adopted, it would erode the hard-won gains of our predecessors. This is why Belgium abstains in the voting on this draft resolution. The following issues, in particular, are of grave concern for our delegation. The text fails to meet the minimum standard with regard to civil society involvement and human rights. Member States should empower civil society and women leaders to implement the women and peace and security agenda on the ground. The language used to describe the impact of the coronavirus disease on women does not adequately reflect the leading role women have played in tackling the pandemic. The resolution inadequately reflects the normative framework, including an insufficient reference to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women and general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women. The current text is nearly devoid of meaningful language on the implementation of or on accountability for the women and peace and security agenda. Our delegation has put forward several proposals on closing data gaps, financing the agenda as well as overcoming structural barriers to gender equality, which have not been reflected in the draft resolution. The women and peace and security agenda belongs to all women, everywhere. Through their achievements, they have made the agenda their own. We are merely here to ensure that the Security Council continues to support them, in words, but foremost in action. It is important that the Council stay united as we sustain efforts to implement and strengthen the women and peace and security agenda.
