Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you back
with us presiding over the Council, Madam. We thank
Mr. Mladenov and Mr. Krahenbiihl for their updates
today and are grateful for their commitment and vital
work. We also welcome Mr. Greenblatt.

Once again, this issue brings only accusations and
counteraccusations, without solutions. We reiterate
our firm condemnation of the attacks at the beginning
of this month in which rockets were fired from Gaza
into Israel, and of the resulting reprisals, which
resulted in tragic losses of both Israeli and Palestinian
lives, leading once again to a dangerous escalation of
tensions and distancing us from the understandings
recently reached between the parties. We commend the
mediation and cooperation efforts that countries such
as Egypt are making to ease tensions as quickly as
possible and prevent any further loss of life, as well as
of United Nations agencies such as the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which, through human development
initiatives and humanitarian assistance, help to relieve
the suffering of the inhabitants of Gaza, who continue
to endure a severe humanitarian and security crisis. We
therefore urge friendly countries to continue to support
those efforts and initiatives.

We remain optimistic about the recent formation
of the Palestinian Government and the start of a new
stage for the Government in Israel and hope that they
can bring renewed impetus to the quest for a definitive
solution to the conflict that can deliver the longed-
for peace, considering that we are seeing a continued
increase in tensions between the parties thanks to
widespread violence in which civilians, including
women and children, are the most affected; various
kinds of provocations and inflammatory rhetoric; a lack
of internal reconciliation; and actions that contradict
and violate international law and order.

We had an important discussion at our previous
meeting, at the end of April (see S/PV.8517), on
the environmental dimension of the peace process
and the precarious situation in Gaza and the West
Bank created by the severe water shortage and its
impact on the economic and social development of
the region, including by increasing its vulnerability
to food insecurity. We must therefore recognize the
transboundary nature of water as a relevant element in
peace negotiations. We are also concerned about the
Palestinian Government's difficult financial situation,
which has worsened with the involuntary withholding
of tax revenues and the decrease in international
assistance, which have led to a substantial loss of
income and forced it to take austerity measures, with
negative effects on the economy and society.

We continue to be dismayed at the continued
expansion of settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, with thousands of
units being advanced, approved or bid on and action
taken to legalize a number of enclaves and homes,
all under the shadow of possible annexation. We also
strongly condemn the excessive use of force and any
acts of violence and intimidation against civilians,
including women and children, and reiterate our
condemnation of the indiscriminate firing of rockets,
mortars and incendiary devices.

Finally, we urge for international consensus
on this conflict to be strengthened, based on the
peaceful settlement of conflicts, international law
and multilateralism, while recognizing the important
mediation role ofthe United Nations, and on agreements
previously arrived at, based on a solution whereby two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side
in peace within secure and recognized borders.

