Mr. Petersen (Norway): I thank the Secretary-
General for his leadership and Special Representative
Brahimi for his comprehensive briefing and his
presentation of a road map for future peace and
stability in Afghanistan. He and the Secretary-General
deserve praise for the urgency with which they are
proceeding at this critical time.

Breaking the vicious cycle of war and misrule in
Afghanistan is long overdue. The military results we
are witnessing give hope for real progress. It is now
vital to maintain calm and avoid retribution.

The Taliban regime in Afghanistan has ignored
binding Security Council resolutions demanding that it
stop harbouring and supporting terrorists. The refusal
by the Taliban regime to comply continued even after it
became clear that terrorists based and trained in
Afghanistan were behind the attacks on 11 September.
This left no alternative but to use military force - in
accordance with the right of self-defence.

The Taliban's setbacks will hopefully facilitate a
political solution. They will also allow us to further
increase our humanitarian assistance and initiate urgent
support for the reconstruction of Afghanistan's war-
torn society.

The Taliban disregard humanitarian principles,
international law and human rights. They are the major
cause of the suffering of the Afghan people, not least
the oppression of women. We are still deeply
concerned about the obstacles facing humanitarian
organizations in Taliban-controlled areas. The Taliban
must ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel and
their full access to people in need.

Norway is pleased that Pakistan is opening its
border to the most vulnerable refugees. International
solidarity and burden-sharing with neighbouring
countries is called for, particularly with Pakistan and
Iran. Norway is prepared to do its part.

There is an immediate need to increase
humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan before the
onset of winter. This is especially urgent in the most
vulnerable areas in the north. We applaud the tireless
efforts of the United Nations agencies, working under
difficult circumstances. Norway has recently stepped
up its assistance, disbursing nearly $35 million this
yean

Only a broad-based Government that includes
representatives from all major groups can bring
stability to Afghanistan. Only a Government
committed to basic human rights and development can
ensure long-term peace and security. Norway therefore
strongly supports the efforts by Mr. Brahimi to help the
Afghans lay the foundation for a lasting political
solution. The proposals presented by him today deserve
our support. We must now transform them into reality.
We owe this to the Afghan people.

Our efforts to assist Afghanistan will only be
effective if they are well coordinated and part of a
comprehensive political and economic strategy. Such a
strategy must be supported by a necessary security
presence. Humanitarian assistance must pave the way
for long-term rehabilitation. Peace-building and
reconstruction must start now. The United Nations
must play a leading role. Norway commends the United
Nations for its swift reaction. We will do our utmost to
help the United Nations in its endeavours.

The need for a coordinated approach to
humanitarian assistance and reconstruction will also
guide Norway's chairmanship of the Afghanistan
Support Group, starting in January next year.

We must stand united in helping Afghanistan
come back into the family of nations. We must stand
united in helping the Afghans get rid of the terrorists
and their supporters. We must stand by the oppressed
people of Afghanistan.

Long-term commitments and efforts are needed.
The United Nations can provide the tools. We - the
Member States - must provide the means.

