Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium supports the statement to be made shortly by
the representative of Germany on behalf of the
European Union. We thank Mr. Alvaro de Soto for this
briefing, which has enabled us to better understand the
issue on the Council's agenda.

We all find ourselves agreeing with the
observation made here last month by Under-Secretary-
General Gambari: we cannot afford another lost year
such as the one that just passed by. The role of the
international community - our role, our
responsibility - is to create the conditions necessary
for a resumption of negotiations between the parties.
The parameters for reaching such an agreement are
well known: the Road Map, the relevant Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the Beirut Declaration of the League of Arab States.

Belgium welcomes the recent meeting between
Prime Minister Olmert and President Abbas, and the
initiative of a trilateral meeting undertaken by
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. But this
resumption of dialogue cannot remain at the mercy of
further incidents. Our collective responsibility is to put
in place a negotiation process capable of resisting the
blows of fate. The responsibility of the parties is to
prove their commitment through negotiation, by
implementing previous agreements.

Belgium recalls the resolve of European Union to
become actively involved. We support the central role
of the Quartet as the guarantor of a clear political
outlook and as a catalyst for various initiatives. We
commend the Quartet for reaffirming its willingness to
meet regularly. That will enable it to actively assist the
parties in updating the modalities for implementing the
Road Map and in monitoring developments on the
ground. In that context, Belgium is pleased at the
active role played by the Arab countries and welcomes
the Mecca Accord as a positive step.

If 2007 is to make a difference, we must rely, first
and foremost, on the actions of the parties. Belgium
welcomes the efforts of President Abbas to form a
Government of national unity. We will be ready to
cooperate with a legitimate Palestinian Government
equipped with a programme that reflects the Quartet
principles. A lasting peace will not be built by rejecting
past agreements. Those agreements are not ad hoc
measures, but the very foundations for a lasting peace.

Belgium condemns the continued firing of
rockets into Israel in violation of the Gaza ceasefire, as
well as the terrorist attack against the population of

Eilat. We welcome the restraint shown by the Israeli
Government, and we call upon the Palestinian
leadership to put an end to the violence. We hope for a
swift extension of the ceasefire to the West Bank. We
also call upon the Israeli Government to halt settlement
activities and the construction of the wall within the
West Bank.

I should like to conclude with a few words about
Lebanon. After the events of summer 2006, Belgium
decided to participate in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon as a reflection of its desire to
contribute to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006). We earnestly hope that, in his next report, the
Secretary-General will be able to make proposals
aimed at implementing the political component of
resolution 1701 (2006), particularly with regard to the
issue of the Sheba'a farms.

We welcome the strong message that the
international community sent at the Paris Conference.
We call upon all Lebanese to settle their differences
through cooperation, rather than confrontation.

Finally, we forcefully condemn this morning's
serious, tragic and odious incident and express our
deep sympathy to the families of the victims and to the
Government and the people of Lebanon - a people
dear to Belgium.

