Mr. Zacharakis (Greece): My delegation fully
subscribes to the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the European
Union. Greece attaches particular importance to its
relations with neighbouring Albania, with which it is
linked by strong ties of friendship and cooperation.

In the last few years, following the political changes
in that country, Greece has contributed significantly to the
efforts of the Albanian people to promote political,
economic and social progress. The Greek people extended
warm hospitality to hundreds of thousands of Albanians
coming to Greece to work to ensure a better future for
themselves and their families. At the same time the two
countries have set up a solid framework for the
development of their relations in all fields, based on the
principles of good neighbourliness.

Despite some occasional setbacks in the past, Greek-
Albanian relations have managed to overcome long-
standing difficulties and to establish a climate of mutual
confidence and understanding. In the period from 1991 to
1996, Greece offered considerable economic, technical
and humanitarian assistance to Albania. Since the last
crisis broke out in February, Greece again has spared no
effort to contribute, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to
its peaceful settlement.

Greece participated by contributing a regiment to the
multinational protection force. It contributed several
officials and experts to the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) presence in Albania and
provided significant humanitarian assistance, while
accepting into Greek hospitals large numbers of Albanian
citizens in need of treatment. The Greek Government
undertook various initiatives at both the bilateral and the
international levels so as to help in bringing together the
parties in Albania, to achieve a negotiated solution of the
existing problems and to create the conditions for holding
free and fair elections.

In this context, I would like to remind members of
the successful visit of the then Prime Minister Fino to
Athens on 2 and 3 April, and of the talks he had there
with Foreign Minister Pangalos, Mr. Van Mierlo, then
President of the Council of the Ministers of the European
Union, and Mr. Vranitzky, the special representative of
the OSCE Chairman-in-Office. These talks helped in

 

reaching an understanding among all the parties concerned
on the structure of the international presence in Albania.

Greece, in close cooperation with the Albanian
Government, intends to further develop and enhance its
relationship with and assistance to Albania by initiating
specific economic and technical programmes. The visit of
the Greek Foreign Minister to Tirana last week, heading a
large delegation of cabinet ministers and parliamentarians,
paved the way for renewed joint efforts by the two
Governments to promote various projects for economic,
military and police cooperation.

The Greek Government has also announced the
granting of financial assistance of $80 million for the
financing of specific development projects in Albania.
Greece is committed to continuing to participate in all the
efforts of the international community to assist Albania in
the transition period it is going through. In this context,
Greece is participating in the Partnership for Peace
programme for Albania, in the OSCE presence there, in the
Western European Union mission to reorganize the
Albanian police force and in various European Union
programmes.

The latest crisis in Albania illustrates better the need
for consistent, comprehensive and effective international
assistance to and cooperation with that country. Preventive
action to that effect would help to avert future crises and to
secure a better environment for swift and steady progress
towards democracy and a free-market economy, along with
full respect for human rights and the rights of persons
belonging to minorities. As in the past, Greece pledges not
to fail to do its part in meeting the formidable challenges
that lie ahead.

