Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): It is a
great honour for me to address the Security Council. Since
I am doing so for the first time, please allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of this very prestigious Council, which is so important in
watching over peace throughout the world. I also express
my best wishes to all the members of the Council and wish
them every success in their heavy but noble
responsibilities.

The Government of Burundi highly appreciates the
commitment of the United Nations, through the Security
Council, to peace in our country, which has been afflicted
by recurring violence since independence, particularly
since 1993, when the country experienced the most
serious crisis in its history.

I do not wish today to go into the history of what
has been called the Burundi disease. Rather, my aim is to
explain to the Council and others present in this Chamber
the main current concerns in Burundi.

First, regarding the peace process, it can be said that
from an internal and external standpoint real progress has
been made, even though the time limits set by both the
Government and the facilitation process have not been
respected. The Burundi conflict is so complex and the
resentments are so deep that it is best to advance slowly
but surely. In any event, peace in Burundi will be the
result of a process, and it is important to properly define
the causes of the ills and to prescribe well-considered
solutions.

The death of His Excellency Mwalimu Nyerere, the
Facilitator of the inter-Burundi talks, has slowed the
momentum of the peace negotiations. The Government
has addressed a letter to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations asking him to contribute to finding a new
facilitator as soon as possible. It has outlined the profile
of the new facilitator needed in Burundi, and has even
specified the criteria for choosing such a key figure. We
hope that the consultations to be held among the heads of
State of the region, in which the Government of Burundi
very much hopes to be involved, as well as the tour of
the region now being made by the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Kieran Prendergast, will
promptly provide us with the name of a facilitator.

The various Burundi parties, the region, the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the United
Nations are all asked to act promptly. We hope that the
new facilitator will then tackle the priority problem,
bringing about the cessation of hostilities, which is the
major concern of the Burundi Government, as it is of the
international community. In meeting the challenge, the
people of Burundi must be, as they are, those principally
involved. The armed factions that consider themselves to
have been excluded from the Arusha negotiations, and to
be the real combatants on the ground, must also be

 

involved. The Government of Burundi has always
advocated inclusive negotiations, excluding no one,
especially not those who have an immediate impact on the
ground. Therefore, the hostilities must be ended, in order to
create a climate conducive to the pursuit of negotiations, for
the lasting solution to the Burundi conflict is political.

Secondly, what is the state of security? Generally, the
situation is more or less normal, with the exception of rural
Bujumbura, where ambushes are still seen on the routes to
and from the capital, and with the exception of the
provinces of the south-east, where fighting is once again
causing a flow of refugees towards Tanzania.

Since the beginning of the crisis we have been
drawing attention to the contribution of the neighbouring
countries to the return of security and peace to Burundi.
The rebels have bases within the country and outside it.
More seriously, they are now in collusion with genocidal
Rwandan elements, the Interahamwe and the former
Rwandan armed forces. In the light of the implementation
of the Lusaka Accords, they have begun to move back
towards Burundi, either directly or through Tanzania, in
order to sow death and devastation, now that they have
acquired a larger arsenal. If the international community is
not careful, the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo could further complicate an already tense situation
in the entire subregion.

Thirdly, I would like to say something about
regroupement of the population. The Government of
Burundi, after much hesitation, decided to regroup the
population of the region of rural Bujumbura in what are
today called "protection areas". This followed the
worsening of violence against the populations in the hills,
on the roads and in the suburbs of the capital. To avoid
having these populations caught in a crossfire, the
Government, faced with a military operation of broad
scope, was obliged to regroup the people in 10 different
areas. The regroupement was not forced, as has been said;
it responded to a real concern of the population, and the
duty to respond was the Government's - and only the
Government's. If it had not responded, those who today
accuse it of displacing populations would condemn it for
not having protected those populations. It was also
necessary to protect the capital, where not only Burundians
but many foreigners live, and where the inhabitants were
extremely tense and might have yielded to the temptation
of selective violence, such as that experienced in 1995-
1996.

This is therefore not a deliberate policy on the part
of the Government; it is a provisional measure which has
proven itself in other provinces, which are today in a state
of security. Like childbirth for a mother, whose delivery
always follows a painful time, the regroupement of
populations is a painful operation, but it is one that also
bears hope.

Concerns of a humanitarian nature are thus
legitimate. The Government is aware of this. It is
prepared to organize assistance, but since its means are
limited, it has requested international assistance.
Unfortunately, that assistance is today jeopardized by the
application of phase IV, which limits the movement and
actions of humanitarian workers in the country, following
the dreadful murder of two United Nations personnel on
a humanitarian mission in the south of the country.

Nonetheless, certain non- governmental organizations
are now organizing themselves to resume the delivery of
assistance, with the improvement of security conditions
precisely following the regroupernent of the populations,
among other things. The Government has given the
strongest security guarantees to all those who want to go
to the field, either to provide assistance or to bear
witness, such as human rights workers, journalists, and so
forth. We ask the United Nations and the non-
governmental organizations working in the humanitarian
sphere not to become discouraged but to continue to come
to the assistance of those who need it. The Government
is doing everything within its power so that all these
families can soon go back to their homes.

Fourthly, I wish to address the question of the
protection of humanitarian workers. This is also an
extremely important concern for the Government, and as
I have just said, the Government held - and continues to
hold, when there are new elements - discussions with all
of those involved as to the best way of providing
protection for the humanitarian staff.

Regarding the enquiry into the circumstances of the
death of the two United Nations staff members, I wish to
inform the Security Council that a judicial commission
has been established and that it is to submit the results of
the enquiry to the Government by the end of the month
of November. The Council will be promptly informed.

In fact, I have before me a letter from the Minister
of Justice to the Public Prosecutor to the Court of the
Appeals, dated 4 November 1999, reporting that a

 

commission has just been established. The Minister has
written:

"I believe that at the investigation stage it is vital
to complete the report that was made by pursuing
the investigation further to deepen the enquiry. It
is urgent that the responsibility for these
reprehensible murders be clearly established."

The Minister continues by saying that in order to respond
to this concern, he has decided to establish another ad hoc,
strengthened commission to conduct this work. The
Minister asks that the needed resources be made available
to the commission, which is to be devoted exclusively to
this work until the enquiry is completed, which should be
by 30 November 1999. This is what I can tell you, Sir, in
this respect.

Fifthly, and lastly, I wish to touch upon the economic
and social situation. It is deplorable. In fact, with the
suspension of the regional embargo in January 1998, the
Burundians had breathed a sigh of relief. But, unfortunately,
this was not long-lived, because those who had helped us
to bring pressure to bear on the region did not want to
resume cooperation with Burundi until the peace agreement
was signed, they said. This is an attitude which is startling,
to say the least, because the problems afflicting us are even
more painful today.

The national economy is on the verge of collapse. The
currency has depreciated more than 100 per cent, and
inflation is striking terribly at those who are the most
destitute. There is reason to fear social upheaval, which
could destroy all hopes of the peace process. And this could
cast the fate of the country into the hands of extremist
groups.

The Government has already presented a peace plan to
the other parties, and it is a text which is a real
compromise, arrived at by the broader-based Government
and the National Assembly, itself broadened to include the
various political parties and civil society. This political
partnership for peace deserves to be supported, especially
since through negotiations it is involved in negotiations
specifically with the armed and unarmed outside opposition
to arrive at an overall peace agreement on which future
transition institutions will base themselves to prepare a state
of law respectful of human rights and of democratic
freedoms.

In conclusion, it is true that the situation in Burundi
remains a matter of concern. The solution will come from
the people of Burundi themselves, but also from
understanding and support on the part of neighbouring
countries and the rest of the international community. We
hope that our partners will accompany the process
towards a definitive peace. Their contribution will be
greatly appreciated and most effective if only they help
the Burundians themselves to find the solutions that suit
them.

