Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this morning's meeting
and the briefings of Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto,
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Mr. Yury Fedotov, as well
as the statement of the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.

Peru notes with concern the security situation that
Afghanistan continues to face. We strongly condemn
the suicide attacks perpetrated by Da'esh and Taliban
groups, which have serious consequences for civilians
and the stability of the country even as preparations
for a major electoral process are under way. Faced with
those repugnant attempts to undermine democracy,
we want to pay tribute to the courage of the Afghan
people and the endeavours of their authorities, who
are pursuing the voter registration process and other
work in preparation for the parliamentary elections and
district elections scheduled for 20 October.

We also want to associate ourselves with the call
of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres on the various
political groups to speak and act as one on the need to
tackle those threats and, on that basis, on the governance
and reconciliation of the country. The objective of
sustainable peace ought to spur all actors to pursue
that course of action. We must deplore the refusal of
the Taliban to extend the ceasefire as proposed by the
Afghan Government at the end of the Eid al-Fitr holiday.
That refusal stands in contrast to the mass mobilization
of the Afghan people in the so-called march for peace,
held during Ramadan, to express their support for a
lasting ceasefire.

Peru reiterates its support for the Kabul process,
designed and led by the Afghans themselves. We are
convinced that intra-Afghan dialogue, supported by
the countries of the region, is the only viable path to
sustainable peace.

We would like to underscore the Afghan
Government's commitment to increasing the number of
women in the public sector, as well as the importance
of compliance with the national strategy and action
plan for the elimination of violence against women,
and the concurrent efforts of the Independent Human
Rights Commission.

However, we must express our concern about the
situation described by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights after his visit in May. In particular,
we are concerned about the increase in the number
of children recruited by the different factions of the
conflict, who often fall victim to sexual violence. There
is a need for immediate action by the Government to
counter that practice, as well as to provide for the
rehabilitation of victims.

We also consider the fight against corruption and
illicit drug trafficking to be a priority. Mr. Fedotov
reported record figures for the opium harvest in 2018.
That is a business that undermines the framework of
institutions and encourages terrorism. We welcome
the efforts that are being developed on a joint basis
to reverse this situation. Allow me to recall that the
Council is committed to supporting the efforts of the
Afghan Government in its fight against those scourges.
We would like to express our regret to and solidarity
with the relatives of the recently assassinated counter-
narcotics police officer who was recently murdered for
courageously confronting that type of organized crime,
as well as those of other officials.

In conclusion, we associate ourselves with the
Secretary-General's call for humanitarian assistance
to be provided, through the donation of the necessary
funds, to the more than 2 million people whose
situation has been aggravated by the drought affecting
that country.

