Mr. Alsabah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2019/797). We stress our full support for the Special
Representative and appreciate the vital role of the
United Nations throughout the past period in helping
Kosovo to build its institutions in line with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, notably resolution
1244 (1999).

I would also like to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacie, First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador of Kosovo to the
United States in Washington, DC, and I thank them
for their statements.

The State of Kuwait welcomes the parliamentary
elections held on 6 October. We believe that this is
an opportunity for the parties in Kosovo to uphold
democracy and encourage discussions and general
dialogue at all levels. This opportunity must be seized
in order to focus on socioeconomic priorities and to
strengthen the rule oflaw, good governance, justice and
accountability, as well as to resume the dialogue, under
the auspices of the European Union, between Belgrade
and Pristina. This dialogue remains the most suitable
framework for resolving the outstanding issues between
the two parties and the only way to reach solutions that
will lead to a comprehensive settlement.

We listened a while ago to the conclusions of the
team that investigated the two incidents relating to the
arrest and detention of two UNMIK staff members. We
reiterate the importance of respecting the diplomatic
immunity of United Nations staff pursuant to the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. It is also
important that the perpetrators of those violations of
and encroachments on diplomatic immunity be brought
to justice. We reiterate the importance of guaranteeing
the neutrality of United Nations mission staff and to
ensure commitment to their mandate.

The report of the Secretary-General mentions the
forty-ninth meeting of the joint Working Group on
persons who are unaccounted for in connection with
events in Kosovo, during which the International
Committee of the Red Cross indicated that 1,653
persons out of 6,063 remained missing as of 18 May.
We welcome the efforts undertaken by the Working
Group in this regard and commend the amendment to
the Law on Missing Persons, which was promulgated
by the Government of Kosovo to provide protections
and rights to the families of the missing.

As set out in resolution 2474 (2019), it is important
to shed light on the fate of missing persons. It is one of
the most important humanitarian issues leading to long-
term reconciliation and the creation of an environment
conducive to good-neighbourly relations.

We also welcome the continual work carried out
by UNMIK in cooperation with the United Nations
country team in Kosovo and in partnership with
local and international stakeholders to implement the
joint recommendations of the United Nations Kosovo
Trust-Building Forum, which was held in May 2018 to
provide support for trust-building among the various
communities. Such efforts cannot be successful
without strengthening the rule of law and a judiciary
with credibility, independence and integrity.

In conclusion, it is important for the international
community to continue making efforts to urge Pristina
and Belgrade to set aside their differences and reach
consensus-based solutions that would be fair, lasting and
accepted by both parties and would lay the foundations
for peace, security and stability in the region.
