Ms. Makarenko: I would like to begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for providing me this opportunity
to speak to the Security Council today. My intention
is to summarize my 25 years of interest and academic
research on the crime-terrorism nexus, while drawing
particular attention to the dimension of logistical
support, along with the question of financing, which
often comes up with great frequency.

Although my initial model on the crime-terror nexus
was first published in 2003, based on the findings of an
in-depth assessment of hundreds of groups worldwide,
over the years the model has been refined to encapsulate
new developments in both terrorism and organized
crime. In seeking to understand the complexities of

the relationship between terrorism and organized
crime, I would like to begin by saying that this is not
a new phenomenon; it has a solid historical academic
foundation dating back at least to the 1980s, from which
it has evolved into a multifaceted and dynamic concern
to, and for, the international community.
The linkages that exist between terrorism
and organized crime are not independent security
threats per say; rather, the ties that develop between
terrorism and organized crime exacerbate the security
environment. That is most obviously done through
changes in financial operations, as we already heard,
and logistics. As such, or effort to develop an accurate
understanding of how, why and when linkages between
terrorism and crime develop should be viewed as an
essential component of our counter-terrorism and
anti-crime strategies. In other words, the nexus is but
one tool in our international security toolkit, but a tool
that has become central to helping us focus where our
limited national, regional and international security
and development resources should be directed. Where
linkages between terrorism and organized crime exist,
a range of peripheral and facilitating crimes are also
present. They manifest themselves in various ways
and, through an increasing number of cases, reveal
that links between terrorism and organized crime have
global salience, regional nuances and local proclivities.

A holistic approach to the nexus between terrorism
and organized crime helps uncover how different types
of linkages facilitate access to specialized skill sets
and tactics needed for both terrorism and organized
crime groups to reach their objectives. How that plays
out, however, depends upon the specific nature of that
interaction. At its most basic level, the nexus is either
transactional or organizational. A transactional nexus
generally refers to the coming together of a terrorist
and criminal group to fulfil specific operational
requirements. That coming together takes place either
through an alliance or the appropriation of tactics
learned over time, or acquired through the integration
of criminals into terrorist groups. The organizational
nexus, on the other hand, occurs when both terrorists
and criminal activities occupy the same space and
time. In that manifestation we see the emergence of
something called the hybrid group and, in extreme cases,
the rise of a de facto black hole - an ungoverned and
ungovernable territory where terrorism and organized
crime collide, collude and conspire.

Each of those five nexus points has specific
implications for the logistics capabilities of a terrorist
group or cell. Alliances, for example, are often the focus
of basic debates on the linkages between terrorism and
crime. That relationship between two independent
bodies fulfils a number of immediate requirements,
such as access to specialized knowledge - money
-laundering, for instance - access to specialized
services, such as counterfeiting; operational support;
access to smuggling networks; and financial support, as
we have heard. Although there are numerous historical
cases of alliances, in particular in the provision of
counterfeit documents and access to arms and weapons,
the crux of the alliance has itself evolved, in particular
in parts of the world where counter-terrorism efforts
are relatively efficient.

Perhaps more common in the alliance today are
cases where terrorist groups or cells have effectively
appropriated or integrated criminal capacity and
know-how into their organizations. For larger, more
structured groups, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, there is considerable evidence that their
logistics departments - ifI can use that name - learn
the value and necessity of being able to engage in illicit
activities to support their operations. That includes
everything from establishing smuggling operations to
selling illicit goods to having in-house counterfeiting
expertise. For smaller, more independent terrorist
cells, that has taken the form of recruiting criminals.
Over the past several years, for example, we know
that prisons have acted as incubators for integration.
Direct networking between terrorists and criminals
has enabled the transfer of criminal skills through
recruitment, ostensibly providing cells with access
to criminal networks that provide weapons, forge
documentation and provide other logistical support
infrastructure, such as safe houses, and knowledge of
local and national police weaknesses.

Alliances' appropriation of tactics and integration
are types of linkages between terrorism and organized
crime that are relatively straightforward to identify,
because they do not require analytical judgements
to be made on intangible characteristics, such as
group motivation and strategic priorities. It is more
difficult to draw decisive conclusions about hybrid
entities; however, as they exist today, hybrid entities
are themselves very important to look at. Although
the emergence of a hybrid entity depends upon several
factors, what I would like to highlight today is that
that type of group - one that equally displays the
characteristics of organized crime and terrorism - has
developed a sophisticated operational structure that is
upheld by its ability to navigate the licit/illicit divide as
a means of securing a robust logistic framework. Hybrid
groups truly have the organizational infrastructure of
organized crime, with the retained tactical expertise
of terrorism.

From years of conducting ongoing analysis of the
crime-terror nexus, there is no doubt that linkages
between organized crime and terrorism exist. That is
regardless of the fact that that relationship may reveal
itself in different ways. Today one of our greatest
concerns should be that expanded linkages could
increase our vulnerability to terrorism by groups with
enhanced criminal capabilities. If we take the flip
side of that, expanded links could also increase our
vulnerability to criminal groups with a heightened
propensity towards the use of indiscriminate violence.
We are undoubtedly challenged by security threats
that arise in ungoverned territories, but it is the less
predictable threats emanating from the rising profile of
small-time criminals turned terrorists, or local criminal
enterprises fuelling terrorist cells, that we need to focus
more attention on. That is inherently more difficult to
counter, and implies that even low-level criminality can
no longer be the sole domain of local law enforcement.

We are navigating a complex security environment
where terrorism and organized crime are no longer
mutually exclusive, but can be interdependent and
sophisticated enough to learn from the successes and
failures of groups and cells that came before them.
Understanding the evolving proclivities of the linkages
is a tool that will inevitably help our national
authorities and associated international organizations
adjust how they engage in counter-terrorism and
anti-crime initiatives.

