Mr. Velasquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We would
like to express our appreciation for the convening of this
meeting. We thank the briefers for their comprehensive
briefings, which paint a bleak scenario and urge the
Security Council to take action.

Peru notes with deep concern the continuing
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic and its grave
humanitarian repercussions. We regret in particular
the recurrence and magnitude of violence in the north-
western part of the country, which is due to terrorist-
organization control of the area and military responses
that tend not to distinguish between combatants and
civilians. We are alarmed that this situation will further
exacerbate the extreme vulnerability of the population
in the area, while at the same time increasing tensions
in the region, particularly after the attacks on Turkish
observation posts in the vicinity of Idlib.

Given that delicate panorama, we stress that the
duty of the international community is to prevent
north-western Syria from becoming the site of a new
humanitarian tragedy. We therefore urge the Syrian
Government and all the actors in the conflict to prevent
a further deterioration of the situation, which essentially
means preserving the ceasefire agreed by Turkey and
Russia last September.

We reaffirm our strongest condemnation of all
terrorist acts and their perpetrators. But we underscore
that under no circumstances can the fight against
terrorism be used as an excuse to violate human rights
and international humanitarian law, especially when,
as in the case of Idlib, the lives of millions of children
are at stake. We also encourage the United Nations and
other humanitarian actors to continue to provide relief
and hope to the hundreds of thousands of internally
displaced persons - 270,000 in May alone - who are
in very precarious conditions in areas near the border
with Turkey.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Peru's full
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and unity of Syria. In that sense, any detente or other
arrangements, as well as the presence of foreign forces,
should always be of a temporary nature and should not
lead to a de facto partition of the country.

