The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern about the military confrontation in
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council is also concerned at the
violation of the United Nations premises in Kabul and
expresses its dismay at the brutal execution by the
Taliban of the former President of Afghanistan,
Najibullah, and others who had taken refuge in these
premises.

"The Security Council demands that all parties
fulfil their obligations and commitments regarding the
safety of the United Nations personnel and other
international personnel in Afghanistan. It calls upon
all Afghans to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and associated bodies as well as with other
humanitarian organizations and agencies in their
efforts to respond to the humanitarian needs of the
people of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan. It calls for the immediate cessation of
all armed hostilities and urgently calls upon the
leaders of the Afghan parties to renounce the use of
force, to put aside their differences and to engage in
a political dialogue aimed at achieving national
reconciliation. The Council also calls upon all States
to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full support
for the efforts of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
in particular the activities of the United Nations
Special Mission. It calls upon all parties to
cooperate with the Special Mission which will act as
a key and impartial facilitator in order to bring
about a peaceful solution to the conflict as soon as
possible. The Council calls upon all States to take
all steps necessary to promote peace in Afghanistan
and to work together with the United Nations to this
end.

"The Security Council will continue to follow
with close attention developments in Afghanistan."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l996/40.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6. 40 p.m.
