Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I shall take this opportunity
to deliver a brief report on the activities carried out by
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) and the future prospects for,
and challenges to, the work of the Committee in its task
of supervising the implementation of that resolution.

After assuming chairmanship ofthe Committee, the
work was undertaken in the framework of the broad and
comprehensive review of the five-year implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and based on resolution 2325
(2016), which was adopted in December 2016 and
highlighted the importance of providing States, at their
request, with effective assistance to meet their needs. In
that context, efforts were intensified to promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) by all States.

Our main concern was also to continue focusing
on preventing the proliferation to non-State actors,
including terrorists, of weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials. I must
emphasize here that it was always kept in mind that
resolution 1540 (2004) is a platform of cooperation to
prevent non-State actors from accessing precisely those
types of weapons of mass destruction. We wanted to
make it clear that, without cooperation, it would be
impossible to address the problem globally.

Regarding national reports, we continued to
intensify efforts to encourage the 17 Member States
that had not yet submitted their first national report
by January 2017 to do so. Through dialogue with those
States, including by sending written letters, as well
as direct interaction and bilateral meetings with the
Permanent Representatives of the relevant Missions to
the United Nations here in New York, we encouraged
them to send their first report to the Committee in
accordance with resolutions 1540 (2004) and 2325
(2016). I am therefore pleased to inform the Council that
during 2017 we received the first national reports from
Equatorial Guinea and Zimbabwe. In the current period
we received the national reports of Guinea-Bissau,
Timor-Leste and the Comoros. The total number of
States that have submitted such national reports is now
181 out of the 193 Member States.

Regarding cooperation with international, regional
and subregional organizations, we can say that, in
order to achieve several of our objectives, we worked
closely with several international organizations, as
well as regional and subregional organizations, that
were able to respond to requests for assistance. In
terms of national focal points, States were encouraged
to inform the Committee about their focal points for
resolution 1540 (2004), both to their capital cities and
to their Permanent Mission to the United Nations here
in New York.

Regarding the voluntary implementation of
national action plans, that was another priority for the
Committee, working with the support of regional and
subregional organizations. The Committee continued
to promote the exchange of experiences, including
through peer reviews, to evaluate and strengthen
effective practices in the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004).

In terms of assistance, the Committee, with the
support of its Group of Experts and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, is ready to cooperate
and, when requested, to facilitate assistance to States
in their resolution 1540 (2004) implementation efforts.
That will contribute to achieving the common goal of
preventing the catastrophic use of weapons of mass
destruction by non-State actors.

With regard to the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) before the end of its mandate
in 2021, the work of the Committee and its Group
of Experts during this period was carried out in the
context of the resolution's upcoming comprehensive
review, which will take place before the end of the
mandate of the 1540 Committee on 25 April 2021. That
is why, following the complete revision of the matrices
in 2016 and the revision of the matrix format in 2017,
the existing matrices of the Committee were converted
to a new format in 2018 to allow for updates and a
systematic review of all required information. In that
regard, the working group on assistance discussed and
approved a method for systematically reviewing the
matrices before the next comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which will
be completed before 25 April 2021.

With regard to the appointment of experts and the
Coordinator of the Group of Experts, on 24 December
2017 the Secretary-General appointed six new experts
to the 1540 Group of Experts, which supports the
Committee. They assumed their functions in April
2018. It is also worth mentioning that the Secretary-
General also appointed a new Coordinator on the
recommendation of the Committee.

With regard to the use of the website, it is a space
that is constantly updated and very helpful in ensuring
that States that require remote access to information on
the Committee's work have access to it. It is important to
note that the Chair, the members of the Committee and
the experts participated in various outreach activities
during the reporting period. In order to participate as
much as possible in fulfilling his or her functions, the
Chair sent recorded messages when he could not attend
a relevant event. Those messages became an important
tool under the circumstances and were all uploaded to
the website.

In conclusion, in accordance with paragraph 11 of
resolution 2325 (2016), we believe it is important to
develop an approach to implementation and reporting
that takes into account the specificity of States, inter
alia, with respect to their ability to manufacture and
export related materials, with a View to prioritizing
efforts and resources where they are most needed
without affecting the need for the full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). It is important to encourage
expansion and undertake initiatives to strengthen the
capacity of national points of contact. It is imperative
to develop a more effective assistance process, in
cooperation with international partners, to support
Member States.

As to the short term, we believe it is essential to
bolster additional strategies, such as the updating and
continual use of the Committee's website, as well as the
recording ofmessages, which allows the Chair to cover a
greater number of events. It is important to bear in mind
the deadline for the adoption of the programme of work,
which will conclude on 31 January. It is also important
to appoint new experts in advance to replace those
who will complete their mandate during the 2019 term.
That also involves the appointment of a new Coordinator

of the Group of Experts since, in Bolivia's experience,
just the appointment of new experts took seven months,
during which time the Committee worked with the help
of only three experts.

On behalf of the delegation and the Government
of Bolivia, I would like to thank the Group of Experts
for their support and contribution throughout the past
two fruitful years. I would also like to highlight the
work carried out by Secretariat and all the members
of the Committee. I thank them for the support and
cooperation they have provided over the course
of the two years of my country's chairmanship.
Finally, I congratulate the Indonesian delegation on
being elected the new Chair of the Committee. We are
sure it will demonstrate outstanding leadership at the
head of this important Committee.

