Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to meet
today and to hear from the High Commissioner for
Refugees. We are very grateful to him not only for his
comprehensive and thoughtful statement, but also for
the work he does in leading what is obviously a very
dedicated team of people for the United Nations around
the world. We signal our appreciation today for the
leadership of the High Commissioner, both in driving
his Office through an ambitious programme of
structural reform and in forging stronger relationships
with other key actors from within and without the
United Nations system. It was salutary to hear what he
said about the kidnappings and the deaths that his
workers and other United Nations workers are subject
to around the world. I would like to use this occasion,
through him, to pay tribute to them and their families.

I was also very pleased that we were able to hear
a little bit from Ambassador Ilkin about countries that
support the refugees by taking them in and providing
them with shelter and protection. As the High
Commissioner and the Ambassador said, that too is a
very important part of the equation.

It is clear from the briefing that we have received
today that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is active across
the range of the Council's business in Afghanistan,
Darfur and Iraq. Of course, as the High Commissioner
said, they are not the agency that is active in Gaza, but
Gaza is obviously very much on our minds today as
debate continues in New York and as we all watch the
developing situation on the ground.
I would like to start by echoing the
Commissioner's admiration for the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East in acutely challenging
circumstances, and in particular for the bravery of
United Nations workers trying to relieve suffering in

Gaza. The escalation of violence in Gaza and southern
Israel has caused immense suffering and shortages of
humanitarian supplies. We join others in calling for
immediate humanitarian access and the provision and
distribution of supplies in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We welcome any
initiatives that bring about a pause in hostilities to
allow the provision of humanitarian help. I think it is
clear to all of us that more is needed, before any
resolution to this conflict, and most immediately
through a ceasefire. We also condemn acts of violence
and terror directed against civilians in the region. My
Foreign Minister, along with the French Foreign
Minister and others both inside and outside the
Council, are still in New York, searching for a way
forward as a contribution to resolving the conflict.

I would like to take this occasion, more generally,
to recall the commitment of my Government to
upholding the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of
Refugees and its 1967 Protocol and to support the
mandate of UNHCR to protect refugees and find
durable solutions to their plight. We know that the
majority of people uprooted by conflict and violence
do not cross international borders, but nevertheless can
find themselves in situations of extreme vulnerability.
We strongly support the responsibilities of UNHCR for
internally displaced persons and other populations
affected by conflict, as part of the inter-agency cluster
approach.

I would like to take this opportunity to encourage
the High Commissioner to see what can be done to
deepen the involvement of UNHCR with the cluster
approach and to further develop its relationships with
other stakeholders. We expect good things to come out
of the UNCHR/Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs retreat, and look forward to
hearing more about that.

That leads me to another point the High
Commissioner made about the potential distinction
between the work of UNCHR when a conflict is
ongoing and its work alongside other agencies in the
aftermath of that conflict, when the immediate
situation has been eased. I know from personal
experience that in the latter situation, it is important to
have an integrated approach if we actually want to get
success on the ground. But what he said about the
distinction was something that might offer fruitful
grounds for work in the future.

We talked a little bit today about the changing
causes of forced displacement. The High
Commissioner raised some very interesting questions
on that. It seems to my Government that the current
protection framework is adequate, if it is implemented.
I think that is another important point. In terms of
prevention and response, the increasing complexity
described by the High Commissioner raises again the
issue of the need for effective partnerships.

The protection of civilians in conflict is also a
theme that many people will be interested in today. I
was also pleased to hear the responsibility to protect
and the need for effective prevention mentioned. It is
clear that members of the Council do not yet have a
unified view about how to take the responsibility to
protect forward. It is in its early stages. It is a new
concept that we all need to work hard to elaborate and
operationalize in an effective manner in order to get
help to where it is most needed and help Governments
discharge their primary responsibility to protect their
populations.

We would welcome, in connection with
responding to and preventing protection crises, more
regular and ad hoc briefings to this Council by the
High Commissioner. In turn, we believe we should
make better use of UNHCR expertise when we
formulate mandates for peacekeeping operations. I
would be grateful if the High Commissioner, in his
response, would say something about the evolving
thinking of UNHCR on voluntary return. I know that in
certain circumstances there has been a debate within
the Organization and elsewhere in the international
community about whether refugees should be
encouraged to return only to their places of origin -
that is, their original homes - or whether they should
be allowed to resettle in majority communities in their
own country. It would be interesting to hear if there is
any update on that debate.

I would like to turn, as my last point, to
peacebuilding. We welcome UNCHR support for and
involvement in the upcoming report of the Secretary-
General on post-conflict peacebuilding and early
recovery. That report is an opportunity to put in place a
more effective international response to assisting
countries in the immediate aftermath of conflicts. That
is a response that can provide coordinated, prioritized
and adequately resourced support to national efforts.

