Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin, Mr. President, by thanking you and your team
for your presidency of the Security Council for what has
been a very busy month of February. I expect that the
two biggest events of the month, in terms of products
that we can agree on, are still ahead of us, and I hope
that we will be coming back together to unanimously
adopt the very important draft resolution mentioned
by the representative of the Russian Federation, which
welcomes the cessation of hostilities due to come into
effect in Syria and points the way towards the political
transition there that is so important for the people of
the country and the region. Secondly, I hope we will
also be able to come together before the end of the
month to agree on a draft resolution on sanctions for
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which we
discussed in consultations yesterday.

What I thought I might do in today's meeting is to
talk about how we work rather than what we work on
and, as we have done before, to use the wrap-up session
to exchange views on our working methods, all of it
with the aim of trying to improve the Council's overall
efficiency and effectiveness. Back in November,
when we held the presidency, I said there were three
adjectives we wanted to have in mind - "interactive",
"transparent" and "action-oriented" - and I would like
to say a little bit about what we mean by each of those
three, in order to see if they can help to improve the
Council's overall efficiency and effectiveness.

Starting off on the topic of interactivity, I note
that, first of all, that there are two different ways of
doing these wrap-up sessions; either we do it formally
here, which has the benefit of being a formal meeting
of the Council but has the disadvantage of there being
no interactivity with the people listening and watching,
or we do it in another Chamber, which has the benefit
of genuine interactivity. I think that I can say that
people are voting with their feet. I counted, I think,
17 people in the red seats. They are all very welcome,
and it is great that they are all still awake, just about,
but when we did the session informally in one of the
other Chambers, we had the vast majority of the 193
members of the General Assembly present, many of
them at the Permanent-Representative level. I think that
perhaps there is a message there for how we do these
wrap-up sessions and increase the overall interactivity
between the Council and the rest of the United Nations
membership.

But there is also a message about interactivity in
terms of how we work with each other, about getting
high-quality briefers, about genuinely listening and
engaging with them, and about genuinely engaging with
each other on the contents of what we are discussing.
There is a clear link between the level of engagement or
interactivity, on the one hand, and the products that can
come out, on the other.

To take a couple of examples from this month, we
very much welcome the discussion that the Venezuelan
presidency organized on the workings of the subsidiary
bodies on 11 February (see S/PV.7620). There was
a very thoughtful concept note, which informed the
exchange of views (S/2016/102, annex). The United
Kingdom did not agree with everything in it, but we
thought that it was very well thought through, and it
led to an interesting exchange of views. And following
the discussion, the Venezuelan presidency worked
on a presidential note (S/2016/170), which, again, we
welcome very much, to capture the areas of agreement.
As a result of the interactivity, the Council was able
to agree on this note last week, and we now have a
series of specific, concrete, practical suggestions that
will, I hope, improve the transparency and outreach of
the committees, encourage Chairs to share experience
between incoming and outgoing Chairs and across
different committees. It was a useful exchange of
views; there was some interaction following it and a
positive outcome.

On the other hand, we had, as others have mentioned
already, an open debate about respecting the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
(see S/PV. 7621), which is an admirable topic for a
debate. I naturally strongly agree with those who say
that we must uphold the purposes and principles of the
Charter. I would just question whether a whole series
of 70 statements by 70 different countries over a whole
day is actually going to change anyone's mind about
such an important issue. It was clear from that debate
that it is an interesting issue and that people want to
talk about it, but there was absolutely zero interactivity
at any point in that debate. I am therefore pretty sure,
as a result, that nothing really is going to change, which
is a shame because it is an important topic and it was
a whole day out of the short month of February. I am
not criticizing the topic of the debate. I am just saying
that we need to think further about how we build some
interactivity into our debates to drive up the level of
engagement, which in turn will drive up the usefulness
of the product or products that come out ofthe meetings.
That is a little bit about interactivity.

On transparency, everything we do in the Chamber
is of course transparent because the cameras are on
us, but there are times when need to meet privately.
It is very important that we be able to do so, in the
Consultations Room. It is incumbent upon us to
be transparent in terms of telling the rest of the
membership, and indeed the public through the media,
that we have had discussions, and broadly speaking what
the discussions were about it, what we agreed on, what
were the areas of disagreement, what are going to do
next. That level of transparency each and every time we
have a meeting in the Consultations Room, whether its
formal consultations or any other business or anything
else, I think that we should try to increase the level of
transparency between us and the outside world, as a
result of those discussions. If not, then particularly if
our debates in this Chamber are very stilted and formal,
with no engagement, then people will rightly assume
that the real action is happening elsewhere, and I think
they need to know a little bit more than they currently
do about what that real action looks like.

Thirdly, and finally, I would like to say a little
bit about action-oriented debates, consultations and
meetings. I am very keen that we do not just have a
discussion for the sake of having a discussion. From
the statistics that the President mentioned, it is clear
that on a couple of topics we have had a very large
number of discussions one way or another. Were we
really making sure that each and every one of those
was action-oriented so that something would actually
happen as a result that was different? I am not sure that
we can say that, honestly.

We have five "any other business" items. Yesterday,
one of them was extremely action-oriented - the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea - because
the United States and China came forward with a draft
resolution, which is extremely welcome. On one of the
others - on the Sudan and South Sudan - we had
some action in terms of an agreed press element, which
the presidency was able to tell the media about, but on
the others, as far as I can see, there is actually no action
resulting at all, and it seems to me that might something
worthy looking at if we are trying improve our overall
efficiency and effectiveness.

Those are the three points I wanted to make - the
Council needs to be more interactive, transparent and
action-oriented. I think these concepts are all linked, in
a way, and we can get a better action coming out if we
are interactive and transparent. But I hope that people
will accept my suggestions in the spirit in which they
are intended, which is to be positive and constructive
and to improve the overall effectiveness of the Council.

Finally, to wrap up, I just want to thank the President
and his team again for a very full and productive month
of February. I wish all the very best to the Whole of
the Angolan delegation and to Movses, who might
have left the Chamber - maybe he has had enough
already - but I thank him very much on behalf of the
Security Council for his work in the role of leading
the Secretariat.

