Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I
thank the Secretary-General and Mr. Prendergast for
their briefings.

The United Nations Convention against Corruption
stresses that corruption undermines the institutions
and values of democracy, ethical values and justice.
Given those undermining effects, it is remarkable that
the Security Council has never discussed corruption
before. I therefore commend you, Madam President, for
putting this issue on the agenda today.
In my intervention, I would like to focus on
three aspects: the rule of law, accountability and
sustainable development.

The rule of law forms the basis of stable societies,
democracy and the trust that citizens place in their
Government. If the rule of law is the medicine for
stability, then corruption is the virus that breeds
conflict. The report of the United Nations Development
Programme, entitled Journey to Extremism in Africa,
tells us how corrupt and ill-performing Governments
push people into the hands of violent extremists, and
Mr. Prendergast's organization has highlighted how
actors engaged in illegal economic activities driven by
corruption have an interest in perpetuating conflict. At
the same time, reliable, corrupt-free Governments have
proven to be a source of resilience. Let us therefore
step up our efforts to strengthen the rule of law, build
capacity and create strong State institutions that truly
serve citizens.

This brings me to my second point - accountability.
Accountable State institutions are strong State
institutions. Accountability requires the separation of
powers, checks and balances and judicial follow-up. I
would like to thank Mr. Prendergast for his concrete
suggestions in that regard, which are worth looking into.
It requiresnot only the separation of powers, checks
and balances and judicial follow-up; it also requires
transparency. For that reason, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports Transparency International. The
annual Corruption Perceptions Index of Transparency
International shows that corruption and conflict
correlate. It also shows that corruption diminishes
when there are structures in place for citizens to hold
their Government to account.

The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI) is worth mentioning as well. The EITI standard
requires Governments to publish information on their
natural resources management, including on where
related tax money ends up. The EITI gives an informed
voice to the people, and the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a proud supporter of the Initiative since its
inception because it is clear to us that internal oversight
mechanisms, as well as external oversight mechanisms
run by civil society, businesses and independent
auditors, are key to holding State institutions to account.

Lastly, with regard to my third point, sustainable
development, the sustaining peace agenda and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are our
most comprehensive responses to conflict prevention.
Corruption, however, undermines their implementation.
It deprives those who are most marginalized ofaccess to
vital services. Corruption diminishes tax revenues and
fuels grievances and discontent. Corruption raises the
cost of sustainable development. Tackling corruption is
vital to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
in particular Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong
institutions. Tackling corruption is vital to sustainable
development, and thus to global security.

In conclusion, today the Security Council has taken
a first and important step to address corruption and its
link to conflict. For the Council to take further steps,
we call on the Secretary-General to highlight the issue
more explicitly in his future reports and briefings. In
his foreword to the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime publication of the United Nations Convention
Against Corruption, the late former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan wrote that corruption "is found in all
countries - big and small, rich and poor". Let the
disruptive consequences of corruption that all our
countries face unite us in our efforts to tackle that evil
phenomenon once and for all.

