Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): While aligning myself
with the statement made by the observer of the European
Union, I would like to thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Korea, Mr. Kim Sung-hwan,
for having taken the initiative of convening this debate.

I would like to focus my comments today on two
issues: first, the accountability of those who violate
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
and, secondly, the prevention of conflicts through the
strengthening of human rights instruments and the rule
of law. Those two subjects are, of course, interrelated.
Accountability based on the rule oflaw provides a solid
basis for justice being done. The High-level Meeting
of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the
National and International Levels (see A/67/PV.3),
held in September 2012, emphasized the importance of
the rule of law as one of the key elements of conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. States
should respect and promote the rule of law and justice
and ensure equal access to justice for all, including
members of vulnerable groups. Raising awareness
about legal rights is an important element of that.

That also means that we have an obligation, in our
view, to engage with and give assistance to all parties
to armed conflicts in order to remind them of their
responsibility to ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Too often,
the absence of accountability creates an atmosphere
in which people think they can get away with raping
women, torturing children, threatening doctors and
nurses, and using disproportionate force. We therefore
cannot let these atrocities go unpunished. The threat
that those crimes pose to peace, security and the well-
being of citizens must be addressed by prosecuting
the perpetrators and those who order or condone those
crimes.

Preferably, the investigation and prosecution of
international crimes are executed on a national level,
but if a State is unable or unwilling to do so that duty
falls on the international community. On the basis of
the principle of complementarity, the International
Criminal Court (ICC) functions as a court oflast resort.
We firmly support the ICC, and we call upon States to
ratify the Rome Statute and the Kampala amendments
and ensure their full implementation.

Meanwhile, the international community must
call upon the Government of the country where the
crimes were committed to strengthen the security
sector as a whole and assist that country in doing so in
order to establish the prerequisites for the protection
of its civilians in the future. To facilitate domestic
prosecution, the Netherlands, together with Belgium
and Slovenia, has started an initiative to strengthen
the international legal framework covering inter-State
cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of
crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes.

One way to document violations is through casualty
counting. The practice of United Nations bodies, States
and other actors of recording civilian casualties can
be further improved through joint monitoring and
data analysis. We also support the use of international
commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions as
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law.

Sadly, in Syria the counting of casualties
continues at a horrendous pace. I would like to take
this opportunity to call upon the Security Council to
overcome its disagreement on the situation in Syria and
take concrete action by referring the situation in Syria
to the ICC while respecting the integrity of the Rome
Statute in its referral.

Let me add that we are pleased that the Security
Council reaffirms the provisions of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1)
regarding the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
including its paragraphs 138 and 139 regarding the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
This is, as far as I am aware, the first reaffirmation
of the responsibility to protect since the intervention
in Libya and will, we hope, provide an opportunity to
have a positive impact on the further operationalization
of the concept and the application of the responsibility
to protect in real-life politics.

The Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation of the Netherlands, Lilianne Ploumen,
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
week. She met with Dr. Denis Mukwege, a human rights
activist and doctor who has been repeatedly attacked
and threatened because he spoke out for women who
were raped and violated. Later on during her visit,
Minister Ploumen spoke to the Minister of Defence
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo about the
sexual violence committed by members of the armed
forces and urged him to hold suspected perpetrators
accountable. The protection of civilians is an important
normative element in international relations, but in
the end, it is in the implementation on the ground that
we make a difference. People like Dr. Mukwege and
his clients should be able to count on protection and
security to live a life free of violence and fear.

