The President (interpretation from Chinese): As
this is the first meeting of the Security Council for the
month of March, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Mr. Legwaila Joseph Legwaila, Permanent Representative
of Botswana to the United Nations, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of February
1995. I am sure I speak for all members of the Security
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Legwaila for the great diplomatic skill and unfailing
courtesy with which he conducted the Council's business
last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi

Report of the Security Council Mission to
Burundi on 10 and 11 February 1995
(S/1995/163)

The President (interpretation from Chinese): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Burundi in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bukuru
(Burundi) took a place at the Council table.


The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

 

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Security Council Mission to Burundi,
document S/ 1995/ 163.
I should like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the following other documents:
S/1995/157, letter dated 23 February 1995 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the report of the
preparatory fact-finding mission to Burundi; and
S/1995/185, letter dated 6 March 1995 from the Charge
d'Affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

Members of the Council have received
photocopies of a letter dated 8 March 1995 from the
Charge d'Affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of
Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General. This letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/1995/ 190.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
reports of its Mission to Burundi which Visited
Bujumbura on 10 and 11 February 1995 and
welcomes the observations and recommendations
contained in the report of the Mission
(S/l995/163). It expresses its appreciation to the
Mission members for their efforts.

"The Security Council recalls its earlier
statements on the situation in Burundi, in
particular that of 31 January 1995
(S/PRST/1995/5). It remains deeply concerned that
a climate of insecurity continues to prevail in
Burundi. It condemns the activities of those, both
within and outside the country, who seek to
nullify the agreed power-sharing arrangements
contained in the Convention of Government of 10
September 1994 by resorting to undemocratic
methods such as intimidation and incitement to
violence, as well as guerilla activities and
subversive political activity. Such actions have
threatened peace, stability and national
reconciliation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the Convention of Government and for the

 

coalition Government established under it. In this
connection, it notes the appointment of the Prime
Minister and his Cabinet and urges all parties in
Burundi to work together to ensure stability in the
country.

"The Security Council reaffirms the view
that impunity is a fundamental problem in Burundi,
one which seriously endangers security in the
country, and stresses the importance it attaches to
assistance being given to help strengthen the
national judicial system. In this context, it
underlines the role that could be played by an
international commission of inquiry into the 1993
coup attempt and into the massacres that followed,
established in accordance with the Convention of
Government.

"The Security Council strongly reaffirms its
support for the implementation of the provisions of
the Convention of Government calling for the
holding of a national debate with the participation
of all segments of the society in Burundi, as a
means of fostering political dialogue.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance of assisting the Government of Burundi
in its efforts to restore stability and promote
national reconciliation. In this context, it encourages
the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
Government of Burundi, to augment the United
Nations presence in the country, in order to assist
the Government of Burundi in strengthening the
national judicial system, training civilian police
forces and establishing an effective administrative
presence in the provinces. It commends the
important role played by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General.

 

"The Security Council reiterates that
improving the security situation in Burundi must
be given high priority. It encourages the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, in consultation
with the Government of Burundi and in close
coordination with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, to reinforce the office he
has established in Burundi. Consideration could
also be given to the role human rights monitors
could play.

"The Security Council also recognizes the
significant contribution made by the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) military observers. It
encourages the OAU, in consultation with the
Government of Burundi, to further increase their
number and calls upon the international
community to assist the OAU in this regard.
"The Security Council further calls on all
parties in Burundi to cooperate with international
observers and other personnel by ensuring
unimpeded access to all parts of all parties of the
country.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep it fully
informed of developments in Burundi. The
Security Council will remain actively seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/10.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its

agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.

