Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
Security Council meeting of the President of the
Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija, Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, as well as of
the Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Rilcker, and the
delegation accompanying him.

We take note of the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2006/707), as well as of the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
regarding the situation in Kosovo, Republic of Serbia.
The attainment of concrete, effective progress in the
work on standards remains one of the factors
determining the pace and productiveness of the status
dialogue.

At the ministerial meeting of the Group of Eight
in Moscow, it was emphasized in particular that
Kosovo must remain multi-ethnic. The leadership of
the province must give particular attention to the
implementation of standards defined by the
international community with respect to ethnic
minorities. Unfortunately, despite some positive steps,
achievements in this area cannot be described as
significant, and the activities of the Provisional
Institutions in Kosovo remain insufficient and
inconsistent.

Above all, it is also too early to say that the
necessary guarantees of the rights and security of
minority representatives, particularly of the Serbs, are
in place. We are seriously concerned that the number of
ethnically motivated crimes has again skyrocketed in
the province, as the report makes clear. The
unfortunate situation in that regard was highlighted by
the recent incident in northern Mitrovica, where a
grenade was thrown into a Serbian cafe. Crimes against
the Serbian ethnic minority are often still not fully
investigated and their perpetrators go unpunished. To
question the fact that the overwhelming majority of
those crimes are ethnically motivated is to disregard
facts with which we are all familiar.

The situation with regard to freedom of
movement is equally dire. Minorities remain fearful
and feel that the roads remain unsafe. The problems of
decentralization and the protection of the religious and
cultural heritage of minorities are also far from
resolved. Like the Secretary-General, we strongly
condemn the increasing incidence of vandalism of
Serbian Orthodox religious shrines in Kosovo. The
situation demands heightened accountability in that
regard on the part of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, and representatives
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Council of Europe and other European
organizations.

The situation with regard to the return of refugees
and communities is also unsatisfactory, as borne out,
inter alia, by the figures provided in the report. In that
context, we welcome the agreements reached between
Belgrade and Pristina, which represent a step in the
right direction. However, if we are to redress the
situation, we need primarily concrete and, above all,
financial measures to improve living conditions in the
province and to remove obstacles to the returns
process.

We understand the Secretary-General's concern
over the severing by the northern municipalities of
relations with the provisional authorities. We call for
the establishment of independent security mechanisms.
We support the appeal made in the report to all parties
to refrain from making provocative accusations and to
strive to find a constructive solution to those issues.

However, the non-participation by the Kosovo
Serbs in the activities of the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government also demonstrates just how far
Kosovo remains from completing the main task of
creating a multi-ethnic and democratic society. Among
minorities, the level of trust in the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government remains very low. The
majority community must create a climate that
encourages the minorities, the Kosovo Serbs in
particular, to cooperate with the provincial authorities
and to participate in all spheres of life in Kosovo. We
consider attempts to blame Belgrade for the
non-participation of the Kosovo Serbs in the activities
of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
be wrong-headed.

We urge the leaders of the province vigorously to
intensify their efforts to register real and sustainable
progress in the implementation of standards, above all
those that are of crucial importance to ensuring the
Kosovo's multi-ethnic character. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General's view that we must not lose
sight of the fact that all standards without exception are
of great importance to the future of Kosovo and that
further progress in implementing other standards is just
as essential. We hope that the Contact Group will
carefully monitor implementation of standards by the
provincial leaders.

Of course, the Serbian side has to play its part
here, too. The attainment of concrete and effective
progress in standards implementation is one of the
determining factors impacting on the pace and
productivity of the negotiating process to determine the
future status of Kosovo. Only a sustainable qualitative
redressing of the standards situation can lay the
foundation for its productive advancement through the
mediation of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Martti Ahtisaari, to find a balanced, negotiated
compromise between Belgrade and Pristina.

Like the Secretary-General, we welcome the
onset of a new phase in the Kosovo settlement - the
beginning of a political dialogue at the highest level on
status affairs. Of course, it would be difficult to hope
for much more from the first high-level meeting, at
which a very natural exchange of claims took place.
Nevertheless, the option proposed by Belgrade for
broad or substantial autonomy for Kosovo is open-
ended; in other words, it can be adjusted over the
course of time. It offers a basis for negotiations that
would permit a smooth and gradual transition to the
issue of the province's status. That particular approach
is consistent with the task of strengthening the stability
of the Balkans.

The Secretary-General is right to note the need
for the parties to the talks to show greater flexibility
and a spirit of compromise. They must find points of
convergence and a long-term, mutually acceptable
solution. In that regard, the international community's
support remains a crucial factor for progress. The
positions of the countries of the region and of other
interested European States and participants in the
Kosovo Force must be taken into account. It is also
important to take into consideration the situation with
regard to the Serbian enclaves in the northern part of
the province, whose situation demonstrates just how
long it will take even to establish the most basic
cooperation between the parties.

In any event, any decision on the future status of
the province must be a universal one. Only a
negotiated decision on Kosovo, and not one that is
imposed and one-sided or that will set a negative
precedent in the context of international crisis
settlement, can be supported by the Security Council. It
is already clear that even an optimal scenario for
genuine and lasting results on standards
implementation and for the drafting of solutions by the
parties to the status talks will take quite some time to
evolve. In that connection, we deem it
counterproductive to establish any arbitrary time
frames.

A negotiated solution on the future status of
Kosovo is a priority for Russia. That is the gist of the
Contact Group's statement following the Vienna
summit negotiations, which clearly refers to making
progress towards a decision on the basis of
compromise.

Our delegation associates itself with the
Secretary-General's words of gratitude to the former
head of UNMIK, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, and welcomes
the appointment of Mr. Rficker as Special
Representative for Kosovo. We hope that, under his
guidance, UNMIK will strictly abide by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), as well as the
guidelines of the Contact Group and the ministerial
declaration it issued in London on 31 January.

