Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Secretary-General and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

The Russian delegation voted in favour of resolution
2171 (2014) to prevent armed conflict, taking into
account how important this issue is in the context of
maintaining international pace and security. We believe
that States have the main responsibility for conflict
prevention. Any international assistance, including
within the framework of the United Nations, should be
carried out with the consent of the host country and
cannot be imposed.
Today, most crises are internal in character, and
the border between assistance in the area of preventive
diplomacy and pressure on domestic political processes
is becoming tenuous, especially when this kind of
assistance is provided at an early stage of a crisis.
Unfortunately, we have often heard proposals in the
Security Council that border on attempts to manage
the internal affairs of States or to interfere in their
constitutional processes. It is clearly important to
strike the right balance. Too much support for one
political group can only further stoke a conflict and
undermine trust in the international community, and in
the United Nations in particular. The proliferation of
mediation efforts, not to mention competition among
ambitious players all trying to win kudos for their roles
as mediators and peace brokers, can end up adding fuel
to the fire.

Clearly, the actions of certain influential States are
directly at odds with the goal of conflict prevention,
thereby engendering serious crises. The consequences
of those crises have led to the destabilization of entire
countries or even regions. The situation following the
invasion of Iraq has developed in such a way that the
breakup of the country is now a possibility, and part
of its territory could become a haven for international
terrorists. We are also witnessing uncontrolled
destabilization in Libya, with bleak prospects for
overcoming that crisis.

In Ukraine, we see how some countries are openly
prodding Kyiv to continue the bloodletting and to reject
proposals that offer a way to peaceful settlement. The
agreements of 21 February and the Geneva declaration
have been forgotten. The road map proposed by the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe has been disregarded. Yet
all those documents had real potential for resolving the
political crisis before it morphed into armed conflict.

The United Nations, as a universal international

organization with unique legitimacy, plays a significant
role in preventing conflicts. We agree that the
successful early prevention of conflicts depends on
the comprehensive use of the various tools available
to the United Nations. Yet we should have no illusions
that the system can be improved to such an extent that
it can automatically check the temperature of a crisis
and write out a standard prescription. Each situation
requires a delicate, balanced and impartial approach
and a patient search for a unique solution.

We are convinced that early prevention cannot
be based on an arbitrarily chosen mix of certain
indicators of conflict; that paves the way for abuse. It is
unacceptable to favour certain mechanisms available to
the United Nations, even such important ones as human
rights or development indicators. The evaluation
methods of certain entities, which are not transparent
and often biased in nature, should not be used as the
universal bases for preventive action. Nor can we agree
with insistent attempts to force the Security Council to
take into account information and assessments of the
Secretary-General and to adopt measures on that basis.
In fact, that is an attempt to dilute the responsibility
of the Council to maintain international peace and
security.

Furthermore, we should take into account that the
Council does not have a monopoly on discussions and the
use of preventive measures in such areas as mediation,
disarmament and, most recently, the general political
aspects of special commissions under the purview of
the General Assembly. We should also not disregard
the significant potential of regional and subregional
organizations. There is no doubt that the Secretariat can
analyse relevant issues and communicate its experience
in their solution, as reflected in the reports it prepares.
Such reports can be useful if they are drafted in a
professional and impartial way. It is important for them
to focus on the practical benefits of the measures being
proposed.

We see no point in having the United Nations draft
research-intensive publications in which the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations are lost behind
a facade of so-called innovative concepts. That task
belongs to academic institutions. Nor should we lose
too much time on the bureaucratic side of matters by
hatching various entities with unclear mandates. In fact,
we should not be engaged in a race for accountability,
invoking unrealistic figures on the number of supposed

conflicts resolved by the United Nations. It is better
to have one example of real success than thousands of
pages and millions of words.

Based on some of the proposals we have heard, one
could conclude that many of the bodies and structures
of the United Nations could be eliminated, with the
exception of the Security Council. That would hardly
be right. Finally, it is premature to speak of some sort of
conflict-prevention architecture until there is a broader
discussion of the matter. That should involve of all
Member States.

