Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Bulgarian delegation, I would like to
thank Mr. Hans Blix for the briefing he has just given
us. I would like to take this opportunity to thank him
for the excellent work done thus far, and this in spite of
difficult circumstances and conditions. Bulgaria
confirms its support for the activities of UNMOVIC,
under Mr. Blix, as well as that of the IAEA, under its
Director General, Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei, and their
teams.

The obvious suspension of the inspectors' work
should not call into question the usefulness of
inspections in general. In future, the inspections will
remain a necessary tool for the United Nations in order
to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction everywhere throughout the world.

It is clear that the instrument of inspections is
truly effective only with the existence of full and active
cooperation on the part of the country and Government
concerned. My delegation is grateful to Mr. Blix for
having submitted the work programme, before the
deadline, on the key remaining disarmament tasks for
Iraq under resolution 1284 (1999). The work
programme continues to be under study by my
authorities, and we reserve the right to give our view
on the programme as soon as this study has been
concluded.

Bulgaria sincerely regrets that diplomatic efforts
at disarming Iraq peacefully have not yielded the
desired results. Throughout recent months, Bulgaria
has defended a clear-cut and consistent position within
the Council, the objective of which was the full
implementation of resolution 1441 (2002).

My country has done its utmost to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis between the Security Council and
Iraq, and this through a reasonable compromise along
the various approaches we had in the Security Council
with a view to preserving its unity.

Now, since all the political possibilities for
disarming Iraq have been exhausted, we confirm our
position that, in refusing to cooperate fully, actively
and without condition with the inspectors, Iraq has
failed to seize its last chance to comply with the
relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions,
in particular resolution 1441 (2002).

Bulgaria unreservedly supports the position of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan to withdraw all United
Nations staff from Iraq, including the UNMOVIC and
IAEA inspectors, in order to ensure their safety. We
very much regret the fact that, while there was a
consensus on our objective in the Council - that is,
the disarmament of Iraq - differences as to means and
a timetable for the carrying out of this objective have
not enabled the Council to take a common approach.

Ensuring that we have a calm debate in the
Security Council is crucial at this difficult time.
Dialogue must be fully restored and the unity of the
Council re-established. In this context, the statements
that we have heard this morning lead us to believe that
the resumption of dialogue has already begun. We must
now focus on the most important issue. The most
urgent and important matter now, which should be the
focus of the Council's concerns at this serious time, is
the humanitarian situation in Iraq. Like other
delegations, we call on all States members of the
Council to work together to support the efforts of the
international community in providing assistance to the
civilian population of Iraq.

Even though my delegation deeply regrets the
events of recent days, Bulgaria reaffirms its
determination to continue to make a contribution to the
preservation of the role of the United Nations in
international relations. Bulgaria, which is dedicated to
the principle of multilateralism, is convinced that the
Security Council must preserve its essential role in the
maintenance of international peace and security
throughout the world, as set forth in the Charter. The
Council should play an important role in the post-
conflict reconstruction of Iraq.

