Mr. Powles (New Zealand): Ijoin other speakers
in thanking you personally, Madam President, for
calling this special debate - following a similar debate
last year - on the issue of children in armed conflict.

My delegation also commends the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report. Wide-ranging
and innovative measures are recommended to address
the problem of children and armed conflict, which we
hope will receive the Council's fullest consideration.
We welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on the
importance of preventing armed conflict as the
principal means of protecting children from its effects.

When we met to discuss this issue last August it
was clear that to enhance the United Nations central
role in the protection of the world's children Member
States needed to pursue progress in improving the
international legal standards for the protection of
children in the context of armed conflict.

The opening for signature on 25 May of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed
conflict is thus a very welcome development. The
success of the negotiations was due in no small part to
the perseverance and skill of the Chair of the Working
Group, Ambassador Catherine von Heidenstam of
Sweden, and we acknowledge her substantial
contribution.

We believe that the Optional Protocol, once it
enters into force, will be a significant addition to the
protection of children's human rights. We hope that the
age limit of 18 years for participation in armed conflict
will become the new international standard. For the
Optional Protocol to be effective, it will need to be
widely ratified. We urge States to accord priority to the
child soldiers issue and to work towards signature and
ratification of the Optional Protocol.

Another significant step has been the conclusion
of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. New Zealand is currently progressing domestic
legislation that will enable it to ratify the Statute in the
near future. This will include the extension of
"universal jurisdiction" over war crimes, as defined in
article 8 of the Statute. Once established, the Court will
help end impunity for a range of war crimes, including
the use of young children in armed conflict and attacks
on civilian targets, such as schools, where children may
be harmed.

The development of new legal standards must be
supported by effective efforts in the field to ensure
their implementation. In this respect, I would like to
pay tribute once again to the work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Olara Otunnu, and to
the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and its
Executive Director, Ms. Carol Bellamy. We particularly
appreciated their contributions this morning. The
United Nations, its agencies and its institutions can and
do contribute significantly to protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict and to addressing the
needs of children in the aftermath of war.

One measure already instituted by the Council
and which has our full support is the appointment of
Child Protection Advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. This initiative is a
concrete example of the creative and practical means
which can be employed by this Organization to address
the impact of armed conflict on children.

The Secretary-General's recent report highlights
the need for comprehensive measures to address the
impact of armed conflict on children in all its aspects.
In this respect, we support him in urging the Council to
seek to minimize the unintended consequences of
sanctions on civilian populations, including children,
through effective targeting and humanitarian
exemptions. We also support the Secretary-General's
emphasis on the particular vulnerability of the girl
child, on the necessity of addressing children's needs
during peace processes, on the need to end impunity
for human rights violators, and on the important role
non-governmental organizations can play in monitoring
and minimizing the impact of armed conflict on
children.

I think we would all agree that much work needs
to be done to promote awareness of the impact of
armed conflict on children and to encourage States to
address it. Governments, non-governmental
organizations and the private sector all have important
roles to play in this process. New Zealand was pleased
to be able to provide modest financial support for the
Asia Pacific conference on the use of children as
soldiers in Nepal in May, organized by the Coalition to
Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, a non-governmental
organization. We also welcome the initiative of the
Canadian Government in planning the Winnipeg
international conference on war-affected children in
September.

We hope that initiatives such as these, coupled
with broad ratification and concerted implementation
of legal standards for the protection of children such as
the Optional Protocol on children in armed conflict and
the Statute of the International Criminal Court, will
lead to the elimination of the use of children as
soldiers. In addition, the Security Council has a key
role to play in addressing more broadly the impact of
armed conflict on children. We welcome its continued
commitment to do so.

