Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We would like to thank the Uruguayan
presidency for convening today's important meeting.

We have taken due note of the concept note
on the protection of civilians and medical care in
armed conflict (S/2017/365, annex), including on
the implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). In that
context, we recall the Preamble to the Charter of the
United Nations, which states that the peoples of the
United Nations are determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war and to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights and human dignity.
Today, however, our world remains incapable of
translating those noble purposes and principles into a
reality where peace, security and prosperity prevail.
This has happened because these principles are used
by some Governments to legitimize hegemonic policies
and interfere in other States' internal affairs.

I would like to make some remarks on behalf of
my country, which for seven years has suffered the
scourge international terrorism, which is supported
by some of the members of the Security Council and
other States. It is States that have the primary and
exclusive responsibility to protect their civilians.
We cannot deal with the issue of the protection of
civilians as a whole without ensuring full respect for
international law and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly those affirming the
sovereignty and equality of States and the importance
of non-interference in a State's internal affairs. We
must avoid selectivity and double standards, and we
should not exploit the issue of the protection of civilians
in order to breach international law and the selfish
agendas of certain States. Indeed, some of the ways
in which some States have interfered in the affairs of
others have had disastrous results for civilians that are
very apparent to us all. The protection of civilians in
conflict first requires addressing the underlying and
genuine causes of those conflicts, and the growing
threat posed by terrorism.

Some international parties, however, have shown no
willingness to attain that goal but have rather used their
economic, political and military might to create new
areas of tension around the world, instead of upholding
their commitments regarding international peace and
security and the eradication of terrorism. It is strange
to see them continue to take liberties as they accuse
others of violating the rules of international law and
international humanitarian law, forgetting their own
crimes in many parts of the world . How can the United
States, the United Kingdom and France claim to respect
international law when, as members of illegitimate
coalitions, they are attacking other countries and killing
their citizens? They infringe on the sovereignty of other
States and destroy their health infrastructure with no
respect whatsoever for the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of the Security Council. They have
thus lost all legitimacy and credibility when it comes to
making statements on human rights - statements by
their representatives that are nothing but lies.

How can Saudi Arabia be a member of the
Human Rights Council when it is sending billions of
dollars to help murder Syrians and destroy our health
facilities, which is then being turned into warehouses
for terrorists? It is spreading cholera in Yemen and
attacking funeral processions, hospitals and other
infrastructure mercilessly. How can Qatar preside
over the Dialogue Among Civilizations initiative when
it publicly supports the Al-Nusra Front, a terrorist
organization that continues to commit crime after
barbaric crime in Syria, including the destruction of
clinics and health centres?

The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
a constitutional duty to protect its civilians. We are
committed to total respect for our citizens' lives and to
providing them with basic services, including health,
education and social protection, despite the tremendous
challenges that we are dealing with. We will spare no
effort in upholding and meeting our commitments under
international humanitarian law. We have re-established
the Syrian Commission for International Law and
organized numerous international activities, including
training sessions.

Armed terrorist groups have invaded and occupied
all of the hospitals and clinics in all of the areas of Syria
where those groups are present. The hospitals have
been turned into military bases and weapons depots or
have been demolished. Modern infrastructure has also
been destroyed. The Al-Kindi Hospital and the Surgical
Ophthalmology Hospital in Aleppo were both renowned
institutions of the Middle East. We have heard the lies
that have been spread and the manipulations of the truth,
such as that some armed terrorists have represented
themselves as members of humanitarian and health care
organizations. The so-called White Helmets are nothing
but a cover for individuals committing terrorist acts
with impunity, supported by members of the Security
Council. Numerous instances have underscored those
lies. For example, I can refer to the medical material
found in the warehouses of terrorist groups in east
Aleppo. Those are the same terrorists that have come to
possess medical materials by depriving civilians who
are in great need of such resources.

I wish to emphasize the fact that we need to protect
civilians, including those civilians who are suffering
under the Israeli occupation in the occupied Syrian
Golan and the other occupied Arab territories. We
must build medical infrastructure for those citizens,
owing to the refusal on the part of the occupying Israeli
authorities to build a hospital for our citizens living
in the occupied Syrian Golan, where they are being
cruelly deprived of medical care.

What can we call an occupying Power whose Prime
Minister visits injured belonging to Jabhat aI-Nusra at
Israeli hospitals? Of course, we call it occupying and
terrorist Power.

Today, the United Nations is in moral crisis and
representatives of States are forced to listen to the lies
of the representative of the worst occupying Power
known to humankind - the Israeli occupation Power.
As I have mentioned, the Israeli authorities refuse the
requests of the civilians of the Syrian Golan to build
a hospital or allow the sick to receive treatment in the

hospitals of their home country, Syria.

Those whom the Israeli representative referred to
as receiving treatment in Israeli hospitals are terrorists
from Jabhat al-Nusra and other armed terrorist groups.
We have informed the Council repeatedly about
their treatment in the occupying Power's hospitals.
Israel's role in the Syrian crisis is crystal clear; it
provides logistic support to the terrorists in the area of
separation, as confirmed in the reports of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force. When the
terrorists, are under increased military pressure, help
comes from Israel through air and artillery bombing of
the Syrian forces fighting terrorists.
In the case of Liechtenstein, we heard the
representative of that country insist on promoting the
so-called International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist inthe Investigation and Prosecution
of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. I call on all Member States
to read the delivered by the Syrian Arab Republic to the
Secretary-General (A/71/799), which reveals the grave
legal violations in its establishment. Here, I cannot
but congratulate Liechtenstein's representative on his
country's disgraceful participation in its establishment
process, alongsidethe state of Qatar, which supports the
terror unleashed in Syria by Jabhat al-Nusra, a group
that is on the Security Council's list.

Lastly, we emphasize the fact that the protection
of civilians, particularly with regard to the issue of
health care, requires solutions to the real problems
underlying the conflict and addressing the causes ofthe
suffering ofthe civilians. The problems facing civilians
include foreign occupation, terrorism and unilateral
coercive measures imposed by the United States, the
European Union and other States against many peoples,
particularly the people of Syria.

