Mr. Bunduku-Latha (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Allow me first of all to pay tribute to you, Mr. President,
and to your country, Brazil, for the initiative of holding
this ministerial debate on the interdependence between
security and development in the framework of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

On behalf of the delegation of Gabon and its
Government, I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, the Secretary-General, for his steady
commitment to peace and development in the world. I
also wish to thank my friend, Mr. Eugene-Richard
Gasana, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
his statement, and Ms. Sarah Cliffe for the quality of
her report on conflicts and for the relevance of her
statement.

The end of the cold war announced a new era of
international peace and security, but since then new
forms of conflict have appeared. Those new conflicts
have taken the form of internal crises to which are
added threats to peace and security such as terrorism,
drugs, international organized crime and the
proliferation of small arms.

In that context, we wish to point out that during
his term of office President Omar Bongo Ondimba
spared no effort in devoting himself, through diverse
mediation efforts, to resolving conflicts in the
subregion of Central Africa and the Great Lakes. The
success of his action was based on a consistent method
of constant encouragement of dialogue, tolerance and
peace. Moreover, Gabon, with its counterparts in
Central Africa, has contributed to setting up
instruments to prevent and resolve conflicts and build
peace.

Following the same lines, the President of the
Republic, His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba, is
continuing the work of his illustrious predecessor. In
that regard, his social programme, based on the triad of
peace, development and sharing, remains the perfect
illustration of the inseparable link between security and
development. It is illusory to imagine development
without solidarity. Likewise, no State can achieve
development without taking the concepts of peace and
security into account.

As Pope Paul VI once stated, the new name of
peace is development. This is therefore the opportunity
to underscore that it is in the best interest of States to
support social cohesion by promoting the well-being of
populations and policies conducive to strengthening
basic infrastructure and improving living conditions.

Indeed, the populations of the world aspire not
only to live in peace and security, but also to a
prosperous existence through their active participation
in the economic and social development of their
nations. The unemployment of young people,
shortcomings in the education and heath-care systems,
and the absence of economic prospects and a reliable
social security can become destabilizing factors in the
long term. Equally disturbing, in many countries
terrorism continues to feed on the distress of
populations and today is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security.

Recent events clearly show the extent to which
insecurity can give rise to demands for deep-seated
social and political change. Thus, in many countries,
we have seen hunger strikes degenerate into popular
uprisings with destabilizing effects on peace and
security.

Security and development are not therefore only
requirements, but remain closely linked and are two
sides of the same reality. In that regard, if we accept
that poverty or the absence of development is the cause
of conflicts, we can also assert that wide-spread
destitution significantly increases the risks of
instability and violence. Furthermore, while crises and
violence alone do not explain the absence of economic
and social development in nations, nevertheless they
hinder development.

On behalf of the Government of Gabon, I am
therefore delighted to note that the topic chosen here,
the interdependence between security and development
in the maintenance of international peace and security,
is in line with the policy advocated by President Ali
Bongo Ondimba, who also attaches particular

importance to issues regarding the improvement of the
status of women, widows, orphans and people with
disabilities, the fight against pandemics and the
environment. In parallel, good governance, social
justice, the rule of law, respect for national laws and
human rights, freedom of expression, pluralistic
democracy, the fight against corruption, as well as the
acceptance of the results of free and transparent
elections, are certainly essential factors for stable
States and dynamic development.

With regard to State ownership in post-conflict
situations, the conclusions of the debate on institution-
building of 21 January, under the presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, (see S/PV.6472), stressed its
importance. Indeed, national ownership of the peace
process is essential to restoring security and promoting
development. The restoration of such States will be
even more sustainable if it is based on the capacities of
their populations and on the credibility of their
institutions. Moreover, such States must ensure the
effective control over their natural resources, since the
illegal exploitation and trade of such resources hinder
development and peace.

My delegation remains convinced of the need to
include in political processes all national actors, public
and private, including civil society. Likewise, close
cooperation among all national and international actors
is essential to the successful efforts of our States. That
is why we are convinced that better coordination
among all bodies of the United Nations system will
enable States to achieve the economic and social
development crucial to lasting peace.

Security and development are two concepts that
share close dynamic links, both conceptually and in
practice. One aims to increase the freedom of choice,
while the other allows those choices to be made in a
secure environment. It would therefore seem crucial for
the United Nations to give a more central role to
conflict prevention in their international policy and
security strategy. Our debate today shares that logic.
That is why my country, Gabon, remains firmly
committed to conflict prevention as the preferred
instrument to promote harmonious peace, security and
development among nations.
Finally, before concluding, allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for the draft presidential statement
submitted for adoption and for which I reiterate my
delegation's support.
