Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Let me say first that
Portugal fully subscribes to the statement that will be
delivered later by the Presidency of the European Union.

I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, which will allow the Security Council, for the
second time, to address the problem of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees in conflict situations,
one of the most delicate and complex issues the
international community faces today. We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for having provided a very good,
comprehensive and well-structured report, which my
delegation considers to be thought-provoking and a good
basis for future action.

We welcome the remarks made this morning by
Deputy Secretary-General Louise Frechette. We welcome,
likewise, the participation in this debate of representatives
of the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and hope to
see them and other, similar departments, agencies and
organizations more often in the debates of the Security
Council related to their work.

More than one year after our first debate, I believe
that no doubts remain about the legitimate and crucial
role the Security Council can play in the field of
humanitarian assistance to civil populations. As either a
cause or a consequence of conflicts, humanitarian crises
are a component of international peace and security.
Given the dimension and complexity of the problem, our
approach and action have to be coordinated with all the
relevant organs and agencies of the United Nations -
this is a collective effort that engages the entire system -
as well as with other international, regional and
humanitarian organizations.

The mandates of the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Security Council should therefore, from
the very beginning, contain the necessary and appropriate
provisions for the safety of refugees, internally displaced
persons and the humanitarian personnel bringing relief to
them. The Council is paying increasing attention to the
question of the unimpeded and safe access of
humanitarian assistance to refugees and other civilians in
need. To this end, the Council must keep closer contact
with other organs and agencies of the United Nations and
needs timely and accurate information, including from
humanitarian organizations, under the appropriate
procedures.

As the Secretary-General rightly points out in his
report, the protection of humanitarian assistance in
situations of conflict poses, above all, a question of
compliance by all the actors in the conflict - and we
mean here State and non-State actors alike - with all the
relevant instruments and provisions of international law.
Since a central element of humanitarian assistance and the
very essence of humanitarian law is the protection of the
human being and, in fact, of his basic human rights,
whenever a party to a conflict denies safe and unhindered
access to humanitarian assistance, that party is violating

 

a fundamental right - the right to assistance - and is not
abiding by its responsibilities and obligations under
international law. The international community, the United
Nations and, in particular, the Security Council must take
a firm stand on violations of this nature. Our reiterated
appeal for compliance must be reinforced with a clear
indication that there will be no "business as usual" with
perpetrators and that sanctions may be imposed on them.

States, which are responsible for the safety of refugees
and all other civilians, as well as for their safe and
unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance, are also
primarily responsible for bringing to justice the perpetrators
of such violations. The international community should
raise its common voice against the culture of impunity and
be more consistently committed to supporting the efforts to
prosecute those who have violated international
humanitarian law and to bring them to trial at the national
level or before international courts, whenever appropriate.

Portugal welcomes the adoption of the Statute of the
International Criminal Court and, in this context, we
consider particularly important its provisions stating that
attacks against humanitarian personnel are war crimes and
establishing the accountability of non-State actors, including
individuals, under international law and international
jurisdiction. This is certainly one of the major achievements
of the Statute. We must ensure that the creation of this
Court will prove to be a major instrument to roll back that
culture of impunity and to deter the perpetration of such
violations.
When we address the major issue of protection for
humanitarian assistance, we should focus our attention on
the situation of the United Nations and associated personnel
and the personnel of humanitarian organizations who carry
out their tasks, often at the risk of their own lives. I wish
here, on behalf of my country, to pay tribute to all those
men and women.

It is important to strengthen all relevant international
instruments of protection through the increasing accession
of States to them. In this regard, we regret that, four years
after its adoption by the General Assembly, the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel
has not yet come into force. As it has done for several
years at the Commission on Human Rights and in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly, Portugal reiterates
here its appeal for the ratification of this Convention. In our
opinion, the Convention is also applicable to all civilians
involved in humanitarian missions.

Notwithstanding progress made in international
instruments of humanitarian law and human rights, attacks
against humanitarian personnel have been increasing. This
appalling situation calls for drastic action. The Council
must draw lessons from recent experience - as in the
Democratic Republic of Congo - and be innovative in
considering the elaboration of a mechanism to facilitate or
protect humanitarian relief and assistance. Perhaps the
Council can consider, in this context, the possibility of
deploying military units to protect humanitarian personnel.
Better coordinated and more efficient action by the United
Nations, involving all agencies dealing with humanitarian
assistance and peacekeeping operations, could address this
problem.

The report of the Secretary-General provides us with
a good set of recommendations. It is now up to the
Security Council to keep the issue of the protection of
humanitarian assistance high on its agenda and address it
in all its implications when dealing with a particular
conflict situation. Humanitarian activities are a component
of a comprehensive and coordinated approach, and the
Council cannot avoid its responsibilities in this field.

As a member of the Council, and even after it ceases
to be one, Portugal is ready and will continue to
cooperate with all delegations, departments, programmes
and agencies of the United Nations to protect refugees
and all other civilians affected by conflict situations. We
must ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian assistance
to all those in need and protect the humanitarian workers
who bring them relief.

