Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for being with us today as
well as Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

We are meeting today in a forum that is very
familiar to all of us. This meeting on the Middle East
has been taking place each month for many, many years;
its focus has been almost entirely on issues facing
Israelis and Palestinians, and we have heard many of
the same arguments and ideas over and over again. We
have already heard them again this morning.

It is as if saying the same things repeatedly without
actually doing the hard work and making the necessary
compromises will achieve anything. Beginning last year
we have tried to broaden the discussion, and we have
had some success in doing so. I thank my colleagues
who have participated in those broader discussions. One
reason we did that is our well-founded belief that the
United Nations spends an altogether disproportionate
amount of time on Israeli-Palestinian issues.

It is not that those issues are unimportant. They
are certainly very important. The problem is that the
United Nations has proved itself time and again to be a
grossly biased Organization when it comes to Israel. As
such, the disproportionate focus of the United Nations
has actually made the problem more difficult to solve
by elevating the tensions and the grievances between
the two parties.

Another reason we have attempted to shift the
discussion is that the vast scope of the challenges
facing the region dwarf the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
As we meet here today, the Middle East is plagued
by many truly horrendous problems. In Yemen, there
is one of the worst humanitarian disasters on Earth,
with millions of people facing starvation. Meanwhile
militia groups fire Iranian rockets from Yemen into
neighbouring countries.

In Syria, the Al-Assad regime is using chemical
weapons to gas its own people. This war has taken the
lives of more than halfa million Syrians. Millions more
have been pushed into neighbouring Jordan, Turkey and
Lebanon as refugees, causing major hardships in those
countries. In Lebanon, Hizbullah's terrorists exert
ever more control, illegally building up a stockpile of
offensive weapons, inviting a dangerous escalation that
could devastate regional security.

The Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham is engaged
in an inhumane level of cruelty in much of the region.
It has been dealt severe setbacks in Iraq and Syria,
but it is not yet completely destroyed and still poses
serious threats.

Egypt faces repeated terrorist attacks, and of course
there is the terrorist-sponsoring regime in Tehran that
initiates and encourages most of the troubles I have
just outlined.

These immense security and humanitarian
challenges throughout the region should occupy more
of our attention rather than having us sit here month
after month and use the most democratic country in the
Middle East as a scapegoat for the region's problems.
But here we go again.

I do not mean to suggest that there is no suffering
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Both sides have
suffered greatly. So many innocent Israelis have been
killed or injured by suicide bombings, stabbings and
other sickening terrorist attacks. Israel has been forced
to live under constant security threats like virtually no
other country in the world. It should not have to live
that way. And yet Israel has overcome those burdens;
it is a thriving country with a vibrant economy that
contributes much to the world in the name of technology,
science and the arts.

It is the Palestinian people who are suffering more.
The Palestinians in Gaza live under Hamas terrorist
oppression. I cannot even call it a governing authority,
as Hamas provides so little in the way of what one
would normally think as Government services. The
people of Gaza live in truly awful conditions, while
their Hamas rulers put their resources into building
terror tunnels and rockets. The Palestinians in the West
Bank also suffer greatly. Too many have died, and too
much potential has been lost in this conflict. We are
joined here today by Palestinian Authority President
Abbas. I am sorry he declined to stay in the Chamber to
hear the remarks of others. Even though he has left the
room, I will address the balance of my remarks to him.

When the new American Administration came into
office last January, we did so against the fresh backdrop
of the passage of resolution 2334 (2016). In the waning
days of the previous American Administration, the
United States made a serious error in allowing that
resolution to be adopted. Resolution 2334 (2016) was
wrong on many levels. I am not going to get into the
substance now. But beyond the substance, perhaps its
biggest flaw was that it encouraged the false notion
that Israel can be pushed into a deal that undermines
its vital interests, damaging the prospects for peace
by increasing mistrust between the Israelis and
the Palestinians.

In the past year, the United States has worked
to repair that damage. At the United Nations I have
opposed the bias against Israel, as any ally should do.
But that does not mean that I or our Administration is
against the Palestinian people. Just the opposite is true;
we recognize the suffering of the Palestinian people, as
I have recognized it here today.

I sit here today offering the outstretched hand of
the United States to the Palestinian people in the cause
of peace. We are fully prepared to look to a future of
prosperity and coexistence. We welcome President
Abbas as the leader of the Palestinian people here today.
But I will decline the advice I was recently given by his
top negotiator, Saeb Erekat. I will not shut up; rather, I
will respectfully speak some hard truths.

The Palestinian leadership has a choice to make
between two different paths. There is the path of
absolutist demands, hateful rhetoric and incitement to
violence. That path has led and will continue to lead
to nothing but hardship for the Palestinian people.
Or there is the path of negotiation and compromise.
History has shown that path to be successful for Egypt
and Jordan, including the transfer of territory. That
path remains open to the Palestinian leadership if only
it is courageous enough to take it.

The United States knows the Palestinian leadership
was very unhappy with the decision to move our
embassy to Jerusalem. It does not have to like that
decision. It does not have to praise it. It does not even
have to accept it. But know this: that decision will
not change.

So once again you must choose between two
paths. You can choose to denounce the United States,
reject the United States' role in peace talks and pursue
punitive measures against Israel in international
forums such as the United Nations. I assure you that
path will get the Palestinian people exactly nowhere
towards the achievement of their aspirations. Or you
can choose to put aside your anger about the location
of our embassy and move forward with us towards a
negotiated compromise that holds great potential for
improving the lives of the Palestinian people.

Putting forward old talking points and entrenched
and undeveloped concepts achieves nothing. That
approach has been tried many times and has always
failed. After so many decades, we welcome new
thinking. As I mentioned in the meeting held last month
on this issue (see S/PV.8167), the United States stands
ready to work with the Palestinian leadership. Our
negotiators are sitting right behind me, ready to talk.
But we will not chase after you. The choice is yours.

