The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.

Mr. Staur (Denmark) First of all, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation for
the statements this morning by the Secretary-General
and by the Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme.

I would like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union (EU) just
before lunch.

Denmark sees today's discussion as a very
welcome opportunity to consider how to further
support the efforts of the Security Council in relation
to its responsibilities to maintain international peace
and security in the context of climate change, and to
make this issue an integral part of the work of the
United Nations.

The Secretary-General's report (A/64/350)
explains how climate change can have an aggravating
effect on political tensions. The security implications
caused by climate change cannot be ignored. Climate-
related resource shortages, such as of water and fertile
land, are well recognized and powerful drivers of
conflict in many places around the world. In some
places, climate change may even threaten to undermine
Governments' ability to ensure stability and security
for their own people.

To find a sustainable solution to this global
threat, it is necessary to follow a multi-pronged
strategy that incorporates climate and security in the
work of all United Nations agencies and relevant
international, regional and national institutions. As
developing countries are the most vulnerable to climate
change, this issue must also be an integral part of the
international development cooperation. That includes
capacity-building to deal with security threats and
political tension caused by climate change. It also
includes immediate activities to adapt to climate
change, as well as improved disaster preparedness and
warning systems. Mitigation actions must be started
without delay, including further development of
renewable energy sources and strategies on greening
economic development.
11-42397

 

Allow me here to also echo the words of the
Secretary-General this morning that we must seize the
opportunity at the Rio Conference next June to connect
the dots of energy security, food security, the
environment and climate change. We fully agree.

The efforts to promote global climate diplomacy
must also be further strengthened. All aspects of
climate change must be addressed through a dialogue
that can promote a coherent understanding of this issue
and a common vision of its solution. In that context,
we very much welcome the recent EU Foreign Affairs
Council conclusions to strengthen the EU's climate
diplomacy.

It is an important prerequisite in our efforts to be
efficient that we have access to relevant information on
developments related to climate change and the
security implications thereof. Denmark can therefore
lend its support to inviting the Secretary-General to
regularly report on these issues.

Most important, we must ensure a joint response
from the international community to the global
challenge of climate change, to secure international
peace and security. It is a challenge we all face and that
we can only overcome together. It is our hope that the
debate today will be an important step forward in that
process.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.


