Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to start by thanking Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi
for his briefing and by expressing my appreciation for
his efforts and those of his team to promote the work of

the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006).

China has always believed that sanctions are not the
goal ofresolutions, nor a measure ofprogress in the work
of the Committee. Under the current circumstances,
the Committee should conduct its work in a balanced
and objective manner. It should tackle such sensitive
issues as individual violations of Council resolutions,
both in terms of ensuring the implementation of those
resolutions and in supporting and facilitating the
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action so as to prevent the possibility of any measures
adding to the complications of implementation. In that
spirit, China will take part in the Committee's various
efforts in a responsible manner, while encouraging it to
play its due role.

In July, the Council adopted resolution 2231
(2015), which endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action agreed on between the P5+1 and Iran on
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is a good plan of action
in that it is conducive to maintaining the international
non-proliferation regime and promoting peace and
stability in the Middle East, thus having a positive
impact on the settlement of other international and
regional issues. It is to be hoped that all parties will
work in concert to implement it.

Agreement on the Plan of Action, however, is
only the first step towards a proper settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue. What is more important is the
follow-up. The Iranian nuclear issue itself is extremely
complicated, with many problems that have to be
addressed in the Plan of Action's implementation, and
no precedent to draw on. It should be anticipated that
in a decade-long period of implementation, various
questions, difficulties and challenges will arise. It is
China's hope that all the parties will continue to try
to meet one another halfway while understanding and
accommodating one another. It is essential to stick to
the principles of synchronization and reciprocity in
accommodating everyone's concerns. The pursuit of
one goal should not come at the expense of another,
lest balance and equity be lost. China is pleased with
the sound cooperative momentum being maintained
between the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) and Iran. We encourage Iran to further
strengthen its communication and cooperation with
the Agency and, in line with the road map signed with
the IAEA, solve all the outstanding issues as soon as
possible.

China has continued to play a constructive
mediating role during the entire negotiation process. In
the future, China will also communicate closely with
all the other parties, while contributing to promoting
the smooth implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and playing a constructive role in
securing a final and comprehensive settlement of the
Iran nuclear issue.

