Mr. Pedersen (Norway): I will not read out my full
statement, but my delegation will circulate it.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains unresolved,
and recent developments give little cause for optimism.
Even so, our goal remains a two-State solution. There
is simply no other option and no time to waste. The
past year showed how destabilizing a lack of political
progress could be. The political process towards a
negotiated end to the conflict must be resumed.

Israel is forming a new Government. Norway
appeals to the new Government to make clear in words
and deeds its commitments to a two-State solution.
History has shown that negotiations are impossible
while a settlement-building programme on occupied
land is ongoing. The settlements are illegal.

Norway appeals to the Palestinian leadership
to form a unified and coherent Administration that
upholds the policy agreed with Israel under the Oslo
Accords to negotiate peacefully, reject violence and
respect Israel's right to exist.

The international community should stand ready
to assist the Israelis and the Palestinians within
the framework of an adjusted peace architecture.
Stakeholders in the region and beyond must unite in
supporting the process, which must build on previous
Security Council decisions, the agreements the parties
have entered into and, indeed, the Arab Peace Initiative.
Norway encourages the Security Council to assume
responsibility and to provide constructive assistance in
the process.

The role of the Ad-hoc Liaison Committee is
to underpin political efforts to achieve a two-State
solution by supporting the development of sustainable
institutions in preparation for Palestinian statehood.
Since the last Committee meeting in New York, held
on September 2014, the financial situation of the
Palestinian Authority (PA) has deteriorated further.
That critical situation requires that the parties and the
donors redouble their efforts. It is simply not an option to
let the Palestinian institutions wither. The Committee's
next meeting, scheduled for 27 May in Brussels, in
preparation for a ministerial meeting of the Committee
in New York in September, will address the fragile
financial situation of the Palestinian Authority and
take stock of the efforts to rebuild Gaza. The following
topics are still to be reviewed and examined by the
Committee: securing and maximizing the domestic
revenues of the PA, supporting institutional reforms
related to good governance and the efficiency of public
services, and providing incentives and facilitating trade
and private sector growth.

Another crucial issue, of course, is Gaza. We cannot
leave Gaza in its current condition in the aftermath of
the war - isolated from the world and abandoned. The
Gaza Strip is an integral part ofthe territory occupied in
1967 and is part ofa future State of Palestine. Israel and
the donors have a shared responsibility, along with the
Palestinian Authority, to transform Gaza. Progress has
been far too slow. Although the Gaza Reconstruction
Mechanism has become more effective and more donors
have been honouring their pledges, it is now urgent
to start the implementation of a larger reconstruction
project. Regional and internal rivalry must be set aside
to facilitate the reintegration of Gaza into a single
legitimate governing authority for Palestine.

It is time to call for an end to the violence in the
region. By now it must be clear to everyone that there
can be no military solutions to the many conflicts - not
in Syria, not in Libya, not in Yemen. The regional and
international parties concerned must intensify their
efforts to find a political solution to the armed conflict
in Syria. Norway supports all efforts to that end,
particularly the activities of United Nations Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Norway also calls for full
and safe access for humanitarian actors to all Syrian
people in need.

In Iraq, we have seen important progress in the
fight against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). Nevertheless, there is a long way to go before
Iraqi Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds feel they are part of a
joint project to create a genuinely inclusive Iraq. We
encourage the Iraqi Government to step up reconciliation
efforts and to give all of Iraq's constituent communities
a real stake in the future of the State.

The threat posed by ISIL, or Daesh, provides
an opportunity to seek resolution of the underlying
conflicts that have allowed jihadist extremists to
become a threat to everyone in the region and beyond.
A clear non-sectarian message should be sent to and
from all the regional capitals to counter the forces
fuelling sectarian fears and impulses both within and
between States across the region. One side alone cannot
bridge the gulf of mutual distrust.

To conclude, Norway welcomes the historic
framework agreement reached in Lausanne on 2 April
between Iran and the P5+1, which represents an
opportunity to resolve more than the nuclear issue alone.
That comprehensive agreement, yet to be finalized,
should set the region on a path towards cooperative
security for all.

