Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's important debate
and express our appreciation for the United Kingdom's
efforts aimed at supporting peace and reconciliation
processes all over the world. We also welcome the
focus in Lord Tariq Ahmad's statement on the issue of
peaceful coexistence among religious groups, which is
an important issue for my country.

The Middle East is going through a critical period
and complex challenges, but the current conditions
may be giving rise to an opportunity to build a new
regional order based on respect for sovereignty and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States if these
conditions are addressed with wisdom and patience
and if political processes that lead to firm positions
against extremism and terrorism are established. In
this vein, mediation and other reconciliation processes
can narrow differences and support reaching political
settlements consistent with international law and the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples, especially those
that reject sectarianism and subordination and that seek
strong and able national States.

The United Arab Emirates has always and
enthusiastically promoted the principles of tolerance
and dialogue so as to spare our region further conflicts
and wars. Tolerance is crucial for reconciliation. My
country does not promote tolerance as a mere slogan;
rather, it has made it a cornerstone for its domestic and
foreign policy, having undertaken numerous initiatives
and practical steps to that end. For example, since
declaring 2019 the Year of Tolerance, the United Arab
Emirates has launched more than 1,500 initiatives
to promote the values of peaceful coexistence and
religious and cultural exchange in the country and
abroad. Furthermore, as part of our efforts to spread
a message of openness and moderation, the United
Arab Emirates, in cooperation with UNESCO, has
supported the reconstruction of several archaeological
and cultural sites in Mosul that were destroyed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.

Accordingly, we urge the United Nations to continue
working to create an atmosphere of reconciliation among
local communities, especially those torn by conflict.
The Organization's rich experience in reconciliation,
stretching over seven decades, can be a useful source of
lessons learned and best practices shared on the role of
reconciliation, while taking into account regional and
local contexts.

Reconciliation can only be achieved if it is
accompanied by a comprehensive peacebuilding
process that includes the strengthening of the rule
of law, the preservation of national institutions and
reconstruction, and support for those affected by
conflict. In this regard, we urge the international
community to ensure the broad participation of all
members of society, especially women and young
people, due to their important role in advancing peace
processes and making them succeed.

We cannot ignore the active role that regional
organizations and neighbouring States can play in
mediation and reconciliation, as they have extensive
knowledge and expertise and share a direct interest
in ensuring regional stability. In this regard, we
appreciate the sincere efforts of the brotherly Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia aimed at unifying the Yemeni ranks,
as well as the pivotal role it played in the adoption of
the Riyadh Agreement, which has served to enhance
efforts to address the risks and threats Yemen is facing.
Similarly, the success of the mediation efforts in the
Sudan underscores the important role that regional
organizations and neighbouring States can play in
the peaceful settlement of conflicts. We therefore
urge the Security Council to step up its consultations
with regional organizations under Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we would like to note that
reconciliation processes do not succeed overnight
or through the mere signing of an agreement.
Reconciliation requires continuous and gradual efforts
aimed at healing the wounds ofconflict and the laying of
a solid foundation for peaceful coexistence. As we have
stressed elsewhere, parties to conflicts should engage
in mediation and reconciliation processes in good faith.
They must refrain from exploiting such processes for
political ends and stop misusing mass media to fuel
tensions. We reaffirm that the United Arab Emirates
is committed to spreading the principles of tolerance
and coexistence and to pursuing political solutions as
the best way to address the many challenges we all
face together.

