The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.
At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Representative for her comprehensive briefing and
express our appreciation for the tremendous work that
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is doing
in assisting the Iraqi authorities.

Poland welcomes that further progress has been
made in forming the Government, with the appointment
of the Ministers of the Interior, Defence and Justice,
and encourages the Iraqi political parties to continue
their positive engagement in order to complete the
process in the near future and to ensure that women
be included at all levels of decision-making processes.
We also commend the progress on the formation of the
Kurdistan Regional Government. We are encouraged
by the continued dialogue between Baghdad and Irbil
aimed at resolving outstanding disputes.

We highly commend the efforts undertaken by the
Iraqi authorities to restore stability and prosperity in
the country. We welcome in particular their continued
focus on combating corruption and on finding ways to
improve the environment for business and investment.
We encourage the Government of Iraq to make further
progress in that respect for the benefit of all Iraqis.

With regard to security issues, we highly commend
the decision of the Government of Iraq to bring the
popular mobilization forces under effective State
control. We consider that to be an important step
towards advancing security-sector reform aimed at
restoring sole responsibility for providing security in
the country to the State. The effective implementation
of this decision, as well as ensuring accountability
for noncompliance with the decree, will be critical.
In addition, we remain concerned about the continued
activity of Da'esh cells across numerous governorates,
which still pose a significant security threat.

After years of conflict, the path to stabilization
and reconciliation in Iraq will require time, extensive
reforms and the building of strong State institutions.
We believe that it is essential to meet the needs of all
Iraqis, including women, young people and members
of all religious and ethnic groups, including by
prioritizing the delivery of basic public services and
creating job opportunities.

Advancing stabilization and reconstruction
in areas recaptured from Da'esh is also of critical
importance. Rebuilding damaged infrastructure and
restoring effective administration, security and public
services are indispensable for creating conditions for
the voluntary, dignified and safe return of internally
displaced persons, as well as their local integration or
resettlement. It is also vital that internally displaced
persons be treated in a non-discriminatory manner,
irrespective of their perceived affiliation, and be
provided the assistance they require.

To conclude, I would like to stress the need to
support Iraq in its efforts to restore stability after years
of conflict in full respect for its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

