We thank Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Rosemary DiCarlo for the briefing. I want to indicate from the outset that the situation we are facing today is unfolding around Venezuela, not inside the country. The recent incidents of breach of Venezuela's sovereignty by foreign agents pose a direct threat to the country's peace, as well as to regional security and stability. Moreover, the situation is a clear violation of the Charter of the United Nations. To better illustrate the point of our meeting, I will summarize the facts. In the first days of May, an armed group of at least 60 people entered the sovereign land of Venezuela from the territory of neighbouring Colombia on two vessels. Forty-seven of them were arrested, among them two citizens of the United States of America, who confessed that their mission was to train forces in neighbouring Colombia for military operations in Venezuela and to take control of an airport in order to secure the transportation of President Nicolas Maduro to the United States. We also know about a contract signed on 16 October 2019 by a deputy to Juan Guaido and Jordan Goudreau, the chief executive officer of United States company Silvercorp, for some $200 million. The aim was "to remove the current Venezuelan regime". According to the information available, the operation was to be financed through Venezuelan sovereign funds expropriated by the United States from Caracas and kept in United States banks. After the imposter President claimed that he had nothing to do with the contract, another financial document dated 28 April 2020 that demanded Juan Guaid6e make a down payment of $1.5 million to Silvercorp was published just a few days prior to so-called Operation Gideon. We would like to question what role neighbouring Colombia had in that story. It is hard to imagine that the clandestine operation that originated on its soil was conducted without it having any knowledge of it. The United States authorities claim that they have nothing to do with it. We would be glad to believe them, but they fail to explain the fact that, according to the contract, two American citizens were planning to take the legitimate Venezuelan President hostage and bring him to the United States. For what purpose, may I ask? And how does it correlate with the constant all-options-are-on-the-table messages from the United States Government to Caracas, including the recent announcement of a $15 million bounty on President Maduro? Who else can be behind this mercenary adventure? Nepal, as Mr. Pompeo once said regarding another issue? The facts, as provided to the Council by the Permanent Representative of Venezuela in his letter of 13 May, are self-evident. Fortunately, the invasion was exposed and countered by the Venezuelan armed forces. As a result, a significant number of firearms were confiscated, including high-calibre weapons, all of which were meant to be used to trigger internal chaos and take over critical infrastructure and State institutions. It was an act of aggression and must be condemned. The Venezuelan Government has warned numerous times that preparations were being made for armed attacks and paramilitary groups were being trained in neighbouring countries. Let me recall that the Security Council "condemns any State which persists in permitting or tolerating the recruitment of mercenaries, and the provision of facilities to them, with the objective of overthrowing the Governments of States Members of the United Nations" (resolution 239 (1967), para. 2). That was a direct quote from resolution 239 (1967), which appears to have been grossly violated in this situation, as have the Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States, adopted by the General Assembly in 1981. Unfortunately, the United States has a history of treating the whole of South America as its backyard, in accordance with the Monroe Doctrine, mothballed for some time until the United States Administration decided to give it a second chance. The Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba in 1961, overthrowing Salvador Allende in Chile in 1973 and the 1986 Iran-Contra file in Nicaragua are just a few examples. Today Venezuela is on the United States menu, and our American colleagues do not even make an effort to deny it. It is exactly because of this that the recent adventure of Silvercorp is especially alarming. And we cannot forget the troubling context - the so-called counter-narcotics operation in the Caribbean, which was in fact a military operation following the announcement of the bounty for President Maduro. We want to ask today what the real aim of the American Navy parade in the Caribbean is. Are there more mercenaries on the ground in Venezuela? Who is responsible for attacks on Venezuelan critical infrastructure, including electricity networks? We also hope Washington fully realizes the risks of incidents when deploying the USS Lassen, USS Preble and USS Farragut in an area where Iranian oil tankers are involved in legal activity near Venezuela. I also want to use this opportunity and put a question to our European colleagues, who hastily recognized the imposter President two years ago. How do they see his role now that his role in this attempted coup d'etat - let us call things by their names - has become so evident? How can the legitimate Venezuelan authorities engage in negotiations with him after this? The absolute majority of the international community rejects military or subversive actions as an instrument in international relations. We appeal to all participants in today's discussion to unequivocally condemn the invasion attempt on Venezuelan sovereign territory. It is time for all of us to speak in support of the right of Venezuelans to solve their political disagreements themselves, including their right to choose their own leaders, in line with the Constitution of the country. The Russian Federation will continue to do its utmost to help Venezuelans in that endeavour. We urge everyone to join us and to refrain from dictates, ultimatums, sanctions or coercive measures with regard to this or any other country. With this in mind, we have prepared a draft Security Council press statement to address the above-mentioned issues. It reads as follows: "The members of the Security Council discussed the latest developments in and around the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. "The members of the Security Council rejected the use or threat of use of force, as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations, reaffirmed relevant resolutions on the condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and on the use of mercenaries. "The members of the Security Council called for the current situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to be resolved through a dialogue by Venezuelans, without interference, through peaceful and political means, in line with Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, within the framework of its national Constitution and in full respect of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Venezuela." We believe that such a short, politically neutral and concise text will raise no substantial objections from the Council members. We will distribute it immediately after my statement.
