Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras)(interpretation from Spanish): The last report of the International
Commission of Inquiry, established by Security Council
resolution 1013 (1995), contributes to clarifying the
reports that have been repeatedly advanced by the
Government of Rwanda and various human rights
protection organizations on the existence of operations
related to the sale or provision of arms and related

 

mate'riel to former Rwandan government forces, in violation
of the embargo imposed by the relevant resolutions of this
Council.

It is clear that the illegal flow of arms and the military
training of those Rwandan elements represent not only a
danger to the peace and internal stability of Rwanda, but
also to the peace, security and stability of the entire Great
Lakes region. For this reason, my delegation considers that
the establishment of the International Commission of
Inquiry has been a very important step towards the
containment of those operations and a measure to prevent
the possibility in Rwanda of a new genocide occurring,
along with a humanitarian disaster, such as it experienced
in the recent past.

We also consider that, given the invaluable work of
the Commission, the Council should strengthen its mandate
so that it can carry out a thorough investigation of all
reports, past and present, on the sale and provision of arms
to elements of the former Rwandan government forces. To
this end, the Commission must continue to have the
effective cooperation of the entire international community.
Those Governments that are found to be implicated in the
alleged violations of the arms embargo must lend their full
cooperation to the Commission's investigations. It is also
necessary that the Governments of the Great Lakes region
observe the commitments undertaken in the Tunis
Declaration of 18 March of this year. In this regard, we
wish to emphasize the full cooperation offered to the
Commission by such countries as Seychelles in the
investigation of arms sales.

Given the important role played by the Commission of
Inquiry for the achievement of peace, security and stability
in the Great Lakes region, and bearing in mind the
imperative need for all States, especially those of that
region, to effectively implement the embargo on arms and
military supplies imposed by this Council and to observe
the principles of international law and of the United Nations
Charter, while avoiding at all times the use of their
territories by armed groups to launch attacks against
another State, my delegation voted in favour of the
resolution just adopted by this Council.

