Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting today. I remember that, in the aftermath of
the horrific events of 11 September 2001, you, Sir,
were among the first of the world's leaders to call for
coordinated global action against terrorism. Your
commitment to countering terrorism is well known,
and your choice of subject for this thematic debate,
made before the recent appalling attacks in Mumbai,
shows that your vision remains and that your
commitment to this vital cause is unwavering.

Across the world, many thousands of innocent
people of all races and faiths have been victims of
terrorism. These are criminal acts for which there is no
justification, and the Council rightly denounces the use
of terror in pursuit of political aims.

The attack in Mumbai at the end of last month
was an attack on us all. Democracy in India is vibrant,
and Mumbai is one of the world's most diverse cities.
The terrorists responsible seemed to be intent on
destroying democracy and diversity. We must all focus
on helping the Government of India in whatever ways
we can to investigate these attacks and bring those
responsible to justice.

This is now a sensitive time for the region. We
look to the leaders of Pakistan and India to work with
each other. The words of their leaders, as responsible
statesmen, are important to show their determination
that the terrorists will not further divide their two
countries. We welcome the initial steps taken by
Pakistan in the past few days. We urge the Government
of Pakistan to cooperate with the Indian investigation,
and we urge the two of them to work together in
bringing those responsible to justice.

Terrorism threatens international peace and
security, and that means that the Security Council has a
role to play. We must be robust in our practical
responses. Through national and coordinated
international action, we must disrupt terrorist networks
and deny terrorists the safe havens and funds that they
need in order to operate. The United Nations sanctions
against Al-Qaida and the Taliban are important tools.
In resolution 1822 (2008), we improved the procedures
for listing and de-listing individuals in order to address
concerns that have been raised and to ensure that the
sanctions list is as up to date and effective as possible.

The United Nations also has an important role to
play in helping build Member States' capacity to tackle
terrorism. The Counter-Terrorism Committee - which,
Mr. President, is very ably chaired by your Ambassador
here - has, where requested, assessed the counter-
terrorism capabilities of individual Member States and
helped Member States to improve them. Recently, we
have seen much closer cooperation among the various
committees dealing with terrorism to promote capacity-
building in United Nations Member States and for the
effective implementation of all Security Council
resolutions aimed at countering terrorism.

My country is playing a full role. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
recently visited London as part of its programme of
visits for a full exchange on how we in the United
Kingdom tackle terrorism. That was the first such visit
to a permanent member of the Security Council.

The CTED team saw how we are revising and
developing our own counter-terrorism strategy to build
on successes and to prepare us for new challenges.
Central to the development of our strategy has been to
establish an Office for Security and Counter-Terrorism
to develop and implement the strategy and to
coordinate efforts across Government - at the

community level, at the national level and
internationally - to deliver the impact we need.

We have increased our resources devoted to
combating terrorism in the police and intelligence
agencies. These new resources have been used to
disrupt terrorist conspiracies in my country and
overseas. Since the beginning of last year, 81 people
have been found guilty of terrorism-related offences in
33 major cases. We are also working to counter
radicalization within our communities at home, and we
are developing a joint counter-radicalization
programme with the Government of Pakistan so that
we can share with each other the lessons we are
learning.

Sanctions, law enforcement action and capacity-
building are vital, but they are still not enough. We
need to show that, where there are justified grievances,
they will be addressed by political means. We cannot
allow disputes to persist so that they are used as
pretexts for terrorism. Over the long term, we have to
continue to improve access to justice, tackle political
disenfranchisement and develop better educational and
vocational opportunities. Those are important goals in
their own right. They also address issues that can help
prevent vulnerable individuals in vulnerable
communities from being lured into violent extremism.

The international community has to address the
other conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.
Restoring stability to countries and regions mired in
conflict, strengthening human rights, empowering
individuals and promoting the role of women in
society - again, these are all worth doing in their own
right, but they also remove the pretexts that terrorists
use to justify their actions.

Thank you, Mr. President, for giving us the
opportunity once again to review our work in this vital
area. Permit me to add that I would like to associate the
United Kingdom with the statement to be made shortly
by the representative of France on behalf of the
European Union.

