Mr. Biden (United States of America): I
appreciate your indulgence, Mr. President, in allowing
me to trespass more on your time, if not your patience.
I also truly appreciate the candour with which all the
members ofthe Security Council have spoken today.

I would like, in my capacity as a member of the
Foreign Relations Committee and on behalf of Senator
Helms, to re-issue the invitation, to which the
representative of Mali made reference, to come to

S/PVAZAS

 

Washington again. We hope the Security Council
would be willing to do that. It is an open invitation. We
learned a great deal from the Council's presence, and
members were very, very helpful to those of us in the
United States Senate who are very supportive of the
United Nations in making the case - a case that is
obvious on its face to all members of the Council but
that is less than obvious to some of my colleagues -
as to why the United Nations is such an important
body, particularly as it relates to the United States and
from the United States perspective. I hope members
will be willing to come back. This is my second trip
here in about 12 months - plus the Council's trip to
Washington.

I want also to thank Council members for their
collective understanding of our position. As I said once
before, I apologize for having to play out before the
Council our internal dilemma as it relates to our
commitment to the United Nations - and that is a
binding commitment and a lasting commitment.
Nonetheless, there have been some bumps in the road
in terms of our internal domestic politics. I also want to
thank members for their statements regarding a
willingness to be flexible. I assure them that I for one
am inclined to be, and desire to be, very flexible.

I want Ambassador Levitte, along with the
representatives of the United Kingdom and of the
Netherlands, to understand that I fully appreciate the
contribution of the European Union not only to the
United Nations, but also to the Balkans in general and
to Bosnia and Herzegovina in particular. It would be
presumptuous of me to do this, but if Ambassador
Levitte would like, I could send him copies of some of
my floor speeches in the United States Senate making
the case that the European Union is carrying the bulk
of the responsibility on the ground, and economically
as well. We appreciate the recognition and
understanding expressed in the statements of France,
the United Kingdom and the Netherlands that this may
be necessary in the light of the proximity of the
problem to their interests.

We also understand the burden that has been
imposed - a burden that is not often recognized in the
United States; we focus on our own burdens, as every
country tends to do - as a consequence of the
significant number of refugees that have flooded into
Germany, France and many other European nations. I
want to assure members that I appreciate and
understand, and my Government appreciates and
understands, that the bulk of the commitment is being
made by the European Union.

We also want to thank those, including the
representative of China and the President in his
capacity as the representative of the Russian
Federation, who spoke of a desire and willingness to be
flexible regarding the scale of assessments. I am
confident of one thing: that if there is any significant
reform, there will be a significant increase in the
prospect that the United States Government, and the
United States Congress in particular, will not only meet
its obligations, but will understand that its future lies in
increasing its voluntary commitment.

I thank our Canadian friend. I am a student of
Canadian politics. Both my sons are with me today.
Both of them are practising lawyers, and I might add
that one of them is about to commit to six months to a
year in Pristina with the United States Department of
Justice. Not only do we watch Canada and consider it a
great friend and neighbour, but I am quick to say that
my sons, on their mother's side, are related to a
number of Canadians. So I appreciate the distinction
made by the representative of Canada between what we
are bound to do and what we voluntarily do. We
appreciate that very much.

With regard to the comments made that the
United States should not act unilaterally, should pay its
bills in full and should not make contributions
contingent on reform, I would suggest that we want
both to pay our fair share and to work with others on
meaningful reform. Again, as I said, I am technically
speaking for my Government now, but one thing I do
not do is speak for the United States Congress. There is
no living human being capable of doing that; the Lord
Almighty would have difficulty today. And with a 50-
50 split in the United States Senate about to take place,
as my grandfather would say, with the grace of God
and the goodwill of the neighbours, we may very well
be able to reach some consensus on these issues in our
Congress. But we want to do both: we want to
participate in meaningful reform and we want to pay
our fair share.

In terms of the contributions to United Nations
expenses being based on the ability to pay, I would
suggest that an international organization of the
consequence of this one cannot fully meet its potential
without everyone in the organization having a
significant investment in it based upon their capacity

S/PV.4245

 

and capability; I would argue that gross domestic
product is not the only basis upon which to determine
that. I know that the representative of France, in his
previous capacity, has heard all those discussions of
the views of the United States about additional burdens
it undertakes in our collective interest. I will not repeat
any of them because it would be inappropriate, but will
only say that we appreciate the comments relating to
flexibility. I for one and, I know, my Government are
also prepared to be flexible, although I cannot speak
for the entire United States Congress.

I would like to make one other point before I
really do trespass on members' patience too much. I
was impressed by the comments made by the
representatives of Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Tunisia and Ukraine: all of them
spoke to the report of Jacques Paul Klein. Three things
impressed me very much. One was their appreciation
of the report; the second was the fact that there seemed
to be an overwhelming consensus that it accurately
reflected what was happening on the ground; and the
third was that they all seemed to suggest something
that my Government feels very strongly: that there is a
need for more patience, that progress has been made
but that much more needs to be made, and that there
must be a commitment to the practical requirements of
implementing Dayton - that is, having a police force
that is not corrupt and is capable; having a court
system that functions; and having war criminals
indicted and brought to trial. With one or two
exceptions on the last point, there seems to be a pretty
wide consensus here, expressed very cogently by my
friend from Jamaica.

I quite frankly wish that all my colleagues in the
United States Congress could have heard all members'
comments and replies to Mr. Klein. One of the things
that my Administration and I have been counselling our
colleagues in the United States Congress is patience.
We have come a long way. This is an incredible
opportunity to do something that has not been done in
the history of the modern nation-State in Europe: to
integrate the Balkans fully within Europe. It is the
ultimate solution. It is painful; it is timely. We
understand, again, that most of the pain is being borne
by our European friends. We understand that most of
the obligation is being borne by our European friends.

I can assure members, as one member of the
United States Senate and Congress - and as a senior
member with some little bit of influence in that small

pond called the Senate - that I believe that we will
maintain United States commitment, and that we will
maintain, along with the Council, patience to bring to
fruition what is ultimately necessary. As a friend of
mine, a local politician in my home state who has no
knowledge of international affairs, said to me, "Joe, if
the water does not flow because the public works
commissioner is not in place, if the traffic lights do not
function, and if you cannot arrest a man for beating his
wife or stealing from the local shop-owner, you can
have no government in place". These are very, very
basic functional requirements to put in place when we
separate all the high-minded rhetoric that we all utter
about peace and security in the Balkans.

I want, on behalf of my Government, to thank
Jacques Klein for what he has done.

I would end with a caution: I would not make any
commitment that we will be out by 2002. We must stay
as long as is required, because it may not be possible to
go back and try to fix what would be more broken if
we left, at least within the timeframe of my career. And
I would like to see this end nobly within the timeframe
of my career 4 which, ifI speak much longer, will be
very much foreshortened.

I thank the President and all members for their
indulgence. Flexibility will be the word that I take
from here and that I make sure that my colleagues
understand full well.

