Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
always attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria, supports the international
community in increasing humanitarian assistance
to the Syrian people and supports the active work of
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and other international humanitarian agencies. China
has also provided Syria with food, medicine, education,
training, public services and other assistance through
multilateral and bilateral channels and is committed
to improving the humanitarian situation there and
reducing the suffering of the Syrian people.

Regarding the establishment of a Syrian cross-
border humanitarian relief mechanism, China has had
consistent reservations. We have always advocated the
need for any operation to respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned. The
Syrian Government has the primary responsibility
for improving the humanitarian situation in Syria and
we should prioritize the provision of humanitarian
assistance from within Syria. Cross-borderhumanitarian
relief is a special relief mechanism adopted in specific
circumstances. It should be evaluated in a timely
manner in light of the developments on the ground.
This mechanism must ultimately be adjusted.

In the meantime, cross-border humanitarian
Operations should also strictly follow international
law and the United Nations guiding principles on
humanitarian relief, based on Security Council
resolutions. It is essential to strengthen overall
supervision and ensure fairness, neutrality, credibility
and increased transparency. Relevant relief operations
must be coordinated with the Syrian Government so as
to effectively prevent relief supplies from falling into
the hands of terrorist organizations or being diverted
for other purposes.

China has been making active efforts to promote
consensus on the issue of cross-border humanitarian
relief in Syria among all parties. We regret that the
parties failed to reach agreement on the extension.
As a result of the aforementioned reasons, China was
compelled to vote against draft resolution S/2019/961.

Regarding the differences among parties on
Syrian humanitarian issue, they should be addressed
fundamentally through the Syrian political process. We
urge the parties to continuously strengthen mutual trust
and cooperation in order to jointly create conditions
favourable to the comprehensive political settlement of
the Syrian issue.

