Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I must say that our
discussions with Nikolay Mladenov and the briefings
he presents belong to the most depressing exercises
undertaken by the Security Council.

As our South African colleague reminded us, this
organ was created for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We have international law as an
instrument for maintaining peace and security, and the
United Nations has created the instrument of Security
Council resolutions, which are binding law, for the
same purpose. What we have heard today in Nikolay
Mladenov's briefing and around the table has been all
about the violation of international law and resolution
2234 (2016). We have heard nothing about steps that
have been taken to actually implement that resolution.

Today, just a few days before the Israeli elections,
a new element has been added. We have heard our
American colleague tell us that the United States is now
violating resolution 497 (1981) by recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the Golan Heights. That comes a year
and a half after a violation of resolution 478 (1980), on
Jerusalem and the establishment of embassies there.

In a few minutes, we will hear our Israeli and
Palestinian friends deliver statements that will be full
of accusations against one another and how each is
violating international law. I would ask them to do as
I have done by putting their speeches aside and telling
us how they are implementing resolution 2234 (2016).
What is the Israeli Government doing to implement that
resolution? How is it stopping the settlements? What
is it doing to agree with Jordan on how to ensure calm
on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount? I would
ask our Palestinian colleague to focus his statement on
how his Government will end the constant incitements
and provocations, the inflammatory rhetoric and, in
particular, the missile attacks on Israel. Germany
strongly condemns the latest incident, in which
innocent Israeli citizens have fallen victim to rockets
fired from Gaza.

Again, we appeal for respect for international
law, but not as a goal in and of itself. We believe that
international law is the best way to protect civilians and
allow them to live in peace and security and without
fear of Israeli bulldozers or Hamas rockets.

