The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of November, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Sergey V. Lavrov,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of October 1999. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing our
deep appreciation to Ambassador Lavrov for the great
diplomatic skill and effectiveness with which he conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Election of five members of the International Court of
Justice (S/1999/939, S/1999/940/Rev.1 and Add.1* and S/1999/941)

The President: The Security Council will now
proceed to the election of five members of the International
Court of Justice, in accordance with Article 13 of the
Statute of the International Court of Justice, to fill the five
seats which will become vacant on 5 February 2000 on the
expiry of the terms of office of the following Judges:
Mr. Gilbert Guillaume (France), Ms. Rosalyn Higgins
(United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland),
Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren (Venezuela), Mr. Raymond
Ranjeva (Madagascar) and Mr. Christopher G.
Weeramantry (Sri Lanka).

The consolidated and updated list of candidates
nominated by national groups is contained in documents
S/1999/940/Rev.l, which reflects all the information
concerning notifications received regarding such
nominations in order to facilitate the election for all
representatives. Members of the Council will note, in this
connection, that the Secretariat reissued document
S/l999/940/Add.1 for technical reasons in order to correct
the references to the United States of America by replacing
them with references to New Zealand. Therefore, it is the
national group of New Zealand and not the national group
of the United States of America which has nominated Mr.
Christopher G. Weeramantry. This correction has been
reflected in document S/l999/940/Rev.l. Document
S/ 1999/941 contains the curricula vitae of the candidates.

I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
the fact that the Permanent Mission of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo informed me that the national
group of the Democratic Republic of the Congo had
decided to withdraw its nomination of Mr. Balanda
Mikuin-Leliel for election to the International Court of
Justice. Since Mr. Balanda Mikuin-Leliel was nominated
by the national group of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, his name has thus been removed from the ballot
papers.

The Security Council also has before it a
memorandum by the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/1999/939, describing the present composition
of the Court and setting out the procedure to be followed
in the conduct of the election.

I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the International
Court of Justice,

"Those candidates who obtain an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly and in
the Security Council shall be considered as elected."

The required majority in the Security Council is eight
votes.

If more than five candidates obtain the required
majority, according to the procedure which has been
followed in the past and which is set forth in paragraph
14 of the Secretary-General's memorandum, a new vote
will be held on all the candidates.

This rule will also apply to any subsequent ballots,
if the number of candidates obtaining the absolute
majority is greater than the number of vacancies
remaining. If, on the other hand, in the first ballot the
number of candidates obtaining the absolute majority is
less than five, the Council will proceed to a second ballot
on the remaining vacancies, and balloting will continue in
the same manner until five of the candidates have
obtained the required majority of votes.

The voting will be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive
a ballot paper containing the names of all the candidates.
No withdrawal will be accepted once the ballot papers
have been distributed. However, it would be possible to
withdraw between ballots. Members of the Council will
be requested to place an "X" in the boxes next to the
names of the candidates for whom they wish to vote.

 

Only those candidates whose names appear on the ballot
paper are eligible for election.

I should like to remind members of paragraph 11 of
the Secretary-General's memorandum, which specifies that

"Each elector may vote for not more than five
candidates on the first ballot". (5/1999/93'9, para. 11)

Any ballot paper containing votes for more than five
names will be considered invalid. When five candidates
have obtained the required majority of votes, I shall
communicate the result to the President of the General
Assembly, and I shall request the Council to remain in
session pending the receipt from the President of the
General Assembly of the result of the voting in the
Assembly.

The Council will now proceed to draw lots to select
two delegations to serve as tellers.


The President: The names of the delegations of
France and the United States of America have been drawn.
I request each of those delegations to appoint one member
to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Colas (France)
and Ms. Ari (United States of America) acted as
tellers.


The President: I should like to say, on this occasion,
that we have in our midst two persons - Mr. Franklin
Berman and Mr. Robert Rosenstock - who served as
tellers when elections for the International Court of Justice
were held for the first time. I welcome this fact as a
symbol of the continuity of the Security Council's work.

May I take it that the Council is now ready to proceed
with the election of five members of the International Court
of Justice?

It is so decided.

I request the Conference Officer to distribute the ballot
papers.

Members of the Council should place an "X" in the
boxes next to the names of the five candidates for whom

they wish to vote.
>l< >l< >l<

The President: I take it that all the members of the

Council have now voted, and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

>l<>l<>l<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind the Council that, as we
agreed during our consultations, the ballots will not be
counted until it has been verified that the ballot papers in
the General Assembly have been collected. The Council
will remain in session pending the receipt of that
information.


The President: I have now been informed that the
ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly.

The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.

As agreed in our consultations, there will be two
independent countings of the ballots, one by each teller.

The Council will remain in session.

>l< >l< *


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Required majority: 8

Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Gilbert Guillaume 15
Ms. Rosalyn Higgins 15
Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren 15
Mr. Raymond Ranjeva 14
Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh 9
Mr. Christopher Gregory Weeramantry 6

Accordingly, the following candidates have obtained
the required majority of votes in the Security Council:
Mr. Gilbert Guillaume, Ms. Rosalyn Higgins, Mr.

 

Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren, Mr. Raymond Ranjeva and Mr.
Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh.

I shall communicate the result of the vote to the
President of the General Assembly in writing.

I request the Council to remain in session while we
wait for the President of the General Assembly to inform
the Council of the result of the voting in the Assembly.

>l< >l< >l<


The President: I should like to inform the members
of the Council that I have just received from the President
of the General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the 45th
plenary meeting of the General Assembly, held today
for the purpose of electing five members of the
International Court of Justice, the following candidates
obtained an absolute majority of votes in the General
Assembly: Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh, Mr.
Gilbert Guillaume, Ms. Rosalyn

Higgins, Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren and Mr. Raymond
Ranjeva."

As both the Security Council and the General
Assembly have agreed on the same candidates, the
distinguished jurists Mr. Awn Shawkat Al-Khasawneh,
Mr. Gilbert Guillaume, Ms. Rosalyn Higgins,
Mr. Gonzalo Parra-Aranguren and Mr. Raymond Ranjeva
have been elected as members of the International Court

of Justice for a term of office of nine years, beginning on
6 February 2000.

I should like to congratulate them and wish them
every success in the high office to which they have been

elected.

I should also like to thank the tellers for their
assistance.

The Security Council has thus concluded its business
for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 1.15 pm.

