Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Let me at the outset, Sir, congratulate you sincerely
on your accession this month to the presidency of the
Security Council for the second time. I thank you for
the crucial role you are playing in the Security Council
and for having convened this debate on the situation in
the Middle East.

My country fully endorses the statement to be made
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
as well as those already made on behalf of the League
of Arab States and the Non-Aligned Movement.

For more than six decades now, the Council has been
seized of the tragedy of the Palestinian people. Israel
continues its violations of international law by denying
Palestinians their rights, and the Palestinians continue
to suffer. There can be no solution to the conflict so
long as the resolutions of the United Nations affirming
the rights of the Palestinian people to establish their
own State remain unimplemented. That has a negative
impact on the Middle East region as well as on peace
and security around the world.

It also allows Israel to pursue its policy of
colonization, to hold thousands of prisoners and to
violate the sacred nature of the holy sites. It also
continues to displace Palestinian citizens, particularly
in Jerusalem, and to implement its policy of apartheid
and ethnic cleansing. All this is taking place before the
very eyes of the Security Council, which has failed to
shoulder its responsibilities and putting an end to Israeli
occupation, which may well be the only one to outlive
the era of racial segregation.

The Israeli occupation continues, as do the
daily violations of Palestinian rights, including
displacements, expulsions, arbitary arrests, abuse of
prisoners and ongoing settlement activities seeking
to change the demographic situation on the ground by
confiscating and destroying the houses of Palestinians,
expanding the settlements, detaining and mistreating
Palestinian demonstrators. Moreover, the blockade of
Gaza continues.

The United Nations and the international community
have repeatedly denounced those arbitrary practices,
including last month (see S/PV.7032) when the Council
was briefed by Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, who reported on
the aggression that cost the lives of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including an officer
at the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in the course of
an act of aggression perpetrated by Israel. There have
been 282 Israeli infiltration operations, according to
the United Nations, and Israel has displaced some 176
Palestinians, including 87 children without any explicit
condemnation from the Council. Israel is accelerating
the pace of its aggression against holy sites through
almost daily violations perpetrated by Israeli settlers.
Nor should we forget the serious decision taken by
the commanding general of the occupying authorities
to give the Jews access to the holy Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the attempt to build a synagogue in front of the
Al-Marwani Mosque in order to Judaize that holy site.

It is time for the Council to renounce its policy of
laissez-faire. It needs to be more effective in addressing
the Palestinian question. It is high time for the
Council to realize that the ongoing Israeli occupation
constitutes and has constituted through the decades
an ongoing threat to international peace and security.
My country, which was the first sponsor of the Arab
Peace Initiative, calls on the Council to honour its
commitments and to shoulder its historic humanitarian
and other responsibilities so that the world may not
lose hope for peace and its confidence in our common
international institutions.

In Syria, the Syrian regime continues its campaign
of extermination against the Syrian people, using every
kind of conventional and non-conventional weapon and
killing more than 120,000 people and displacing more
than a quarter of the population of Syria. It has even
used chemical weapons against defenseless civilians
and continues to calmly proceed in such a manner that
the Council will be unable to counter its violations
or protect its citizens, which is a responsibility of the
Syrian regime itself, due to the repeated use of the veto.

The Council responded tardily and minimally to
the massacre at Ghouta, when the Syrian regime killed
more than 1,000 people using chemical weapons. The
response focused exclusively on chemical weapons
and minimized the cause of a people fighting for its
liberty to the sole issue of chemical weapons. Even
when the Security Council has discussed how to
deliver humanitarian assistance to those in need, it
has limited itself to adopting a presidential statement
(S/PRST/20l3/15).

The Council must be firm. It must adopt the
necessary resolutions that open the possibility of
imposing sanctions against anyone who would attempt
to carry out unprecedented moral blackmail by denying
critical humanitarian assistance to certain provinces
and cities. It is high time for the Security Council to
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people by not
allowing the Syrian regime to exploit the Council's
resolutions on the convening of conferences or the
elimination of chemical weapons as a delaying tactic.
If the Council does not take the requisite measures, it
could risk making the situation in Syria a perennial
issue on which the Council will have to meet month
after month, year after year, while Syrians continue to
die.

My delegation affirms the need to resolve the
situation in Syria immediately and definitively, without
limiting itself to considering the repercussions of
the Ghouta massacre and the elimination of Syrian
chemical weapons, as was affirmed at the ministerial
meeting of the League of Arab States in September.
Necessary measures also need to be taken to achieve
a ceasefire throughout Syrian territory by prohibiting
the use of military air assets, including missiles and
heavy weapons, and to adopt a ceasefire monitoring
mechanism under United Nations supervision.
Neither the Syrians nor the world will be able to
forget the indifference shown by the international
community in its failure to settle the Syrian crisis in a
radical and effective way. We reaffirm that the Syrian
regime and the forces that have plotted with it against
the Syrian people by poisoning them with chemical
weapons should not have a place in determining their
future. They need to be brought to justice. A special
tribunal needs to hold them accountable for the crimes
they have perpetrated, and all those who have soiled
their hands with the blood of innocents should be
brought to trial.

To conclude, we remind the Council of the
responsibilities incumbent upon its members for
ensuring the implementation of United Nations
resolutions on the establishment of zone free of nuclear
weapons and weapons of mass destruction in the
Middle East. I recall that the Council failed in its duty
to convene a special international conference to that end
in 2012. This year is drawing to a close without there
a glimmer of hope that it will be convened. This will
lead peace-loving people of the region to question the
validity of international resolutions if the international
community is incapable of implementing through
its institutions the most straightforward decisionto
convene a conference on which everyone is agreed.

We urge the members of the Council to renew and
to restore the confidence of people around the world in
institutions associated with international joint actions
headed by the Council. Members need to remain
committed to safeguarding international peace and
security in a resolute and timely manner.

