Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to congratulate
France on its impeccable leadership of the Security
Council for the month of March. We wish Germany
every success in April, and I would like to thank both
delegations for organizing this important briefing.
We also welcome the presence of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait
and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
France and Poland, and acknowledge and appreciate the
important briefings by Mr. Maurer, Mr. Lowcock, and
Professor Modirzadeh.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea notes with
concern the increasing complexity of armed conflicts
and the growing challenge they pose to civilians and
to humanitarian assistance for the 139 million people
who need it. We thoroughly deplore the persistence of
armed conflicts in which civilians are always the worst
affected. In that regard, we condemn the attacks on the
most vulnerable population groups - children, young
people, women, the disabled, refugees and displaced
persons. We are also outraged by the increasing attacks
on health workers and their facilities.

International humanitarian law recognizes the
principle of State sovereignty, which Equatorial
Guinea supports. States should play the leading role in
providing relief to communities and individuals under
their jurisdiction. However, if for any reason their
ability to do so is constrained, they can ensure that
those affected by the crisis have access to protection
and assistance through international humanitarian aid.
Respect for international humanitarian law should not
necessarily imply a lack ofrespect for State sovereignty.
On the contrary, the two concepts should be perfectly
compatible. International humanitarian law and
humanitarian principles are clear in that regard. For
that reason, Equatorial Guinea urges the parties to
ongoing armed conflicts to comply with international
humanitarian law, including the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols of 1977,
in order to prevent and limit devastating humanitarian
situations, the escalation of armed conflicts and
the radicalization of their victims, especially young
people. In that regard, we call on humanitarian actors
to respect the guiding principles of international
humanitarian assistance so that they are perceived as
neutral, independent and impartial service providers,
particularly in politically controversial environments.

At the global level, there has been significant
progress in the promotion of international humanitarian
law and humanitarian principles. The Security Council
has embedded humanitarian principles in several
resolutions on armed conflict and starvation, children
and armed conflict, Ebola in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the prevention and combating of the
financing of terrorism, among others that Equatorial
Guinea is honoured to have supported. The protection
of civilians in armed conflict is also integrated into
the mandates of many peacekeeping missions and the
training of forces participating in them. The Secretary-
General's reports on children and the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and their corresponding
lists are helping to generate greater awareness, traction
and results. That is still not enough, however, because
armed conflicts continue and their natures change.

Among the most serious challenges to the
promotion of international humanitarian law today,
three stand out - the politicization of humanitarian
activities, the resulting lack of trust in humanitarian
organizations and the unidirectional approach to this
important task. Humanitarian activities are politicized
when there is political pressure on humanitarian
organizations and States with regard to the financing
and use of humanitarian assistance and, in certain
cases, some counter-terrorism measures, owing to the
growing nexus between terrorism, armed conflicts
and transnational organized crime. As a result,
national authorities and non-State armed actors
distrust humanitarian assistance and its agents, and
increasingly resist the presence of certain humanitarian
actors, which leads to the imposition and exploitation
of restrictions on humanitarian activity.

The unidirectional approach to promoting respect
for international humanitarian law in all regions
and States limits their ownership. It is important
to remember that concepts similar to international
humanitarian law and many of its principles already
exist in many cultures. In Africa, there are Somali
war conventions and Fulani customs, among others,
that are part of African customary humanitarian law,
as described by legal scholars such as Yolande Diallo
and Emmanuel Bello, among others. In that connection,
efforts to promote, adhere to and ensure compliance
with international humanitarian law could be more
effective if we built on existing analogous principles
in order to encourage their ownership, recognition
and defence by local groups. Greater participation and
representation on the part of all regions and States in
developing and implementing that agenda is important.

In that regard, we also encourage support for the
implementation of African initiatives in that field such
as the 2009 African Union Convention for the Protection
and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa, the work of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union and the African Union Peace and
Security Strategy. We recognize and encourage the
increasingly important United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security as well as the
collaboration between the International Committee of
the Red Cross and such non-governmental organizations
as African Humanitarian Action.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms that, in order to
find lasting solutions to today's urgent humanitarian
situations, the root causes of armed conflicts, such as
underdevelopment, geostrategic ambitions, illegitimate
access to the natural resources of other States, the
unjust international order, inequality, marginalization
and social exclusion, inter alia, must be addressed.
Equatorial Guinea further reaffirms that, at all stages of
the humanitarian-assistance process, the politicization
of humanitarian assistance must be avoided.

As the interpretation of humanitarian principles is
difficult in practice, the need for critical discussion and
ongoing debate is essential. In this regard, we believe
that the strengthening of international humanitarian
law should contribute to respect for the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law in terms of the sovereignty, territorial
integrity of States, the self-determination of peoples
and non-intervention in the internal affairs of States.
Any humanitarian intervention must have the consent
of the recipient country.

