Mr. Mladenovie (Yugoslavia): The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia is seriously concerned at the
escalation of ethnic Albanian terrorism, which has now
spread to Macedonia, threatening the security of the
broader region. The consistent efforts of the countries
of the region and the international community to
stabilize conditions and strengthen confidence are
being seriously jeopardized.

The latest armed attacks committed by ethnic
Albanian terrorists in the village of Tanusevci in
Macedonia have resulted in the loss of three lives. The
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as a neighbour
country, is following with particular attention the
developments in Macedonia. We fully support the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Macedonia. We
consider that the Government of Macedonia is entitled
to take all legitimate measures to preserve its territorial
integrity and stabilize the situation on its sovereign
soil. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia fully supports
the plan of action for resolving the crisis on the border
between Macedonia and Yugoslavia which the
Macedonian Government adopted on Monday and
Foreign Minister Srgjan Kerim outlined in his
statement just now.

My Government condemns most strongly the
latest armed terrorist attacks against the army of
Macedonia. It is evident that this is an attempt to
provoke a new conflagration in the Balkans in order to
achieve political goals by violence. We are faced with
the same problems on part of our own territory, on the
other side of the Yugoslav-Macedonian border. This
afternoon, a vehicle of the army of Yugoslavia ran over
a landmine activated by a remote-control mechanism
and planted by Albanian terrorists on the road near the
village of Orahovic in southern Serbia, outside of the
ground safety zone. In the explosion, two soldiers were
killed instantly, and two officers were gravely
wounded. I was informed prior to the beginning of this
meeting that one of the officers has succumbed to his
wounds and that the other is fighting for his life. It is
high time that resolute and concrete measures be taken
against Albanian extremism. It is obvious that all these
extremist actions are coordinated on a larger scale and
that they are a function of greater Albanian goals and
objectives.

Yugoslavia continues to be consistent in its
conviction that the troubles that beset the region can be
solved only in a peaceful way, through dialogue and
with full respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of all States. There is no denying that the
responsibility for the security situation in Kosovo and
Metohija lies squarely on the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), as provided for by Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999).

The tragic events in the village of Tanusevci on
one side, and the village of Orahovic on the other side
of the Yugoslav-Macedonian border, as well as those
that took place recently in the ground safety zone along
the administrative boundary of Kosovo and Metohija,
confirm in the most apparent way that the
demilitarization of Albanian armed groups has not been
carried out as provided for by Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). Likewise, the uncontrolled
crossing of armed extremist groups and weapons from
Kosovo and Metohija to southern Serbia and
Macedonia has not been stopped yet. Yugoslavia and
Macedonia, as democratic States, are fully entitled to
expect the Security Council to address a clear and
resolute message to Albanian extremists.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and its
democratically elected Government will continue to
call for a peaceful solution. We are convinced that this
is in the best interest of the stability of the region and
the development of good-neighbourly cooperation. The
recent signing of the agreement on the demarcation of
the State border between Yugoslavia and Macedonia is
a result of the efforts of our two countries to make a
contribution towards these goals.

We are convinced that the Security Council
should support the Macedonian Government in its
efforts to defeat the present attempts to destabilize its
country, thus contributing to the stability of the entire
region.

