Mr. Maboneza (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on Malaysia's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of June. Let me also congratulate the delegation of
Lithuania on the excellent work done during their
presidency in the month of May. I thank Judges Meron
and Joensen and Prosecutors Jallow and Brammetz for
their respective briefings.

The world commemorated the twentieth anniversary
of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda last year,
in April 2014, and marked the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) in November of the same
year. As the Tribunal is winding down, we express our
belief that the ICTR has played an important role in
the fight against impunity for mass atrocities, but also
produced a substantial body of jurisprudence, including
definitions of the crime of genocide, crimes against
humanity, war crimes and forms of responsibility,
such as superior responsibility. Most importantly, the
Tribunal established that the genocide that occurred
in Rwanda was against the Tutsi as a group, and also
ruled that acts of rape and sexual violence constitute
genocide if committed with the intent to destroy the
targeted group.

We note with satisfaction that, since the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2150 (2014) of 16 April 2014 on
the prevention and fight against genocide, reports on
the completion strategy of the ICTR use the correct
terminology, consistent with the ongoing jurisprudence
of the Tribunal, which refers to the specific ethnic
group that was the target of the genocide in Rwanda.
Indeed, as we have said and repeated in this Chamber,
the expressions "Rwandan genocide" and "genocide in
Rwanda", used by many of those around this table, are
unfortunately misused by deniers of all kinds to try to
confuse the Council and the whole world as to which
group was targeted by the genocide.

As we look forward to the conclusion of the Butare
case by the Appeals Chamber, which was unnecessarily
delayed, we note that the 93 individuals indicted for
genocide were mainly the masterminds of that crime,
as well as national and local leaders who were out of
reach of Rwandan justice, as they were international
fugitives. We regret, however, that nine fugitives are
still at large and reiterate our call to Member States,
especially those in our region, to collaborate in arresting
all remaining genocide fugitives, as per resolution 2150
(2014).

It is worth noting that those fugitives include
the tycoon Fe'licien Kabuga, whose son-in-law,
Paulin Murayi, is financially supporting the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda, a movement
that spread genocide ideology and engaged in related
activities in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the material evidence recently unveiled by the
Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we hope that his name, as well as others, will
soon be included on the United Nations list of sanctions,
as requested by my country.

Regarding the monitoring of the four cases referred
to national courts, we regret that the report under review
(S/2015/340, enclosure) and the oral statements that
were made this afternoon do not provide enough detail
on the status of those cases. While the procedures of
two cases referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013 are well
advanced, we are extremely concerned at the delays
encountered in the investigations into the two cases
referred to France in 2007, which are those ofWenceslas
Munyeshyaka and Laurent Bucyibaruta. We call on the
French authorities to expedite the investigations and
proceedings in both cases.

Rwanda has, on many occasions, expressed its
view that the ICTR archives, although the property of
the United Nations, should be located to Rwanda upon
completion of the mandate of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Indeed, the ICTR
records constitute an integral part of Rwandan history,
are vital to the preservation of the memory of the
genocide and will play a critical role in preserving
current and future generations from genocide denial
and revisionism. We hope that all stakeholders will
understand our request and act accordingly.

I will conclude by recalling that this year is the
twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Srebrenica.
Like the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, efforts
to address the genocide in Srebrenica have faced
similar problems, mainly related to delayed justice
and the scourge of genocide denial. Nonetheless, we
commend the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the ICTR and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for their
continued efforts for justice and accountability for
genocide and mass atrocities, and we hope that all legal
proceedings will be completed very soon to enable the
affected victims to turn the page on that dark period of
their history.

