Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this debate of the Council on Timor-
Leste. I welcome President Jose' Ramos Horta of
Timor-Leste to the Council and thank him for his very
important statement. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and for his report
(S/2009/72), which covers all key aspects of the
situation in Timor-Leste over the past six months.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of Thailand on behalf of
the Association of South-East Asian Nations.

My delegation concurs with the Secretary-
General's assessment that the reporting period marked
an important stage in Timor-Leste's return to normalcy
following the events of 11 February 2008, and
congratulates the people and Government of Timor-
Leste on their success in maintaining national security
and stability and in keeping the peace process on track
amid numerous difficulties. While taking note of the
increased poverty as a long-term challenge, demanding
even stronger determination and more effective
combined synergy, we highly appreciate the efforts
made by the Government of Timor-Leste to address
post-conflict issues, particularly those related to the
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and the
closure of 54 out of 63 IDP camps in Dili and Bacau;
to strengthen national reconciliation by creating
opportunities for all stakeholders to contribute to
solving issues of national interest; and to work in close
consultation with the United Nations, local partners
and the public to enhance its capacities and implement
socio-economic development programmes.

We commend the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for the activities
conducted within its mandate in helping to preserve
peace, sustain stability and promote development in the
country, especially those activities aimed at enhancing
Timor-Leste's institutional capacities by training staff,
increasing citizen participation, and strengthening
parliamentary oversight functions and security sector
reform, as requested by the Government of Timor-
Leste.
We are encouraged by the broad agreement that
the Government and UNMIT have reached on the
assumption, from this year, by the National Police of
Timor-Leste (PNTL) of policing responsibilities in line
with the Policing Arrangement. We share the
expectation that, with support from UNMIT, the PNTL
will be able, step by step, to take over its security
responsibilities.

We also welcome the Secretary-General's
medium-term strategy and benchmarks, which
incorporate national priorities and other planning
exercises such as the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, to help measure and track
progress in key areas, particularly improvement in
quality of life and employment opportunities for youth
in rural areas, thereby addressing the country's
underlying challenges.

In view of the need for the long-term stability of
Timor-Leste, we support the Secretary-General's
request to extend UNMIT's mandate for another 12
months at its current composition and strength. We
encourage UNMIT to make full use of its mandate to
continue working closely with the Government of
Timor-Leste and with other United Nations entities,
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
UNESCO, UNICEF, the World Food Programme and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, to effectively implement security and
development programmes in Timor-Leste.

Now that the peace and development process is in
the hands of the people of Timor-Leste, the country's
long-term security and stability depend on the
determination and the efforts of the Government and
all sectors of the population to move the current
process forward. We call upon all parties concerned in
Timor-Leste to actively participate in the ongoing
dialogue and to contribute to meeting the country's
challenges, first and foremost those relating to ensuring
the success of the local elections to be held this year.

Viet Nam has been and will remain by the side of
the people and the Government of Timor-Leste on their
path towards lasting peace and sustainable
development. We are prepared to share post-conflict
development experiences with Timor-Leste and to
enhance bilateral cooperation in fields where Viet Nam
has comparative advantages.

