Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Sir, to express to you
our appreciation for convening this meeting. Our
particular appreciation goes also to the Deputy
Secretary-General and to Mr. Malloch Brown,
Mr. Morris, Mr. Nabarro, Mr. Kastberg and
Mr. Kellenberger. We listened very attentively to their
briefings, and I should like to reiterate to them all that
we share their concerns. We strongly support them in
their efforts.

Before I continue, I should like to reiterate the
condolences expressed by Ms. Frechette to the
brotherly people of Algeria, who are facing a veritable
catastrophe as a result of the earthquake. I should like
also to thank the Secretary-General and the Deputy
Secretary-General for their prompt actions in dealing
with that disaster - as if the Arab region did not
already have enough disasters to deal with.

The Syrian Arab Republic has made every effort
to cooperate with the United Nations agencies
represented here today in order to address the severe
humanitarian crisis affecting the people of Iraq. We
have acceded to all the requests they made. In
particular, as I said earlier, we share their grave
concern vis-a-vis the lack of security and of law and
order in that country. We believe that it is necessary to
make every effort to deal with those issues, because,
failing that, it will be impossible to achieve the other
objectives set, as was eloquently pointed by the
representatives of the specialized agencies and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross.

As is well known, the Syrian Arab Republic has
sent a great deal of humanitarian relief supplies,
including medicine and foodstuffs, to the Iraqi people
through the specialized agencies. We are confident that
the contributions made by the people of Syria to their
Iraqi brethren will increase in the coming days.

Among the things that have greatly impressed us
as Arabs has been seeing Ms. Carol Bellamy, the
Executive Director of the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF), living with the people of Iraq and the
children of Iraq in the difficult circumstances they face.
We are confident that these efforts, supported by the
United Nations specialized agencies and humanitarian
agencies worldwide, will lead to the alleviation of the
plight of that people. We pay tribute to Ms. Bellamy
and to all the other specialized agencies that have
effectively contributed to the alleviation of the
suffering of the Iraqi people.

In this meeting we have among us the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and we would like to make reference to the
tragic situation of the Kuwaiti prisoners of war and
missing persons. We must not forget them, given the
fact that the news we have received through the media
is a cause for grave concern. We reaffirm anew that
there is a need to follow up on this humanitarian
question with all the attention it deserves.

I have two brief questions for Mr. Nabarro and
Mr. Kastberg. Of course, the World Food Programme
and the World Health Organization (WHO) are directly
supervising the supply of medical and foodstuffs to
Iraq under resolution 1472 (2003). What is their
assessment of what has been delivered to Iraq to date?
What are the bases for the choice of foodstuffs and
medical supplies, and what priority is being given to
their delivery to Iraq? We would like to know that in
order to be able to increase the contributions we can
make or that we can encourage through our
membership in the Council.

I have a question for Mr. Kastberg about the rate
of enrolment of students in elementary and secondary
schools. The looting that took place in Iraq has led to
veritable disasters in that aspect, in particular in the
elementary and secondary schools and in the
universities, which were thoroughly looted. What
percentage of students have gone back to school, and
what is required of the international community and of
the oil for food programme to meet the basic
requirements for restoring the educational system to an
acceptable level - a level that would ensure that
future Iraqi generations will not lose a whole school
year as a result of these developments?

