Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
26 August the United Nations compound in Abuja
suffered a serious attack, with colossal human
casualties. China strongly condemns this terrorist act
and expresses its condolences and sympathies to the
families of the deceased and to the wounded and their
families, and to the United Nations and the
Government of Nigeria. China will continue to work
with the international community in combating all
forms of terrorism.

I highly appreciate India's initiative in convening
today's open debate. I also welcome the statement by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

Since the United Nations peacekeeping
operations were launched more than 60 years ago, they
have become one of the important means for the
maintenance of international peace and security by the
United Nations. Lately United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been growing in scale, with ever-Wider
mandates and increasing challenges. I want to focus on
the following.

First, it is imperative to continue to adhere to Dag
Hammarskjold's three principles governing
peacekeeping. They constitute the premise and the
foundation for the smooth conduct of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and they must be adhered to.
On that basis, China approves and supports the
adoption of a prudent and responsible attitude in light
of developments and the necessary development and
improvement of the peacekeeping theories and
practices.
11-48151

Secondly, greater attention should be given to
integrated coordination between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Peacekeeping is an important
component of the peacemaking exercise, and greater
attention should be given and greater efforts be made
to address the issues at the root of conflicts, including
issues relating to economic and social development. In
peacekeeping it is imperative to formulate and
gradually improve transition and exit strategies and to
improve dovetailing with peacebuilding.

The third matter is effective implementation of
the mandate for the protection of civilians. In carrying
out this mandate in peacekeeping operations, there
should be stricter observance of Security Council
resolutions and the principle of neutrality by avoiding
siding with one particular party or becoming a party to
the conflict. Much less should we cause more civilian
casualties while implementing this mandate. We should
also respect the sovereignty of the countries concerned
and do more to improve the political process and
national reconciliation and give full play to the
political advantage of the United Nations.

Fourthly, we should improve capacity-building
for United Nations peacekeeping operations. We hope
that countries able to do so will increase their input and
provide the necessary resources and technical
guarantees for peacekeeping operations. We support
greater attention to strategic design in peacekeeping
operations, greater communications and coordination
with the countries concerned, improvement of logistic
mechanisms and optimizing resource allocation, and
improvement of the effectiveness and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations, including their deployment,
planning and management.

Fifthly, there should be better coordination
between the Security Council on the one hand, and the
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and the Secretariat
on the other. At all stages of the establishment and
implementation of peacekeeping operations, the
Council should pay attention to maintaining regular
consultations with the TCCs. We support closer
partnerships between the Council on the one hand and
the troop contributors and the Secretariat on the other.
We hope the Secretariat will continue to provide
relevant information to the TCCs in a timely and
accurate manner. We also support the United Nations in
improving the partnerships with the countries
concerned and with regional organizations in particular
in supporting the peacekeeping efforts of the African
Union and in supporting the latter and improving its
capacity.

