Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Some colleagues today have achieved high
levels of rhetoric. I must mention that the Ukrainian
colleague nevertheless went far beyond anything
permissible. Ifone is to speak ofblood, indeed the blood
is not on our hands but on the hands of his friends the
nationalist radicals - the blood of those Ukrainians
who were shot by snipers on days in February of this
year - whose ideological fathers he defended not very
long ago in the halls of the United Nations, stating that
Nazi Ukranian henchmen did not kill anyone and that
those were falsehoods made up by the Soviet Union.

With regard to other statements, I must note that
something has caught my attention. Colleagues that have
taken the floor discussed poorly developed arguments,
on the whole - it was not the argumentation put forward
by my delegation, but distorted images or elements of
our position. I will not comment on everything heard
today - all of the highly unacceptable comments. I
will, however, make a few comments.

The French colleague did not notice the smallest
hint of violence in Ukraine. It is possible that he was
unaware of what occurred on Saturday in Kharkiv,
where two citizens were killed by fighters from other
regions of Ukraine. In fact, the violence had to be noted
as it took place during this month in Kyiv and in other
regions of the country. There is a continuing threat of
violence and a continuing threat of it spreading to other
regions okaraine. Yet the violence has not occurred in
Crimea, due to measures taken there.

The Permanent Representative of the United States
blamed Russia for illegally pursuing its ambitions. That
does not apply to us; it is a phrase taken from the foreign
policy arsenal of the United States. Ms. Power spoke of
truth. The world would be very interested to know if
Washington, DC, would in fact tell the truth about its
role in the development of the crisis in Ukraine. Finally,
Ms. Power spoke of dreams and aspirations. But why
has she negated the right of the people of Crimea to
express their will tomorrow during the referendum?

To conclude, one of our colleagues said that Kyiv
had extended a hand to Moscow and that we had refused
to reciprocate. But the problem is not with Moscow; it
has to do with the fact that Kyiv should have been the
one to extend a hand to its people and regions, instead
of intimidating them with repression and banning
the use of the Russian language. Why, for instance,
was the constitutional assembly not convened, and in
reality, in the course of the constitutional process, it
was not proved that the ideology and practice of radical
nationalism did not prevail in Kyiv?

It is unfortunate that much time has been lost.
Nevertheless, we would appeal to all to put an end to
the confrontation and to begin constructive cooperation
with a view to a long-term settlement of the situation in
Ukraine, in the interests of all of the people, including
those in the eastern and south-eastern regions.
