Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend my
thanks to Mr. John Holmes, Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, for the valuable and
comprehensive briefing. We highly value his efforts
and endeavours in this field.

The issue under discussion in this meeting, based
on the framework of a previous understanding reached
in the Council, is one that unites us all. Protection of
civilians in armed conflicts is one of the highest legal,
moral and religious commitments and is an absolute
priority in our work.

At the end of the last century, the Council started
to give priority to the commitment. After the civilian
tragedies in Rwanda and Bosnia, the first open meeting
of the Council was crowned by a presidential statement
(S/PRST/J999/6) that revealed the growing gap
between the provisions of international law and their
implementation and emphasized a coordinated and
comprehensive method for protecting civilians.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/Z 999/95 D, issued at the end of the last century, set out specific
measures that could be undertaken by the Council
within its mandate. It was followed by other reports,
the most recent of which was last year's, which
determined measures to be taken rapidly and
systematically.
The discussions in the Council advanced, and a
number of working groups have been established.
Many resolutions have been issued, such as 1674
(2006) and 1738 (2006), as well as a number of
presidential statements. Most of those resolutions and
presidential statements underscored the Council's
commitment to protect civilians and to condemn any
violations of international humanitarian law, human
rights law, refugee law and to combat impunity and
safeguard access of humanitarian assistance and the
safety of humanitarian workers.

In the 2005 World Summit Outcome document
(General Assembly resolution 60/1), all States accepted
the principle of the responsibility to protect. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General noted the
advances in the implementation of this principle. The
role of the Council has grown in a number of ways,
such as combating sexual enslavement, protecting
women and children and controlling the spread of
small arms and light weapons. Many measures were
taken to promote and build national and international
judicial capacities to combat impunity from
punishment, and some of the activities relating to the
protection of civilians were given to peacekeeping
operations, whose humanitarian role we highly value.
We support the Secretary-General's recommendation of
the importance of promoting it.

In addition to what we have said, I regret to say
that action is needed in a number of areas in Africa,
particularly in Somalia, and in Asia, especially in
Palestine. I remind members of what was in the
UNICEF documents and in those of the Secretary-
General in his briefing concerning the tragic situation
existing up to today in the Gaza Strip. Actions include
the deliberate and arbitrary military attacks against
vulnerable civilian populations, the continuous
humanitarian impact of mines and cluster bombs,
which have been spread in civilian areas,
administrative detention, internal and external
displacement, collective punishment, measures to
eradicate cultural identity, bulldozing of land and the
demolition of property, including refugee camps.

In summary, those are all actions that are
criminalized by the provisions of the law, including the
provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention, on the
protection of civilians in times of war, which includes
occupation and which is ratified by all States. Despite
all this, the Council stands idly by and does nothing.
That situation reminds us of an old position leading to
human tragedies that we all know.

The Security Council, in taking humanitarian
action to protect civilians, cannot be selective, far from
balanced and transparent. Action must be in accordance
with a method supported by an accountability system
and specific sanctions. Everyone should submit and
comply with the provisions of law and allow none to
enjoy impunity.

Finally, I would like to thank you, Mr. President.
We are all full of hope that our deliberations will end
with tangible and general progress in an issue that is
linked to the dignity of humanity.

