Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): Latvia aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, as well as the statement delivered by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Group of
Friends of the Rule of Law.

I would like to thank the Chinese presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this open debate
in order to reflect on and reaffirm our commitments to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

The debate proposed by the Chinese presidency is
both historical and timely. It is important historically,
as it lets us reflect on the reasons why the different
nations wanted to establish the United Nations. Why
was the United Nations necessary? The United Nations
was created to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in fundamental human
rights, to establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law can be maintained,
and to promote social progress and better standards
of life in larger freedom. In other words, the United
Nations was created because humankind had learned
its historical lesson that the world pays too high a price
for the absence of a credible international system.
The United Nations was created to put an end to a
world where might makes right. The United Nations
was created to establish a rules-based system where
powerful countries do not annex parts of other countries
or whole countries on false pretexts.

One year ago, this would have seemed a historical
debate only. Sadly, recommitting ourselves to the
purposes and principles of the Charter has turned out
to be very topical for all Members of the United Nations
and poignant for some. Who would have thought that
a permanent member of the Security Council would
illegally annex a part of another sovereign country
only 20 years after its written commitment to respect
the independence and sovereignty and the existing
borders of Ukraine and to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of Ukraine? After thousands have
died in eastern Ukraine, the promise of the Budapest
Memorandum that "none of their weapons will ever
be used against Ukraine" rings particularly hollow.
Therefore, recommitting ourselves to the purposes and
principles of the Charter is timely and topical, both
for the Security Council and for all Members of the
Organization.

All States Members of the United Nations are the
guardians of this international system and of the Charter
of the United Nations. However, the States members of
the Security Council have a particular responsibility in
this regard. Inaction on the part of the Security Council
when mass atrocities are taking place runs counter to
the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
permanent members ofthe Council are granted a special
privilege - the veto power - in order to protect the
Charter of the United Nations and the international
order, they also bear a special responsibility to ensure
that this power is used in the interests of common peace
and security.

Unfortunately, with respect to recent developments
the Council has not lived up to this special responsibility.
In the case of Syria, the Council has not been able to
stop that State from committing crimes against its
own population. It has even failed to authorize the
investigation and prosecution of those crimes, blocking
the referral of the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. In the case of Ukraine, it was not
able to stop an act of aggression, which triggered the
commission of further crimes. These failures have
immense human costs. They allow innocent civilians
to become victims of the crimes from which the
United Nations is committed to protecting them. The
international community cannot afford more failures.
Latvia therefore supports the French initiative of a
voluntary code of conduct regulating the use ofthe veto
when genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity
are committed.

With the changing nature of conflicts, the
protection of human rights and the rule of law are key
elements of conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding. Serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law can be an early
indication of a descent into conflict or an escalation
of conflict. In order to effectively fulfil its primary
responsibility of maintaining international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations, the
Council should develop early warning and preventive
measures to address such situations. Respect for
the principles of the Charter and international law,
including human rights law, is equally important to
maintain international peace and security in the twenty-
first century.

