Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura and the
Permanent Representative of Iraq, Ambassador Al
Bayati, for their extensive briefings.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation for the excellent worked
carried out by the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). Their dedication and commitment
to help Iraq accomplish its goals are indeed most
commendable.

As a neighbour of Iraq, Turkey is particularly
interested in the promotion of stability and the
advancement of security in Iraq. We have equally good
relations with all segments of the Iraqi population, be
they Arabs, Kurds or Turkmens. Our only message is
one of good will and cooperation.

That is why we are happy to see that, after many
years of war, internal strife and destruction, Iraq is
finally striving towards a more sustainable
environment of security and stability. The Iraqi people
greatly deserve to enjoy peace and prosperity.

It was against that backdrop that we closely
followed the provincial elections held in late January,
including by sending observers from Turkey. Overall,
despite certain shortcomings, the elections served their
purpose quite successfully. They helped to bridge an
important gap in representation in Iraqi politics. They
also reinforced the democratic process in Iraq.

In short, Iraq has made a good start in 2009, a
year that, we believe, will be crucial in shaping its
future. Indeed, the provincial elections, as important as
they might be, are only a first step in the consolidation
of democracy and democratization in Iraq. There are
certain challenges that remain to be addressed, such as
reviewing the Constitution in a way that will unify

Iraqis as a whole; settling the issues of the disputed
internal administrative boundaries and, in particular,
the status of Kirkuk in a way that will help preserve the
unity and territorial integrity of Iraq; peacefully
transferring security responsibilities to the Iraqi
Security Forces in a way that will not create a power
vacuum in the country after the withdrawal of the
multinational force; adopting the long-overdue
hydrocarbon resources law in a way that will create an
investment-friendly environment and help all Iraqis to
benefit fully from their country's strategic energy
resources; and reaching an accord on income-sharing
arrangements in a way that will strengthen the sense of
Iraqi nationhood and union. These are all issues of
priority.

The parliamentary elections to be held at the end
of this year will be another important milestone in the
democratic evolution of Iraq. We hope that, by that
time, these priority issues will have been resolved in a
constructive and consensual manner, making it possible
for these achievements to be crowned with fair and free
elections.

I know that the wide array of issues to which I
have just referred present a most daunting task.
However, failure is not an option. In that regard, we
believe that a three-pronged process is best suited to
enabling us to attain our common objectives in Iraq.

The first aspect of this joint venture concerns the
responsibility of Iraqis themselves. By that, I mean the
obligation of all political parties in Iraq to work with
one another in good faith and cooperation with a view
to ensuring that the solutions to many of the
predicaments being faced will be found through
compromise rather than confrontation. We hope and
expect that the political representatives of the Iraqi
people will rise to the occasion and reconcile their
differences. The Iraqi people have already rewarded
those who have made the right promises; now it is time
to deliver.
The second set of responsibilities in this process
lies with the countries in the region. Indeed, those
countries, sharing the same geography, have a special
stake in seeing Iraq effectively tackle these challenges,
many of which have direct implications for the whole
region and beyond. We must all do whatever we can to
support the development and reconstruction of Iraq. We
are committed to further advancing the regional
cooperation to which we have contributed, including by
initiating the Iraq neighbours forum seven years ago.
The forum is now operating in an extended format.

Indeed, Turkey has long provided an essential
lifeline for the flow of humanitarian and reconstruction
assistance to Iraq. Today, the volume of bilateral trade
is rapidly rising, along with all other aspects of our
economic cooperation. In particular, helping Iraq to tap
its vast energy resources and to export them to world
markets through reliable outlets, such as Turkey,
remains a priority for us.

In parallel, our political cooperation has also
reached an exemplary level. In that context, reciprocal
visits by the two Prime Ministers have created strong
momentum by further enhancing our bilateral relations,
as evidenced by the establishment of the high-level
strategic cooperation council. Our President will soon
reciprocate the official visit made by President
Talabani, which is expected to give a further boost to
our relations. Taking this opportunity, I am also
pleased to announce that, in addition to the one in
Mosul, our new Consulate General in Basra has
recently become operational.

We also attach great importance to cooperation
with Iraq in the fight against terrorism. As will be
recalled, the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) terrorist
organization has long used northern Iraq as a
springboard for its cross-border terrorist attacks against
targets in Turkey. The PKK's presence in northern Iraq
also poses serious problems for and a threat to the
people of Iraq. Initially, we had our differences on how
to best tackle that problem. Today, however, we are
pleased to see both central and local Iraqi authorities
showing more signs of cooperation in countering that
scourge. Indeed, the trilateral mechanism recently set
up by Turkey, Iraq and the United States to coordinate
a joint response to that vicious terrorist organization
has made an encouraging start, and we now expect it to
yield more effective and tangible results in preventing
Iraqi territory from being used for such cross-border
terrorist activities.

The third and final set of responsibilities in
helping Iraq to achieve its goals rests with the
international community. Indeed, Iraq cannot be seen
as a merely regional issue, because the future course of
events there will have repercussions reaching far
beyond the region.

In that regard, the United Nations must continue
to play its important role of coordination and assistance
in the critical period ahead. In addition to the essential
humanitarian and reconstruction assistance being
provided by United Nations agencies, UNAMI's
support for the constitutional review process - as well
as for the ongoing work concerning the disputed
internal administrative boundaries and the status of
Kirkuk - is of great importance.

With regard to Kirkuk in particular, Turkey
strongly supports UNAMI's impartial and neutral role
in promoting dialogue among the parties concerned and
in helping to forge a consensus on that sensitive issue.
Kirkuk, which is a microcosm of the rich ethnic
diversity of Iraq, must not trigger new disputes and
conflicts in Iraq.

In conclusion, I should like to reaffirm once again
our strong support for the democratic transformation
under way in Iraq. Obviously, we are still at an early
stage of this long journey, the pace and final
destination of which will be determined first and
foremost by the Iraqis themselves. However, given the
strategic importance of this whole endeavour, we must
all be generous in extending our support and
assistance. Turkey is more than ready and willing to do
its share.

