Mr. Amorim (Brazil): I wish to thank the
Security Council for having promptly granted the
request of the Brazilian Government for the convening
of this urgent meeting.

As Council members are aware, President Jose'
Manuel Zelaya of Honduras has taken shelter, together
2

with family members and his closest advisers, at the
Chancellery of the Brazilian Embassy in Tegucigalpa
since Monday, 21 September. President Zelaya arrived
at the Embassy peacefully and by his own means. He
was received in his legitimate capacity as
constitutional President of Honduras. He remains there
under the protection of the Brazilian Embassy.

As soon as I learned of President Zelaya's arrival
at the Embassy, I called him personally, on the
instructions of President Lula. He told me that he had
gone back to his country with the aim of returning to
power by peaceful means and through dialogue. Since
then, I have had no reason to doubt his words.

Since the day that the Brazilian Embassy first
sheltered President Zelaya on its premises, the
Embassy has been virtually under siege. It has been
subjected to acts of harassment and intimidation by the
de facto authorities. Electricity, water supply and
phone connections were cut off. Cell phone
communications were blocked or interfered with.
Disruptive sound equipment was installed in front of
the Embassy. Access to food was severely restricted at
some point. The circulation of official vehicles of the
Brazilian Embassy was curtailed.

The Charge d'affaires of Brazil has, in practice,
been prevented from moving from the Chancellery to
the residence, since the police have announced that
anyone leaving the Embassy premises will not be
allowed to return. In fact, the wife of the Charge
d'affaires, who left the premises, was not allowed to
come back. These measures by the de facto authorities
clearly violate obligations under the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

I recall that the International Court of Justice
established long ago the inviolability of diplomatic
missions as a standing principle of international
relations, to be respected in all circumstances,
including a breach of diplomatic relations or even war.

I wish to thank the Governments, organizations
and groups that provided means to alleviate the siege
of the Brazilian Embassy or expressed their
condemnation of the actions taken against the
Embassy.

The Brazilian Government is gravely concerned
that the same people who perpetrated the coup d'e'tat in
Honduras might threaten the inviolability of the
Embassy in order to forcefully arrest President Zelaya.
09-52505
That is not mere suspicion or speculation; concrete
indications of this possibility have been received.

First, the decision was taken to send a bailiff to
the Embassy with a search warrant. Of course, the
Brazilian officials refused to receive the warrant, and
the bailiff was not allowed to enter our premises. The
regime also made a change in the formal treatment of
the Embassy, by which they seemed to imply that it
had ceased to enjoy diplomatic status. In addition to
making public statements to the same effect, the de
facto Government sent a communication directly to the
Ministry of External Relations, in which it referred to
our Embassy as "one of the facilities that the Brazilian
Government still maintains in Tegucigalpa". Of course,
all of this seemed to be a prelude to further action.

In a public communique, the de facto authorities
even tried to deny responsibility for the safety of
President Zelaya and for damage to property in the
Embassy's neighbourhood. That is in total
contradiction with the Vienna Convention and, more
immediately, with the recent ruling by the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that the
de facto Government of Honduras must not threaten
the safety and security of President Zelaya or any of
those sheltered at the Brazilian Embassy.

It is imperative to ensure that the regime in
Honduras fully respects and complies with the Vienna
Convention regarding the Brazilian Embassy, in
particular its inviolability and the security of its
personnel and other people within its premises. Brazil
categorically rejects all threats against our Embassy
and against the safety of President Zelaya and all those
under our protection.

I understand that, by calling this meeting, the
Security Council recognizes that the situation of the
09-52505

Embassy of Brazil in Honduras constitutes a threat to
the peace and security of our region. Any action
against the Embassy of Brazil, its personnel or the
people under our protection must therefore be
considered a flagrant breach of security.

My country supports dialogue based on the
relevant resolutions of the Organization of American
States and the efforts made by President Oscar Arias of
Costa Rica. Brazil is a firm supporter of the United
Nations Charter. It is also a firm supporter of
democracy and of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
As such, it could not deny protection to a
democratically elected President recognized by the
entire international community as the only legitimate
ruler of Honduras.

A clear statement from the Security Council
would certainly serve as a deterrent against the further
aggravation of this crisis. It would also be a sign of
support for the diplomatic efforts of the international
community aimed at the peaceful and speedy
restoration of President Zelaya to power.

We sincerely hope that today's meeting is duly
understood in Honduras as a sign that acts of disrespect
against the Embassy of Brazil must cease immediately.
It is our opinion that the Council should remain seized
of this matter as long as that does not happen.

