Ms. King (Australia): Allow me to express
Australia's appreciation to Special Representative
Zarif for his presentation this morning and for his
continuing efforts and those of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to promote security, stability and respect for human
rights in Kosovo and in the region. I also welcome
Prime Minister Thaci and Prime Minister Daeie and
thank them for their statements.

We welcome the first agreement between Serbia
and Kosovo of principles governing the normalization
of relations, initialled on 19 April and subsequently
approved in full by the Government of Serbia and the
Parliament of Kosovo on 22 April. We join others in
congratulating both parties for the strong political
leadership and far-sighted vision they have displayed
in reaching that historic milestone, which, among other
important components, also allows both countries to
make progress towards their European integration. I
would also like to acknowledge the constructive and
dynamic role played by High Representative Ashton
over a period of four critical months to steer difficult
negotiations to their successful outcome. It is necessary
that both parties now implement the 15 points of the
Agreement fully and in line with the agreed timelines.

A viable solution to the situation in Kosovo cannot
be achieved without addressing the anxieties expressed
by Serbs residing in northern Kosovo. Continuing
political dialogue between Belgrade, Pristina and Serbs
in northern Kosovo can ensure that the implementation
process meets their concerns and interests. Local
elections in municipalities in northern Kosovo later this
year facilitated by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe will be an important test of the
degree to which Serbs residing in northern Kosovo feel a
real sense of political inclusion. Ensuring that northern
Kosovo's security structures become part of a coherent
framework within Kosovo will also be a crucial step
towards a long-term resolution of the situation.

Security, the rule of law and a strong human rights
framework are essential components of any long-
term sustainable solution to the situation in Kosovo.
Australia is encouraged by the fact that the overall
security situation on the ground remained relatively
calm throughout the period covered by the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/254), but we regret the incidents
which occurred in ethnically mixed areas in northern
Kosovo. The attacks on offices of political parties
and civil society groups are of particular concern and
represent a threat to dialogue and mediation efforts. We
commend the close cooperation between the Kosovo
police, the European Union Rule of Law Mission and
the Kosovo Force in responding to those challenges.

We welcome the steps taken by the Assembly
of Kosovo to strengthen the rule of law and stem
corruption. The work of the Kosovo police to fight
organized crime and international narcotics flows is
vital. That contributes to strengthening law and order
not only in Kosovo but in the broader region.

Australia condemns acts of vandalism and the
desecration of sites of cultural or religious significance.
In that regard, we commend the establishment of
a specialized unit within the Kosovo police for the
protection of cultural heritage and religious sites. We
acknowledge the continuing efforts made to strengthen
protection frameworks in Kosovo for religious, social
and ethnic minorities. Australia continues to encourage
the safe and viable return of internally displaced
persons.

Much progress has been achieved over the past
four months, and we welcome the efforts of the
parties in working towards a stable and prosperous
Kosovo. The international community needs to
remain closely engaged to encourage and monitor the
faithful implementation of the agreements reached at
the political level and continue to support the ongoing
political dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and
with local communities towards a better future for all
people in Serbia and Kosovo.

