Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on convening this debate at a time when Somalia is
ushering in a decisive and promising phase on the
path towards stability and national reconciliation. I
would also like to commend the eloquent briefing
of Special Representative Augustine Mahiga on
recent developments and future prospects. Lastly, I
welcome the presence among us and the participation
of Mrs. Preneet Kaur, Minister of State for External
Affairs of India.

Morocco welcomes the fact that, following the
instability in Somalia for more than two decades, the
country now has political institutions established on
the basis of an inclusive and transparent process, with
the participation of all elements of Somali society that
support peace. Those significant gains towards stability
and reconciliation would not have been possible without
the resolve of the Somali people, who undertook to
close the painful chapter of the past and to enter into
a stabilization phase on the basis of the Djibouti and
Kampala agreements and the road map.

The adoption of the Constitution, the establishment
of Parliament and the election of the country's President
and Prime Minister are already crucial elements in
laying the foundations for stable political governance
in Somalia. The formation of the first post-transition
Government, which we hope to see as soon as possible,
will mark the completion of the key political institutions
of the new Somali State.

The achievements to date should be consolidated
in order to build and strengthen the position of the
institutions and the rule of law in Somalia. We would
also like to commend and fully support the six priorities
set out by the new President of the country, Mr. Hassan
Sheikh Mohamud, on strengthening stability and
peacebuilding, respect for human rights, the rule of law
and good governance, economic recovery, the provision
of basic services to the population and, of course,
preserving the unity and integrity of the country.

Achieving all those goals will require the patience,
perseverance and unwavering political commitment
of the Somali authorities in order to establish peace
and lasting stability. Above all, that requires security,
defeating terrorism and extending the authority of the
Somali State throughout the national territory, not to
mention an appropriate response to the humanitarian
situation, the refugees and the internally displaced
persons, who are only now returning.
In that context, the liberation of the port of Kismayo,
a stronghold of Al-Shabaab, which is inhibiting that
group's main source of financing and, at the same
time, giving the Somali State better control over the
country's commercial activities, is a significant turning
point in the fight against terrorism in Somalia. Those
developments and the improvement in the security
situation are in large part due to the African Union
Mission in Somalia and to the troop-contributing
countries and the important role that they continue to
play in improving the country's security situation.

It goes without saying that extending the gains
in terms of the country's security and stability to all
Somalis necessarily means strengthening the Somali
armed forces and police. In that regard, we welcome
the signing in August of the national security and
stabilization plan, which seeks to guide and plan
security sector development in Somalia.

The fight against piracy is also an important aspect
in strengthening the stability gains. Securing the Somali
coast will make it possible to ensure normal economic
and trade flows between Somalia and other countries
and the establishment of economic activity and jobs, in
particular for young people.

Somalia, which has emerged from two decades of
war, is recovering. It requires assistance. It needs aid and
the solidarity of the entire international community and
the United Nations, which represents that community,
in order to overcome the many reconstruction and
development challenges facing its authorities. The
Somali people aspire to calm, harmony and a decent
life, free from insecurity, need and uncertainty. Let
us give them the means to achieve their basic and
legitimate aspirations.

