Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Council on the humanitarian
situation in the eastern and northern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

As the Council is well aware, the last six months
saw deteriorating stability in several areas; renewed
fighting between various rebel groups, principally the
Congres national pour la defense du people (CNDP)
and the Forces arme'es de la Republique democratique
du Congo (FARDC) in the Kivus; the resurgence of
armed groups and subsequent clashes with FARDC in
Ituri district; and new vicious attacks by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in Province Orientale. Those
worrying developments left many hundreds dead,
provoked the displacement of a further half-million
people and worsened the already dire humanitarian
situation, although humanitarian needs in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo are, sadly, not
limited to areas affected by conflict.

My visit last week came as the Government and
the international community were pursuing new
political and military initiatives to address long-
standing and fundamental concerns that have major
potential humanitarian implications. In the East, while
the mediation jointly led by President Obasanjo, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy on the Great Lakes
2

Region, and President Mkapa from the African Union
continues, the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda are carrying out
joint operations against the ex-genocidaires of the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR)
in North Kivu, and CNDP elements are being
integrated into the Congolese armed forces following
the arrest of Laurent Nkunda in Rwanda. Those
initiatives have created a new dynamic that could have
a significant and favourable impact, including on the
humanitarian situation, but that also brings with it
significant risks.

North and South Kivu will be most affected one
way or the other. In North Kivu, I met displaced people
in camps near Goma who had been caught in the
crossfire between the CNDP and the FARDC. These
were some of the 250,000 people newly displaced by
that conflict since August 2008, adding to the long-
standing North Kivu caseload of more than 800,000.

Those displaced people, living both in camps and
with host populations, often continue to face miserable
conditions despite an active and effective humanitarian
response in difficult and dangerous circumstances. The
quality of the services provided to them tends to
decrease the further they are located from Goma,
owing to security and capacity problems. While tens of
thousands had already returned home in areas where
their relations with the CNDP were friendly, others
driven out by the CNDP are still waiting. Those I met
in the Kibati camp near Goma are keen to go home as
soon as possible - not least because the planting
season is already under way - but serious concerns
still prevent them from doing so. Their memories of the
CNDP offensive are fresh, and while the campaign to
integrate CNDP military cadres into the Congolese
armed forces is making progress, the CNDP still
maintains parallel administrative structures and a
military presence in many villages.

Perceptions of insecurity have been heightened in
some areas by the current offensive against the FDLR
ex-genocidaires. And, sadly, the presence of the
FARDC in some areas is far from always seen as
reassuring, given their own dreadful indiscipline and
violence during the CNDP offensive. Moreover, those
internally displaced persons with whom I spoke made
clear that they have nothing left. Their houses and
fields have been looted and burned or taken over by
someone else; such infrastructure as there was has been
destroyed, and their personal possessions have been
09-23954
taken. They will need substantial support from the
international community if they are to return
voluntarily in safety and dignity. We are working to put
in place appropriate return packages.

My most recent visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in September 2007, focused on gender-
based violence and on how the United Nations and the
international community could fight the scourge of
rape in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Unfortunately, I cannot say that the situation has
improved since. Women I met at the Heal Africa
hospital in Goma and in the camps bore disturbing and
eloquent witness to the fact that little has changed.

Sexual violence, particularly by those with guns,
continues to be a horrific feature of everyday life.
Impunity remains the fundamental issue. Lack of
capacity means that, even if perpetrators of sexual
violence can be arrested and convicted, there is often
nowhere to keep them. In that context, I raised with the
Government, from the President downwards, the issue
of the continued presence of known perpetrators of
sexual violence in the senior ranks of the armed forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and stressed
that that sends absolutely the wrong signal to all
concerned. I hope that appropriate action will be taken
soon.

Nevertheless, there have been some positive
moves. I had the sense that public opinion in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo itself may be
shifting, thanks largely to the efforts of Congolese civil
society and Congolese women themselves, including
the President's wife, Mrs. Kabila. For the United
Nations, a senior adviser on sexual violence has helped
develop a system-wide strategy to strengthen
prevention, protection and response with regard to
sexual violence. I hope that all donors will align their
programmes and activities with the strategy, including
much stronger efforts to establish the rule of law
through a functioning judicial system, vigorous
security sector reform and extension of State authority,
and better medical, psychosocial and social
reintegration support for the victims. Meanwhile, it is
vital that the Government itself continue to regard this
as a major priority and make clear publicly and
frequently that sexual violence is completely
unacceptable in Congolese society.

At this stage, it is hard to be sure of the overall
final effect of the continuing combined Rwandan
09-23954

Defence Force/FARDC offensive against the FDLR
ex-genocidaires. I added my voice to those -
including the leadership of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) - who have stressed the
importance of reducing the risks of the offensive for
the civilian population by ensuring strict compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law
and by giving top priority to the protection of civilians.

In particular, there are hostage populations in the
areas concerned who are acutely vulnerable to any
abuse or reprisals from the FDLR. So far, our worst
fears do not seem to have been realized, either in terms
of displacement or in terms of atrocities, but reports at
the end of last week, including from Human Rights
Watch, painted a disturbing picture of revenge attacks
on civilians by the FDLR already beginning. As the
operation officially draws to an end, MONUC -
already present in numerous key locations - will have
a vital role with the FARDC in helping to fill any
security vacuum and in preventing FDLR militants
from returning to areas they previously occupied and
exacting a terrible price from civilians.

There are positive signs, too. At a Goma transit
centre run by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), I spoke to
young Rwandan refugees, men and women, who had
been in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
1994 and had now decided to return home. During the
past month, there has been a significant increase in the
number of refugees transiting the centre. The numbers
of Rwandan civilians who voluntarily repatriated under
the auspices of UNHCR from 1 January to 16 February
reached 2,902 f 883 from North Kivu and 2,019 from
South Kivu.

Meanwhile, the number of FDLR combatants
presenting themselves for MONUC's disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation programme is equally on the rise, having
already reached 376, plus 655 dependents, for a total of
1,031, with several hundred more candidates waiting to
be screened. Those numbers are striking when
compared with the 1,103 total FDLR repatriations and
7,992 civilian repatriations in the entire year of 2008. I
hope those developments signify that the running sore
of the FDLR presence can now be significantly
reduced, if not removed altogether. But robust and
comprehensive political solutions will also continue to
be needed on both sides of the border.
3

I also went to the Haut-Uele district of Orientale
Province, where the Ugandan People's Defence Force
(UPDF) and the FARDC are carrying out joint military
operations against the Lord's Resistance Army. The
LRA have reacted by carrying out horrific and
unprovoked attacks against the local civilian
population. In Doruma, I met those displaced by some
of these attacks. I was shaken by their accounts and
their obvious anger and trauma. The so-called
Christmas massacres triggered a wave of displacement
from at least 22 villages around Doruma, tripling the
population from its normal 6,000 to 18,000. There have
been similar attacks elsewhere, including around
Faradje. The casual brutality, the total disregard for
human life and the treatment of women and children in
particular are appalling even for those used to the
depredations of the LRA in so many places in the last
20 years. The number of deaths since December 2008
is believed to approach 900, with many victims hacked
to death with machetes or bludgeoned by clubs. Many
women have been raped before being killed. One
hundred sixty thousand people altogether are estimated
to have fled their homes. Moreover, according to
UNHCR, in Southern Sudan's Western Equatoria State,
the registered population of Congolese refugees who
fled LRA attacks in the Dungu area in January has
surpassed 9,000, in addition to the thousands of
Sudanese themselves already internally displaced for
the same reason.

United Nations agencies and partners are working
as rapidly as possible with the central and local
authorities, the military forces in the area and MONUC
to expand humanitarian assistance and step up efforts
to protect the local population. These efforts are
constrained by the huge 40,000 square kilometre area
where the LRA are hiding, their dispersal into several
groups, the difficult terrain and isolated location, the
chronic lack of infrastructure and the threat still posed
by the LRA, including on the major roads.

No one doubts the urgent need to remove the
LRA threat, one way or another. Their surrender would
be the best way. Meanwhile, in meetings with the local
commanders of the FARDC and the UPDF, I
emphasized the importance of placing the protection of
civilians at the centre of their planning as the military
operations continue, and of better communication
among all concerned about the risks to civilians and to
humanitarians. I also discussed with MONUC locally
and in Kinshasa what more might be done to strengthen
its presence in the area to help to protect civilians and
to support humanitarian assistance, following their help
for the reinstallation of the humanitarian community in
the main local town of Dungu. MONUC, with the
FARDC, is already expanding escorts for humanitarian
convoys as needed and requested. The mission will
seek to deploy extra troops from elsewhere in the
country, including in a few of the key towns like
Doruma and F aradj e, and will work to improve some of
the roads to help with logistics. MONUC is also
urgently looking to acquire more utility helicopters to
cover this wide area, in support of the FARDC, where
the LRA groups have dispersed.

Let me take this opportunity to comment more
generally on the work of MONUC from a
humanitarian's perspective. The last few months have
been especially challenging for them, and the revised
mandate from the Council is provoking positive
reconsideration of how MONUC can use its limited
resources to the best effect in this immense and
complicated country in order to help protect civilians.
This is never going to be an easy task, and we should
beware of arousing expectations that cannot be met and
of unhelpful criticism that takes no account of the real
problems and limitations. Units which have been
trained for conventional warfare, static defence or
patrolling of ceasefire lines, and military structures
designed accordingly, cannot convert themselves
overnight into the kind of highly mobile and flexible
operations, with good local intelligence, contacts and
skills, that would be ideal.

Nevertheless the civilian and military leadership
of MONUC are well into a far-reaching review of
operating guidelines, deployments and training. Newly
formed joint protection teams, deployed in locations
where access is difficult, are already making a
difference in anticipating and understanding threats to
civilians and in helping the military to interact with the
population and better understand their protection
needs. I would urge the Security Council and troop-
contributing countries to give their fullest support to
these changes, and troop-contributing countries in
particular to allow maximum flexibility in operating
procedures and rules of engagement. I am also
convinced that the two additional battalions, together
with the two companies of special forces, two
engineering companies, extra air assets, and the
information analysis capability recently authorized by
09-23954
the Council remain badly and urgently needed to
enable MONUC to carry out its testing mandate.

I was able to raise many of these points in
Kinshasa with President Kabila, Prime Minister Muzito
and Minister of Foreign Affairs Mwamba. We
discussed in particular the prospects of the current
initiatives producing lasting improvements in the
political, security and humanitarian situation in the east
and the north. I emphasized to them the importance of
doing everything possible to protect civilians,
including tackling sexual violence, to address impunity
and, especially, to improve the discipline of the
FARDC. They agreed, while stressing the need in their
eyes to prioritize a rapid return to peace and stability in
the short term. I pointed out that there should be no
inconsistency between the two imperatives of peace
and justice.

Continuing and improved humanitarian assistance
remains essential to relieve the suffering in the Kivus
and in Orientale province but is not enough to enable
the people there to rebuild their lives on a durable
basis. The authority and capacity of the central and
local authorities have to be rebuilt at every level. The
international community can help to achieve this, as it
has been doing, including through the comprehensive
stabilization strategy now being pursued by MONUC
together with the United Nations and donor partners.
But the Government must also effectively face up to its
responsibilities in this respect.
09-23954

In conclusion, let me return to the point that
humanitarian needs are substantial throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
western provinces, and not only in the conflict areas.
Seventy-six per cent of the population are
undernourished and chronically subject to food
insecurity. Fifty-four per cent have no access to clean
water. Endemic diseases like malaria, cholera, plague
and the Ebola virus further weaken already vulnerable
people. The 2009 Humanitarian Action Plan estimates
that some $831 million is needed to cover humanitarian
needs, an increase of 11 per cent from last year. So this
is no time to turn our eyes away from the Democratic
Republic.

As on my first visit, I was impressed by the
quality and dedication of many of the officials I met,
from district level upwards. If the Government can
establish proper control over the country's natural riches
and provide support and resources to its administration,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo can have a bright
future, despite the huge and multiple challenges.

