Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like
to thank all our briefers for their very insightful and
comprehensive statements. I extend a very warm and
special welcome to Mr. Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso.

Germany attaches great importance to peace and
stability in the Sahel region. Chancellor Angela Merkel
underlined that during her visit to the region only two
weeks ago at a Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
summit in Ouagadougou, where she met with the Heads
of State of the G-5 upon the invitation of President
Kabore. The Chancellor made very clear during her
visit that Germany supports the G-5 Sahel, and the
Joint Force in particular, and is ready to consider
ways to increase support for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
by the Council. Because of the pressing challenges,
we expect more rapid progress with regard to the
operationalization of the Joint Force and the political
integration of the G-5 Sahel as a regional organization.
Let me focus on four specific messages in that regard.

First, Germany is a strong partner of the G-5 Sahel
and has contributed about €28 million in support to the
Joint Force so far. The Joint Force must now quickly
increase its operational capabilities, as we have heard
from many of those who briefed us. In that regard, we
expect to see stronger engagement by all G-5 Sahel
countries. We also call on all international partners that
have pledged support to increase the predictability of
funding for the Joint Force.

Secondly, Germany is certain that the Joint Force has
the potential to develop into a key player for achieving
more security in the Sahel, but we are not there yet.
That is why we are convinced that there is a continued
need for an international security presence in the Sahel
region for the time being. That includes the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, which should be equipped with the
necessary resources to implement its mandate.

Thirdly, Germany strongly believes that
safeguarding human rights and building inclusive
societies are in fact prerequisites to successfully counter
terrorism and extremism. The experience of injustice
often is a decisive factor in breeding extremism. When
combating terrorism and extremism, there cannot be
any compromise when it comes to respecting human
rights. Therefore, we fully support the human rights
compliance framework of the Joint Force and thank the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for its dedicated work in that regard.

Fourthly, Germany is equally convinced that a
military approach to fighting terrorism and insecurity
will not be successful in isolation. Human security
should be increased through civilian police capabilities
that can remain engaged even when serious threats
of terrorism are gone. We therefore strongly support
police cooperation and training in the context of the
G-5 Sahel Joint Force.

If we take a more strategic, comprehensive, holistic
look at the challenges at hand, we see that what is
needed is a joined-up approach encompassing various
fields - specifically, security, peacebuilding and
development. That also guides Germany's bilateral and
regional support to the G-5 Sahel countries. In total,
Germany has been providing at least €l.7 billion to
the countries of the Sahel for the period from 2017 to
2020, and €l billion through development cooperation.
During her recent visit to the region, Chancellor
Merkel announced that Germany will make an addition
€60 million available for regional development. During
his recent visit to the region, our Foreign Minister,
Heiko Maas, announced that Germany will be
providing €46 million for security and stabilization in
Burkina Faso and its border region. In total, Germany's
support to the G-5 in terms of civilian crisis prevention,
security and stabilization has amounted to more than
€l45 million since 2016.

Since we have the honour of having the Foreign
Minister of Burkina Faso with us today, I would also
like to say a few words about the situation in his
country. Burkina Faso is a crucially important partner
in the stabilization of the Sahel region. We are therefore
witnessing the deteriorating security situation there
with great concern. In the past year there has been a
significant increase in terrorist attacks across large
parts of the country, and the reports of recent attacks
in the north and east, as well as the imminent risk of
the further spread of terrorist activities towards the
south, only highlight the fragility of the situation. We
are particularly alarmed about the tremendous surge
in human rights violations and the rising numbers of
civilian casualties, and our thoughts are with all the
victims of terrorist attacks, particularly those soldiers
who recently sacrificed their lives in the fight against
terrorism. In that context, I would also like to express
my condolences regarding the French force members
who recently paid with lives in a hostage situation.
Germany honours their sacrifice. While those who
fight terrorism are a very important factor in our overall
strategy, we all benefit from their efforts to increase
security and stability in the region and beyond.

The proliferation of terrorist networks and
organized crime across the Sahel, resulting from
largely uncontrolled border areas, emphasizes the fact
that we are dealing with regional rather than national
challenges. We therefore encourage our friend and
partner the Government of Burkina Faso to intensify its
efforts to seek regional and international partnerships
aimed at countering such developments. We must do
that together. During the Security Council's March
Visit, led jointly by France, Cote d'Ivoire and Germany,
Council members learned about the security challenges
first-hand, and we would again like to thank the
Government of Burkina Faso for its generous support
to the Security Council mission. I think one of the
most important takeaways from the Visit was that
it is important to work together to prevent a further
escalation of the situation. We welcome the fact that
the Secretariat has demonstrated its willingness to shift
gears and adapt the United Nations country office to
the new challenges. We encourage it to make progress
in that regard and to advance the implementation of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

Before concluding, I would just like to say a few
words about today's meeting of the Peacebuilding
Commission this afternoon. We feel it is a very
important step in rallying and coordinating international
support in the light of the tremendous challenges that
Burkina Faso is facing. We commend the Government
of Burkina Faso for this timely initiative and hope that
this is only a first step in a longer, fruitful partnership
that will lead to fast results for the country's people.

