Mr. Thaci (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): It is a special pleasure for
me to address the Council at this final meeting on
Kosovo for the year, and to discuss the progress made
in Kosovo during the past three months, particularly
the holding of the first local elections in the entire
territory of the Republic of Kosovo and the process of
European Union (EU) integration, as well as the most
recent results in the dialogue on the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia.

I would first like to express my sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his continuing
support ofpeace and progress in Kosovo and the region.

Before sharing my views on those developments, I
would like to point out, as we approach the end of the year,
that 2013 has been a historic year for the region, largely
for two major reasons. First, on 1 July, the European
Union accepted Croatia as its twenty-eighth member
State, making it a model and an inspiration for the other
Western Balkan countries pursuing EU integration.
The second was the first inter-State agreement reached
on the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia, facilitated by EU High Representative Baroness
Ashton. The historic agreement between Kosovo and
Serbia, reached in the early part of the year, is firm
evidence of the transformative power that the European
Union holds for countries that wish to join it. The EU
remains the only alternative and the only hope for the
people of our part of Europe.

In that European spirit, on 3 November, following
laws enacted by the Assembly of Kosovo, the Republic
of Kosovo for the first time organized local elections
for mayors and municipal assemblies throughout its
territory, which served as an inspiration to all the
communities of Kosovo. With a high turnout that
exceeded 50 per cent of those with the right to vote in 38
municipalities of the country, this democratic process
expressing the will of the people was carried out freely
and peacefully, enabling citizens throughout Kosovo
to choose legitimate municipal leaders, including in
four municipalities in northern Kosovo - Leposaviq,
Zvecan, Zubin Potok and northern Mitrovica - for the
first time since the war of 1999. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Central Election Commission
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe for their technical facilitation of the elections
in the North, along with the EU Election Observation
Mission, which was strongly committed to monitoring
and observing the process.

The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
been committed to fair and free democratic elections,
as well as to encouraging broad participation by all its
citizens in the 3 November elections, which were highly
praised by international observers and undoubtedly
constitute an important moment for Kosovo's maturing
statehood, for the internal institutional consolidation
of the political and constitutional system, and for
meeting all the requirements resulting from the
Ahtisaari Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo
Status Settlement package. It has closed the door on all
possible scenarios for partitioning Kosovo's terrritory
or federalizing it on ethnic grounds.

For that reason, the elections were a victory for the
adherents of every political party and institution in the
Republic of Kosovo. We have shown in the best possible
way that Kosovo is a democratic country and that we
can hold an election process in the spirit of a superior
political culture. I am confident that its success will be
repeated on 1 December in the 24 municipalities that
will hold runoffs in mayoral elections.

In most of Kosovo, election day passed peacefully
and calmly. Only at three polling stations in northern
Mitrovica were there isolated incidents involving
Serb extremist groups. They were orchestrated and
organized attacks on the fundamental right of citizens.
The obstruction, intimidation, blackmail and violence
shown towards the people at those polling stations by
certain groups in northern Kosovo was contrary to
society's democratic principles, hinders the process
of building an inclusive and tolerant State and affects
Kosovo's path to European integration. However, the
fact that the people came out to vote was the best
response to the boycott, and it failed. The decision of
the Central Election Commission, as an independent
body, to repeat only the elections in northern Mitrovica
on 17 November was welcomed and accepted by all
the political stakeholders. The repeat vote was held
this past Sunday, 17 November, and the entire process
occurred without problems.

The importance of the elections of 3 November was
that they served as a direct test as well as a result of the
direct inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
and also to legitimize our joint efforts to build an
inclusive society based on the European Charter ofLocal
Self-Government, in which municipalities function
as the legitimate units of basic local Government. My
Government is convinced that this turning point will
speed up the improvement in inter-ethnic relations in
Kosovo and accelerate Kosovo's progress on the road to
European integration.

The 3 November elections and acceptance of
their legitimate results are also a prerequisite for
establishing the community of Serb-majority Kosovo
municipalities, based on the 19 April Brussels
agreement. However, the community, which will be
established in accordance with the laws of Kosovo and
will be similar to the model of the existing association
of Kosovo municipalities, will have no executive or
legislative functions. That means that it cannot serve
as a substitute for municipal assemblies, and thus that
municipal responsibilities cannot be transferred to it.
No one can replace or relativize the direct power of the
free vote of the citizens of Kosovo.

I would like to also inform the Security Council
of our progress regarding the European Union. On
16 October, we received a progress report from the
European Commission for Kosovo affirming the
progress of our European agenda and the challenges
on the road ahead. The progress report is positive
and objective and praises Kosovo's relations with its
neighbours as an achievement exemplary of peace,
stability and the European perspective of Kosovo and
the region in general. We have taken into consideration
all of the recommendations emanating from the
progress report, with the highest level of State and
institutional seriousness and responsibility, and are
seriously engaged in working to meet these criteria.

In the context ofthe dialogue on visa liberalization,
Kosovo has changed and has adopted important
legislation, including on asylum and the financing
of political parties and against trafficking in human
beings, as noted in the report. The report also specifies
the criteria for economic progress that Kosovo must
meet, confirming that Kosovo is moving towards
establishing a functioning market economy.

I am therefore proud that all of these positive
developments identified in the EU progress report
are the results of the hard work of the institutions of
Kosovo in pursuing an ambitious agenda. In this regard,
the Republic of Kosovo achieved a historic milestone
during the reporting period. Following the EU decision
to start negotiations for the signing of a Stabilization
and Association Agreement on 28 October, that decision
was materialized with the onset of the first round of
negotiations between the EU and Kosovo.

The start of negotiations between Kosovo and
the European Commission on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement opens a new chapter for
Kosovo and the EU. It is a process of modernization
for the country and society. The Agreement is the
foundation of our relations with the EU and the first
formal step towards EU membership; it is the only way
to achieve EU membership. Only prospective accession
candidates may conclude such an agreement with the
EU. The launch of negotiations on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement has placed Kosovo in the
formal and official process of EU membership.

The institutions of the Republic of Kosovo are
committed to successfully concluding the negotiations
before next spring, with the aim of opening the way to
Kosovo's EU accession process. The European agenda
is a priority of the Republic of Kosovo that unites all
political parties, communities and civil society, and
reflects the desire and will of all of the citizens of
Kosovo.

The Structured Dialogue on the Rule of Law
between Kosovo and the EU has also continued to
function, representing a long-term commitment
between the EU and Kosovo to strengthening the rule
of law. The dialogue between Brussels and Pristina
focuses on thejudiciary and the fight against organized
crime and corruption.

During the reporting period, the Republic ofKosovo
was recognized by four additional States Members of
the United Nations - El Salvador, Grenada, Libya and
Thailand - increasing the number of international
recognitions to 104, representing more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations. I take this
opportunity to once again thank those countries for
their decisions to formally recognize Kosovo. This
ongoing process has proven to be based on Kosovo's
consistent, positive achievements, especially this year.
We expect the number to grow further with countries
from all continents of the world. Therefore, in this
Chamber, where I have always had the satisfaction of
representing a just cause, I invite other countries to
recognize the Republic of Kosovo.

The most recent recognitions demonstrate that this
process has a global reach and further consolidates the
international position of the Republic of Kosovo as a
geopolitical and legal reality. Our interactions have
advanced at the multilateral level, through which we
aim to build bridges and make our contribution to
building peace and security through foreign policy. The
Republic of Kosovo has also strengthened its position
in international indices.

For the reporting period, I draw the Council's
attention to the fact that the World Bank, in its credible
Doing Business 2014 report, ranks Kosovo 86 out of
189 countries in ease of doing business and positively
praises the dynamic changes and concessions that have
been made in the business environment of Kosovo. Over
the past two years, Kosovo has improved its ranking by
40 places overall. For the first time since it was included
in the Doing Business report, Kosovo has been named
one of the top five or 10 countries in the world with
respect to reform, making the most progress on three or
more indicators measured by the Doing Business report

On 2 September, the Constitutional Court of the
Republic of Kosovo concluded that the procedure for
the adoption of the Law on Ratification of the First
International Agreement on Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between the Republic
of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia and the
implementation plan for the agreement are in accordance
with the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.

On 3 September, the Court also decided that the
procedure followed for the adoption of the Law on
Amnesty was in accordance with the Constitution
of the Republic of Kosovo. The Constitutional Court
also declared inadmissible the motion of a group of
deputies on amendments to the Law on the Budget of
the Republic of Kosovo, which provides a fund for the
North. Therefore, that Law is considered complete.

The decisions of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo show that democracy is functioning and
further strengthen the political cohesion of Kosovo in
agreements reached with Serbia, thereby demonstrating
the deep commitment of Kosovo society to moving
forward on the path towards the full normalization of
relations between the two States.

I am also pleased to report that the Kosovo police
has assumed the responsibility from the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) for the protection of Serb religious and
historical sites. To date, only the Decani Monastery
remains under the protection of KFOR. The protection
of the Peje/Pee Patriarchate was transferred from
KFOR to the Kosovo police at the end of August of this
year. The formation of the seven-member Commission
for the Council of Heritage Protection in Prizren, as
required by the law for the protection of the historical
centre of Prizren, was completed on 24 September.

Kosovo's legal framework continues to guarantee
minority representation in all areas of Kosovo society.
Kosovo supports the rights of persons belonging to
minorities and protects their Vital interests and cultural
rights, including those ofthe Serbian Orthodox Church,
thereby becoming a model for other countries of the
region. In this spirit, the promotion of inter-religious
dialogue and coexistence has become a long-term
priority. One of the largest international conferences
of its kind, with the participation of representatives of
various communities - Islamic, Serbian Orthodox,
Catholic, Protestant, Evangelical and Jewish - was
organized on 17 September in the city of Peje/Pee. Such
events will follow in the future.

Following the adoption of the law on public
broadcasting, a Serbian television channel was
licensed, becoming the second channel of the State
public broadcaster Radio Television of Kosovo (RTK).
RTK2 began broadcasting in June and became fully
operational in August. As an important medium for
the Serb community in Kosovo, it has been welcomed
by the whole of Kosovo society. Now every family
has access to this medium, and as such it has become
an important source of information and promotes the
interests of the Serb community.

It is worth noting that the security situation has
been and remains calm in most parts of the territory of
the Republic of Kosovo. However, on 19 September, a
member of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) was killed in northern Kosovo. Lithuanian
officer Audrius Senavicius was shot with a firearm in
a European Mission car in which six members of the
Mission were traveling to the border crossing between
Kosovo and Serbia in Jarinje. This murder of the
customs officer from Lithuania was the most serious
attack since the inception of the Mission and came at a
time when the EU is strongly committed to normalizing
the situation between Kosovo and Serbia, especially in
the North, where Serbia still has extensive structures.
Violence against EULEX troops violates law and order
throughout the territory of Kosovo. The murder of a
EULEX member is a direct attack against the European
Union.

We do not want to prejudge the outcome of the
investigation, but the motives for the murder of the
Lithuanian customs officer may be related to the
normalization of relations between the Republic of
Kosovo and Serbia and the efforts of extremist groups
in the North to prevent that process. The Government
of Kosovo has made it clear that the killing ofa member
of EULEX was an attack on the values of the State of
Kosovo. The Government, in cooperation with EULEX,
KFOR and other international partners, is dedicated
to continuing to perform its constitutional and legal
obligations to strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo,
especially in the northern part of the country.

The implementation of the agreements reached in
the framework of the dialogue with Serbia in Brussels,
with the help of the European Union, has led to positive
developments, but serious delays have also arisen in
the implementation dynamics. It is worth mentioning
that our efforts as two sovereign and neighbouring
countries during the reporting period have given rise
to the conclusion of a number of new agreements, such
as the agreement on telecommunications and energy.
After many efforts, as a result of the agreement on
telecommunications, Kosovo will finally achieve one
of the important attributes that has been missing from
its statehood. Kosovo will have its own telephone code,
to be issued by the International Telecommunication
Union. Ultimately, that means establishing legality and
regulation. In practice, it means that other operators
from Serbia should stop unauthorized operations and
service delivery, which have caused great cost to the
Kosovo budget.

Besides the telecommunications agreement, we
have also reached another very important energy
agreement. The agreement on electricity ultimately
ends Serbia's illegal interference in Kosovo's electricity
system.

Success has been achieved in the consolidation
of the customs system with respect to the collection
of taxes in the north at two border crossings between
Kosovo and Serbia. Kosovo customs will start the
collection of taxes beginning from 14 December. The
income from those taxes will be assigned to the fund
for the development of the northern municipalities on
the basis of the legal framework of Kosovo customs.

We remain committed to continuing the dialogue
with Serbia in 2014 and to opening talks on new issues
that are important to good-neighbourly relations and
the quality of life of our citizens.

Finally, I want to reiterate that all United Nations
institutions have played a crucial role and have been
involved in State-building in Kosovo, namely, in the
process of the declaration of independence under
the Ahtisaari plan as a result of United Nations
negotiations, and the confirmation of its independence
by the International Court of Justice in July 2010.

The Republic ofKosovo is grateful for that colossal
contribution, it being one of the greatest success stories
in the history of the United Nations. However, I will
reiterate our position that it is time for the Council
to take into account the transformation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo into
a United Nations political office that would coordinate
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
while supporting Kosovo's path towards United
Nations membership and the effective fulfilment of its
obligations under international conventions.

I would also like to inform members of the Security
Council that we have already begun the process of
transforming the EULEX mission, which will be done in
full coordination with EU member States and the laws of
Kosovo. Kosovo will always be an independent country
on the European continent with a clear perspective for
the integration of the Euro-Atlantic family.

Kosovo has already taken the place that it deserves
among the free nations of the world and has become a
European State that contributes in a dignified way to
peace and stability in the region and beyond.

