Mr. Carlsson: I am grateful for the opportunity to
present the report of the Independent Inquiry into the
actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide in
Rwanda.

I am pleased that the report is to be discussed in
substance in the Security Council, one of the main bodies
to which the recommendations were addressed. I
commend Canada's initiative to convene this meeting.

It is now six years since the beginning of the
genocide in Rwanda, six years since hundreds of
thousands of men, women and children were brutally
massacred by their own countrymen in only 100 horrific
days. This was a genocide which took place before the
eyes of the international community and before the eyes
of the United Nations peacekeeping force. We, the
international community, did not prevent, nor did we stop,
the massacres once they had begun. Our failure to do so
is the reason we are here today. We had a responsibility
to act and failed to do so.

The question before the Security Council today is
why, and what can be done to see to it that what
happened in Rwanda in 1994 never happens again. The
Independent Inquiry was set up at the initiative of the
Secretary-General, with the acceptance of the Security

 

Council. I was joined by two colleagues, Mr. Han Sung-Joo
of the Republic of Korea, and General Rufus Kupolati of
Nigeria. We had two main tasks: to establish the facts
related to the role of the United Nations during the
genocide and to make recommendations for the future. We
visited Rwanda and other countries in the Great Lakes
region. We visited New York several times and conducted
in-depth interviews with key United Nations officials. We
visited France, Belgium and the United States. We spoke to
a number of survivors of the genocide, the families of the
10 Belgian peacekeepers who were killed, members of the
local staff of the United Nations in Rwanda at the time and
other witnesses. They helped to provide us with the
necessary, if painful, understanding of what happened.

My colleague and I presented our report to the
Secretary-General on 15 December last year. In the report
we identified what we considered were the failings of the
United Nations before and during the genocide and
formulated 14 recommendations for the future.

Today, I want to highlight the main conclusions of the
Inquiry, but want to focus particularly on the forward-
looking element of the report, its recommendations. This
Council has the power to prevent some of the mistakes that
were made in Rwanda from happening again. I hope
today's discussion will help to mobilize will in this respect.

The Inquiry found that the overriding failure of the
United Nations was the lack of resources and the lack of
political will to act. The United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda (UNAMIR) was often called an orphan
operation, one that suffered from being created in the
aftermath of Somalia. It was smaller and weaker than what
was needed, and the mandate was based on an over-
optimistic assessment of the peace process in Rwanda at the
time. When the genocide started, the Mission was not
working as a cohesive operation. As we wrote in our report,
there was a lack of political leadership, a lack of military
capacity, severe problems of command and control and a
lack of coordination and discipline.

In the report, we tried to identify in each particular
case where the responsibility lay within the United Nations
system. The United Nations had a peacekeeping operation
numbering 2,500 personnel in Rwanda when the genocide
started. They should have been able to prevent or at least
limit the genocide. In effect, however, despite the
courageous efforts of some of the United Nations staff in
Rwanda, the force disintegrated. There were certainly acts
of bravery by those in UNAMIR who stayed in Rwanda.
There are people in Rwanda and abroad who owe their
lives to the United Nations, but there were also those who
were left behind when the United Nations left Rwanda.
Some of these were massacred, others were at risk of
being killed. The withdrawal of the bulk of the Mission
left a lot of bitterness behind in Rwanda.
I should also say that our report also included
criticisms of UNAMIR and some of the troops in
Rwanda. It is important also to say that those countries
which did not send troops or materiel to Rwanda,
including my own country, also share responsibility for
what happened. It is a terrible fact that UNAMIR was
never able to get the troops that it needed, neither in
quantity nor in capacity.

The Inquiry emphasized the need for the
international community to be prepared to identify
situations of genocide as such and to act accordingly.
Political will is the key here. A lack of political will to
act is perhaps the most dangerous obstacle to United
Nations efforts to bring about and keep peace and
undermines the authority and legitimacy of the United
Nations itself. One of the aspects of the United Nations
role during the genocide which has caused most bitterness
in Rwanda is the fact that a few weeks after the start of
the genocide, the Council decided to reduce the strength
of UNAMIR to about one tenth of the original number.
This decision, and the lack of will to react firmly to the
actions of the extremists, put Rwandan civilians and the
remaining United Nations personnel at risk. It was a
decision taken despite clear evidence of the horrors which
were taking place in Rwanda, in the face of evidence of
a genocide.

A key recommendation of our report emphasized the
need to improve the capacity of the United Nations in the
field of peacekeeping. The members of this Inquiry are
not the first to say this, and unfortunately, we are not
likely to be the last. But I would like to ask the members
of the Security Council to take this point seriously. The
United Nations remains the only organization which can
bring global legitimacy to peacekeeping. The reverse side
of that coin is that failed peacekeeping efforts cause
devastating damage to the credibility of this Organization.
To the members of the Security Council I would say, give
peacekeeping operations the mandates they need. See to
it that the resources provided fit that mandate. Mobilize
the political will to provide the troops that the United
Nations needs at short notice and show the same
determination to exercise responsibility for international
law, peace and security, wherever the crisis and whatever
the continent.

 

To the Secretary-General I would say, continue to
focus on improving the Secretariat's capacity to plan and
prepare peacekeeping operations. In recommending
peacekeeping operations, tell the Security Council what the
real needs on the ground are, how many troops, what
mandate, how tough the task is. It is then the responsibility
of this Council not to allow short-term budgetary or other
financial considerations to overrule those needs. It must
ensure that there is full coordination on the ground between
different United Nations bodies involved and use the
lessons learned from previous operations.

I hope that the panel that has been appointed to follow
up on the Rwanda and Srebrenica reports will help in
identifying these lessons. The real challenge will be to
bring the lessons into the everyday planning for
peacekeeping.

Finally, on this point, I would hope that all Member
States will use the Millennium Summit and Assembly to
create momentum to deal with the problems facing United
Nations peacekeeping. Member States will have the chance
to see the political imperatives of making peacekeeping
work and to solve the problems which have plagued
peacekeeping efforts for so long.

During the months leading up to the genocide, the
United Nations, but also Member States and non-
government actors, failed to really recognize the systematic
horrors of what was being planned. There were warning
signs, but these were not given the attention they needed.
Much attention has been focused on the fate of the Dallaire
cable, and it was discussed in detail in our report. I think
the main lesson is the following: information of that
magnitude, and clearly any information which relates to the
threat to exterminate a population, should be shared with
the Security Council as a whole and must lead to a firm
reaction.

Efforts have been made over the past years to improve
the United Nations capacity for early warning. The Inquiry
believes those efforts must continue. A key aspect is
improving cooperation between departments concerned in
the Secretariat. Another relates to improving the flow of
information to the Security Council. This also depends on
members of the Council receiving briefings from those
officials most qualified to do so, be it the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, or the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, or the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Information
on the human rights situation is often a key indicator of
warning signs. This was so in Rwanda.

Much has been said on the need to improve our
capacity for prevention. Learning the lessons from
Rwanda is a question of putting prevention into practice,
of combining the will to act in time with the capacity to
do so. Improving the protection of civilians is a key task
for the United Nations. The Inquiry recommends that
mandates of peacekeeping operations, where appropriate,
explicitly include the protection of civilians. I very much
welcome the work done within the Council on improving
the protection of civilians, based on the report by the
Secretary-General last year. I hope that this thematic
emphasis will also add momentum when dealing with
these issues in individual conflicts.

I would like to mention two lessons from Rwanda in
this regard. First, there can be no neutrality in the face
of the threat of genocide or massive violation of human
rights. The United Nations and its peacekeepers must
react. Secondly, it is important to recognize that the
presence of a United Nations mission, whether or not its
mandates include the protection of civilians, will create an
expectation among the civilian population that they will
be protected by the United Nations. This needs to be
taken into account when planning operations, but also
when discussing how mandates are implemented.

The mistakes that were made by the international
community in Rwanda were grave. We must make a
determined effort to see to it that the same thing never
occurs again. Preventing genocide is a duty; it is also an
effort which goes beyond what is normally understood by
prevention. The Inquiry therefore recommended that the
Secretary-General initiate a specific United Nations action
plan to prevent genocide. The idea would be for each part
of the United Nations system to examine what concrete
steps it needs to take within its mandate to be better
prepared to prevent genocide. Political analysts,
peacekeepers and humanitarian officers should all be
trained to recognize the warning signs. Headquarters
should be prepared to pick up an early warning and to
translate it into early action. The Inquiry's hope is that a
United Nations action plan of this kind could provide
concrete input to the World Conference against Racism
next year.

Finally, I want to express the hope that this report
will contribute to improving the relations between
Rwanda and the United Nations. I also hope that the
recommendations will be taken on board in future
discussions on the role of the United Nations in conflict
situations.

 

