Ms. Solberg (Norway): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the Federal Democratic Republic
ofEthiopia, the Republic of Korea and my own country,
Norway. In 2014 our three countries established an

informal cross-regional group of friends of the United
Nations peace operations. The group has since been
meeting regularly to facilitate dialogue on reforms.

According to the Office of the United Nations high
Commissioner for Refugees, more than 65 million
people were forcibly displaced by conflict last year- the
highest number on record. Behind those figures there
are individual men, women and children - families
that have been broken up and forced to leave their
homes. We must do what we can to prevent, solve and
alleviate the immense source of human suffering.

The 2015 report ofthe High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) was a milestone
in our efforts to make peace operations more agile and
effective. Together with other recent reviews, the report
represents a coherent set of recommendations to adapt
United Nations peace operations to the increasingly
complex realities of the field. I would like to highlight
three areas where the Security Council can engage and
work in close dialogue with the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and host States.

First, the search for a political solution should guide
the design and deployment of all peace operations.
Security Council members must strive to overcome
their own differences in order to maximize the
Council's political leverage. Only then can we expect
genuine engagement from political leaders and parties
to a conflict. But ultimately, no outside engagement
can be a substitute for genuine political will from the
leaders of the countries themselves.

Secondly, the United Nations cannot and should
not go it alone. In these times of rapid and profound
changes in the global security landscape, we need a
strong global peace and security architecture led by
the United Nations working in close partnership with
regional and subregional organizations. We particularly
welcome the new strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).

We encourage the Security Council to make the
most of its relationship with the African Union Peace
and Security Council. It is urgent to agree on a more
predictable system for financing and support for AU-led
operations. There will be no lasting peace in Somalia
or in the Sahel region if the African Union Mission to
Somalia or the joint force of the Group of Five States for
the Sahel are not adequately financed and supported.

Thirdly, the litmus test for our efforts should be
more effective delivery in the field. It must include
more active engagement with local communities, not
least with women. Effective peace operations depend
on the ability of the United Nations to deliver as one,
often in difficult environments. We are therefore greatly
encouraged by the Secretary-General's initiative to
overhaul the United Nations management systems to
build unity and efficiency across the system. Priority
should be given to ensure the safety and security of the
personnel we deploy to the field on our behalf.

We are pleased that Secretary-General Guterres
has made continued reform a cornerstone of his agenda,
building on the framework of the reviews. We can count
on the continued support of Ethiopia, Norway and the
Republic of Korea, as well as other friends of United
Nations peace operations. We will keep pressing for
change to allow United Nations peace operations to
fulfil their true potential. We are convinced that the
only way forward is by working together, focusing on
what unites us rather than on what divides us.
