Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to begin by
thanking the High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest report concerning the implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2018/416, annex). We would like to affirm our
support for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
unity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We would like to welcome the positive developments
demonstrated by Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
reporting period, including the progress on the country's
European Union (EU) accession process. We believe
that progress is testament to the country's commitment
to the EU integration process, with a far-reaching,
long-term and positive contribution to the stability and
prosperity of the country and the region at large. We are
also encouraged by the continued exchange of visits by
high-level officials and political leaders of the countries
in the region, which, in our View, would strengthen
good neighbourly relations and enhance cooperation
in the Western Balkans. In that regard, the trilateral
meeting undertaken by the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia
is commendable. We encourage the continuation of
such high-level engagement in future.

We are nevertheless concerned about some of the
reported developments that undermine the political
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, we
take note of the divisive rhetoric and actions that continue
to challenge the constitutional order and integrity of
the State-level judiciary system in the country. In that
regard, we call upon all authorities and political leaders
to fully respect the decision of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Respecting the rule
of law and the authority of State institutions, which
are established under the Dayton Peace Accords, is
fundamental for the State-building process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is therefore important that all
parties refrain from any provocative statements or
actions that could undermine the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, cohesion and constitutional order of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We also take note of the continued disagreement
concerning changes to the electoral law in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that this issue must be handled
very wisely, as it has the potential to affect not only the
formation of Government after the next election cycle
but also the continuity and stability of the country. It is
our hope that the ruling of the Constitutional Court on
reviewing the country's election law willbe implemented
in a manner consistent with the provisions of the
Dayton Peace Agreement. We also encourage parties
to undertake serious political dialogue to address the
differences surrounding the issue of electoral reform,
which would be particularly relevant considering that a
general election will be held this year.

In conclusion, we would like to express our support
to the High Representative and his Office in discharging
their mandate to monitor the implementation of the
civilian aspects of the Dayton Agreement. We call on
the parties to extend the cooperation that is vital to the
work of the High Representative. We also recognize the
essential role played by the European Union military
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in
maintaining safety and stability in the country.

