Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to reiterate its strong condemnation of the
activities of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
as it seeks to arm itself with nuclear weapons and to
develop and launch ballistic missiles, in violation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions and in a manner
that threatens international and regional peace and
security. We do so based on our unwavering commitment
to the importance of preserving the credibility of both
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and the Security Council. Egypt also reiterates
the importance of ensuring that every United Nations
entity, along with all international organizations and
the international community, is decisive in addressing
any threat to the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
without discrimination or double standards. It goes
without saying that the need for all parties to respect
the binding international consensus represented by the
NPT is very important to Egypt, in View of the fact that
it is one of the major pillars of the existing security
regime. We also have to ensure that the Security
Council deals consistently and impartially with any
threat to that regime and with any measures that stand
in the way of its universalization.

Egypt is also aware that the repeated violations
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea of the
relevant Security Council resolutions constitute a threat
to peace and security, to the stability of North-East Asia
and to the national security of the friendly countries of
Japan and the Republic of Korea. Egypt will therefore
continue to call on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea to immediately cease any actions that contravene
Security Council resolutions and to refrain from any
that may escalate tension and instability and threaten
regional and international peace and security. We urge
it to once more accede to the NPT as a non-nuclear-
weapon State and to implement the International Atomic
Energy Agency safeguards regime without delay.

Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council and every United Nations entity to meet their
responsibilities in this regard by seeking a sustainable
peaceful settlement to the alarming situation on the
Korean peninsula. Such a settlement should provide for
the total elimination of the regime's nuclear weapons
and the achievement of sustainable peace between North
and South Korea, in accordance with the provisions of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. That should
include efforts to revive negotiations and provide a
favourable environment in which that can be done, so
that we can escape from the current vicious circle of
continued violations of Security Council resolutions by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

At the moment, the Security Council has only
imposed additional sanctions without clear political
prospects for a solution to the crisis. That will lead
only to further deterioration of the situation, which
could be a genuine international catastrophe. In that
regard, Egypt followed with interest this month's recent
Visit to Pyongyang by Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs - the first of
its kind by a senior United Nations official since 2010.
We believe that continuing engagement and dialogue
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea is an
imperative if we want to safeguard the chances for
reviving negotiations and dialogue as a way to reach a
peaceful solution to the current, serious crisis, which
has implications for our collective security. In that
connection, we would like to thank Mr. Feltman for his
briefing of 12 December on the outcome of his visit
to Pyongyang.

We underscore the need to continue with engagement
and dialogue. We must not lose hope in the ability of the
international community to reach a peaceful settlement
that meets the agreed-upon provisions set out in the
relevant Security Council resolutions related to nuclear
disarmament and bring about sustainable peace in the
Korean peninsula.
