Romania aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (EU) (annex 38). As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Platform for Action, it is unfortunate that these momentous occasions are undermined by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which disproportionately affects women and girls by severely affecting their safety and livelihoods, as well as by exclusion and underrepresentation. The full and equal participation of all women and girls is essential and has a direct impact on achieving peaceful and sustainable societies. We must enable and include their voices, perspectives and considerations in all processes and outcomes. Acknowledging the importance of resolution 1325 (2000), Romania has devised multiple national action plans for the resolution's implementation. The most recent plan, adopted in July this year, established a national implementation group responsible for consolidating cooperation and consultation with international organizations and civil society, as well as with monitoring and increasing the efficiency of Romanian institutions in relation to the execution of the provisions outlined in the resolution. The renewed support for increasing the representation of women in mediation teams, political transitions and peace processes at all levels, and in close consultation with women's groups at local and international levels, was deemed crucial for the full and comprehensive implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. While there have been notable achievements in this field since the year 2000, more remains to be done, since women and girls are still not adequately represented. Rebuilding societies affected by conflict and crises should be based largely on women's contributions, considering that they are among the most affected. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding, enshrined in multilateralism and symbols of international solidarity in the promotion and maintenance of international peace and security, are among the most effective tools at our disposal. As an active participant in missions sponsored by NATO, the EU, the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Romania understands and fully integrates gender dimensions in all aspects of national and international security and stability, and, as a result of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), 25 per cent of Romanian police officers and 15 per cent of Romanian military personnel participating in missions around the globe are women. Their expertise and important role have constantly been acknowledged. Romanian female officers have received the International Female Police Peacekeeper Award and have been appointed to leading roles within United Nations missions. Furthermore, Romania successfully deployed its first female engagement team in Afghanistan where, owing to the status of women in that country, male soldiers were prohibited from interacting with the female population. As a result, female personnel were pulled from other duties and pressed into service to create an interface with the 50 per cent of the local population that is female so as to better understand their needs. Women peacekeepers have proven that they can perform the same tasks as male peacekeepers under the same difficult conditions and that they can also improve the operational efficiency by engaging with local female communities. Their presence in sensitive areas may constitute a model for local women and a determinant factor for the latter to get involved in all aspects of decision-making. In this regard, we welcome the recent resolution 2538 (2020), on women in peacekeeping. We must strive to fully implement the women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping operations in order to increase performance and accountability, improve the safety and security of peacekeepers and, last but not least, ensure that a policy of zero-tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse is in place, in line with the Secretary-General's strategy to prevent and end this type of misconduct. To this end, on 5 November 2020, Romania will organize an international conference entitled "Gender Equality - 20 years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000): The impact on the security and defence sector". This event will take place under the auspices of the South-Eastern Europe Defence Ministerial Process. Gender equality, the empowerment of all women and girls and the realization of all their human rights will be essential to overcome current and future crises and build more equal, inclusive and resilient societies for all. Together as the international community, we need to be ambitious and continue to drive the changes needed to create the same enthusiasm that made the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and the Beijing Platform for Action possible over two decades ago.
