Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Tanin
for his informative briefing and continued service. I also
wish to express appreciation for the statements by First
Deputy Prime Minister Dacie and Ambassador Citaku.

Japan commends the largely peaceful legislative
assembly elections held on 11 June in Kosovo. At the
same time, we are paying close attention to the ongoing
difficulty in forming a new Government, two months
after the election. Numerous issues lie ahead for Kosovo,
such as the need for economic policies to promote job
creation and attract foreign investment, as well as
foreign policy issues, including the normalization of
relations with Serbia and the demarcation of the border
with Montenegro. We strongly hope that the major
parties will soon form a Government in compliance
with the necessary due process.

However, those issues do not warrant being taken
up by the Security Council every three months. The
Council has spoken at length about the need to adapt
mandates to the situation on the ground, and the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) is a prime example. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2017/640) demonstrates
that the risk of violence in Kosovo is far less than in
other regions on our agenda, such as Middle East and
Africa. A review of UNMIK is required to assess which
functions and mandates UNMIK alone can provide.
We must address the possible duplication of UNMIK
rule-of law-activities with those of the European Union
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, and consider a feasible reduction in UNMIK
personnel. In addition, it is well past time to adjust the
briefing cycle, which has remained in place since 1999
despite the substantially different circumstances. A
half-year cycle or longer is more than sufficient.

Going forward, reconciliation between Albanian
and Serbian communities in Kosovo, as well as the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
ais key. Japan took due note of the recent remarks by
President Vueie of Serbia on a final resolution of the
conflict, the importance of compromise and the need
for an internal dialogue on Kosovo.

Japan strongly hopes that the normalization of
relations will be achieved in the near future through
sustained and serious dialogue between the two sides.
We call on all parties to refrain from provocative ethnic
rhetoric, and urge the new Government of Kosovo to
promote reconciliation and tolerance, including via
the establishment of the association/community of
Serb-majority municipalities. Japan also calls on all
stakeholders to fully cooperate with the activities of the
Kosovo Specialist Chambers.

In conclusion, we are confident that Kosovo will
achieve sustained economic development. Kosovo
should make further use of its abundant natural resources
by facilitating a predictable business environment in
order to attract more foreign investment, while also
fighting corruption. Japan fully supports Kosovo's
efforts and strongly hopes that it will make steady
progress towards European integration.

