Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): Many thanks to
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also
express my thanks for the briefings that we have heard.
Given the mounting demands on the United Nations to
support countries emerging from conflict, such as the
Sudan and cote d'Ivoire, this debate provides a timely
opportunity to reaffirm our commitment to improve the
effectiveness of the United Nations in peacebuilding.

I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno, the Senior
Advisory Group and the team based in the
Peacebuilding Support Office for their efforts in
generating the report before us (see S/2011/85). I am
also delighted that Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra has been appointed to lead its
implementation. We fully support the overarching
approach of the report.

The international community, including the
United Nations, needs to be much more effective in
helping build national capacities in post-conflict
countries. The focus needs initially to be on building
institutions that can generate the critical survival
functions of the State: security, the rule of law and the
economy. Without progress on security, justice and
jobs, people will have little confidence in a nascent
peace process or the State authorities. However, that
will need to expand rapidly into other expected State
functions, such as basic services, infrastructure and
economic management.

Getting the right civilian expertise deployed
promptly to help a country deliver those core functions
is therefore critical, but, as the report emphasizes, local
capacity should have primacy. International capacity
should only be used as a last resort. It is therefore
important that international support be based on a
thorough assessment of existing local capacity.

To help where international deployments are
needed, we support the proposal of establishing a
civilian partnerships cell so that the United Nations can
better tap into the expertise of Member States, regional
organizations and other partners. Such a cell will help
to widen the network of expertise and thus improve the
ability to select people with intimate knowledge of a
region or post-conflict needs. A network of centres of
excellence will help to improve the quality and
availability of experts and the supply to the United
Nations and others. We need to see the benefits of such
recommendations working quickly on the ground.

The report also rightly highlights the need for
effective leadership. Successful United Nations
missions depend on strong leadership. We must select
the best candidates based on competence alone. We
support the need for better training of leaders so that
they can manage the post-conflict response more
effectively.

We also agree with the need for greater unity of
effort so that we have a clear sense within the United
Nations of who is doing what. That will be supported
by having a clearer delineation of roles and
responsibilities for the core peacebuilding sectors.
Without that, we will not get the right investment to
ensure a predictable and professional response. That is
ever more important in an environment where
resources are constrained.

However, we feel that some of the report's
recommendations need further clarity and consultation,
particularly those concerning the flexibility of mission
resources. We welcome Under-Secretary-General
Malcorra's plans to consult closely with Member States
as that and other recommendations are taken up. Where
recommendations are taken forward, that must happen
within existing resource allocations.
Finally, we welcome the plan for the Secretary-
General to prepare a response to this initial report in
the autumn.

