Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I congratulate you, Sir, and your friendly
country on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for this month. We are fully confident that
your efforts and leadership of our work will enhance
the role of the Council in maintaining international
peace and security.

At the outset, my delegation reiterates that the
people and Government of Syria condemn the bloody
act of terrorism that took place in London, the murder
of the Egyptian ambassador to Iraq and the acts of
terrorism that took the lives of Turkish citizens in
Istanbul. We extend our sincerest condolences to those
countries and reconfirm our resolve to strengthen
international cooperation in putting an end to the
scourge of terrorism.

We also thank Ambassador Loj, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001); Mr. Mayoral, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999); and Mr. Motoc, Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We thank them for their
work in skilfully steering the deliberations of the
aforementioned Committees.

Syria has suffered the scourge of terrorism for
decades. In recent weeks, Syrian security forces have
uncovered a terrorist network seeking to carry out acts
of terrorism inside and outside our country. In their
pursuit of those terrorist elements in the border region
between Syria and Lebanon, Syrian security forces
have detained 37 members of those networks who
sought to terrorize our citizens and to destabilize our
country. A number of those security forces were killed.

Syria was one of the first countries to call for
stronger international counter-terrorism efforts. Since
1985 Syria has called for an international conference
under United Nations auspices to define terrorism, to
mount an effective international counter-terrorism
strategy and to distinguish terrorism from the
legitimate struggle of all peoples under occupation to
liberate themselves, which is a right guaranteed by
international norms and instruments. After terrorist
attacks were carried out against a number of countries
to destabilize them, Syria once again called for an
international counter-terrorism strategy and reiterated
its offer to cooperate with all relevant international and
regional organizations to enhance the security and legal
frameworks for putting an end to international
terrorism.

My delegation has noted with great interest that
the Counter-Terrorism Committee has always been
guided by the principles of cooperation, transparency
and equal treatment in its revitalization efforts. In mid-
April Syria presented its fourth report to the
Committee in accordance with paragraph 6 of
resolution 1373 (2001). The report was issued as an
official document of the Security Council (5/2005/265, annex).

Moreover, my delegation welcomes the
cooperation and coordination between the Committee
and its Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate
(CTED). We hope that the CTED will be able to begin
its work as soon as possible. That will promote
capacity-building and the provision of technical
assistance to help States prepare their reports in a
timely manner and in a way that will promote the
implementation of Security Council resolutions.

In order to strengthen the legal framework for
combating terrorism, the President of the Syrian Arab
Republic issued legislative decree 33, dated 1 May
2005, concerning money-laundering and the financing
of terrorism. Syria also acceded to international
counter-terrorism conventions in accordance with
decree 5, dated 3 April 2005. Thus Syria has acceded
to most international conventions aimed at combating
terrorism, and we are considering ratifying the
remaining ones.

The Syrian delegation believes that the successful
visit to several Member States by Mr. Cesar Mayoral,
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, and members of the
Committee last May represents an important effort to
strengthen international cooperation and understanding
in the area of counter-terrorism. In some of the
meetings that took place, Syrian officials shared their
Views with Mr. Mayoral on enhancing cooperation in
the area of counter-terrorism, focusing in particular on
Syria's experience in the 19805 as a result of the
terrorist acts that threatened our national security. Mr.
Mayoral's delegation also noted that a number of
measures have been undertaken by Syrian authorities
in various areas, particularly with regard to our borders
with neighbouring countries.

We have always stressed the importance of
international cooperation in combating terrorism. Syria
has reached agreements in that regard with a number of
countries, including members of the Security Council.
That has greatly contributed to the sharing of security
information in order to combat this international threat.
Thus it is important to recognize Syria's efforts in this
area.

Everyone agrees that weapons of mass
destruction and their proliferation continue to pose a
threat to international peace and security. The best way
to eliminate that threat is to totally eradicate such
weapons. That requires a concerted international effort,
led by the United Nations and utilizing the multilateral
disarmament machinery.

Syria shares the international community's
concern that weapons of mass destruction may get into
the hands of terrorists and non-State actors. Therefore,
we have submitted our national report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). We hope
that the Security Council will consider the draft
resolution that we submitted before our membership
ended in 2003 aimed at establishing a zone free of
nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East, given that such weapons pose an
imminent threat to international peace and security in
the region and throughout the world.

Syria stresses its full cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee through the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and through
my Government's submission of our national reports to
the Committee. We emphasize that the Committee must
serve as a supplement to, and not a substitute for,
multilateral and international conventions related to
weapons control and the elimination of weapons.

Here, I would like to point out that coordination
and cooperation among the three Security Council
committees are very important in the struggle against
terrorism. Such coordination and cooperation enhance
the work of the Committees and lighten the burden on
countries, particularly with regard to the writing of
reports, since there is less duplication of information as
a result. We are fully confident that the Security
Council will take the necessary measures in this area.

The fight against international terrorism concerns
all of the world's countries, because terrorism is a
scourge that we all face; it crosses all cultures, borders
and civilizations. I reiterate once again that Syria, as
always, will be at the forefront of the international
fight against this threat.

