Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like to begin by thanking the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq (UNAMI)
and by thanking Special Representative De Mistura for
having introduced the report (S/2009/ 102). In addition,
we express our gratitude to all the staff of UNAMI who
are successfully carrying out their duties under the
extremely difficult conditions in Iraq today.

We are grateful to the Permanent Representative
of Iraq, Mr. Al Bayati, for his detailed account of the
achievements of the Government and people of Iraq
and of the difficult problems that they are currently
working to resolve.

There is no doubt that progress is being made in
Iraq, but it is premature to give way to euphoria. We
share the views expressed in the report to the effect
that the situation in Iraq has recently been developing
in a positive direction. The situation has improved in
the security sphere. The Iraqi Security Forces have
been strengthened. The Al-Maliki Government has
consolidated its presence in the provinces.

It is gratifying that, in the assessment of UNAMI,
the provincial council elections of 31 January took
place without serious disruptions. In our view, the very
fact that it was possible to hold such competitive
elections must be hailed as a positive development. It
is important that a growing number of representatives
of Iraq's various political, ethnic and religious groups
participated in the elections. The voting in the
governorates marks a substantive element of progress
in Iraq, specifically in terms of the overall political
process and the achievement of national accord, which
Russia has always promoted as a means of bringing
about a reliable and long-term political settlement in
Iraq. However, some problems did arise, including low
voter turnout, which, in Baghdad, reached barely 40
per cent. This speaks to the fact that virtually half of
the population has not yet taken civic ownership of key
issues in the life of the country and in the prospects for
the development of Iraq. Furthermore, important
segments of the Iraqi population, such as refugees and
displaced persons, were not able to participate and
remained beyond the margins of the electoral
campaign.

The report notes that the terrorist underground
continues to have substantial potential in Iraq. A
significant segment of Iraqi society rejects the presence
of foreign forces in the country, even when such forces
are governed by specific rules and limited in time by the
status-of-forces agreement. In that regard, we await the
popular referendum on the security agreement to be held
by 31 July 2009, which should formalize the attitude of
the Iraqis to such agreements once and for all.

Other major and potentially explosive problems
include those described in detail in the report: human
rights violations, violence perpetrated by national law
enforcement personnel and the situation in prisons and
detention centres. The failure to settle these problems
is creating fertile ground for new outbursts of strife
among various groups and for the activity of terrorists.
We believe that the Government of Iraq will be able to
overcome these existing difficulties by working in
close cooperation with UNAMI. The establishment of
the Independent High Commission for Human Rights
was an important step to that end.

Several other questions must also be resolved,
including the delineation of the competencies between
the federal centre and the regions; the establishment of
autonomous regions, concerning which there is a lively
ongoing discussion in Iraqi society; the definition of
administrative borders, including of Kirkuk; and the
adoption into the Constitution of previously agreed
changes that expand the potential for participation in
managing the country by representatives of all of the
communities living there. Finalizing these complex
objectives, which will determine the future of Iraq,
requires compromises and, most important, genuine
dialogue that could yield the appropriate solutions to
achieve national harmony and to preserve unity and the
territorial integrity of Iraq. We wish the Government
and people of Iraq every success in doing so.

