Mr. Wolzfeld (Luxembourg) (interpretation from French): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the associated
country Cyprus, as well as Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.

The European Union wishes first of all to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Coordinator of United Nations Operations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Kai Eide, for the tireless efforts that he,

 

his deputy and the other members of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the
members of the International Police Task Force (IPTF),
have made to assist in the establishment of a lasting peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the new Special Representative,
Ms. Elizabeth Rehn, and to assure her of our full
cooperation and assistance in the discharge of her important
responsibilities.

The adoption without a vote by the General Assembly
on Monday, 15 December 1997, of the resolution on the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina was a clear message of
support for the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the part of the international community.

The European Union wishes to recall that there is no
alternative to the Peace Agreement, which is the foundation
for the political and economic development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two multi-ethnic entities. The process
initiated two years ago has been characterized by the fact
that it has been possible to implement efficiently the
military aspects of the agreements. Furthermore, the
international community has launched a substantial effort to
rebuild infrastructure in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Full respect for human rights and the rights of
minorities is closely linked to the restoration of a multi-
ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina, with institutions operating
in full respect for the rule of law and in conformity with
universally recognized principles of justice.

One of the most delicate areas, which remains a
determining factor for the return to normality in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, is the training of police forces. Indeed, a great
many refugees and displaced persons, including those from
regions in which they were members of minority groups,
have still not returned home for fear of acts of intimidation
and violence. Administrative and legal measures must be
taken immediately to put an end to such acts. If these
measures are to be implemented promptly and without
discrimination, action by a police force imbued with
democratic principles is essential.

The European Union welcomes the progress made in
the two entities in restructuring the police thanks to the
tireless activities of the International Police Task Force. In
particular, we wish to welcome the disbandment of the
special units, the re-entry into the regular civilian police of
some qualified members of those units and the creation of
mixed police patrols. Furthermore, we wish to underline the
importance of organizing in the territory of both entities
courses on respect for human dignity and on the role of
the police in a democratic society, as well as the
importance of reopening and developing police academies
to ensure the training of police in accordance with
democratic principles.

Improved cooperation between the IPTF and the
local police, in the context of promoting freedom of
movement between and within the entities, and with the
assistance of the Stabilization Force, has enabled many
illegal checkpoints to be dismantled. The number of
checkpoints has been considerably reduced, and we wish
to welcome this positive development.

The close cooperation between the International
Police Task Force and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) made it possible to hold
orderly local elections on 13 and 14 September 1997 and
for the Assembly of Republika Srpska on 22 and 23
November 1997. This cooperation bodes well for the
general elections scheduled to take place in 1998 in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. To this end, the reform of the
media must be successfully completed so that they can
operate in a democratic and pluralist manner. The multi-
ethnicity of the parties needs to be developed.

The European Union wishes to pay tribute to the
work carried out by other divisions of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the Civil
Affairs division, the Human Rights Office and the Office
of Press and Information. Furthermore, the European
Union wishes to underline the importance of the Mine
Action Centre, which will be called upon to continue to
play an essential role in Bosnia and Herzegovina after 1
January 1998, with the implementation of the Agreed
Principles for Demining, which have been agreed upon by
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

While 1997 has seen real progress, further efforts
will have to be made in such diverse areas as the
re-establishment of security, the bringing to justice of
those responsible for war crimes, the establishment of a
free press, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
economic rehabilitation and the holding of local elections.
It is true that the results achieved will remain fragile if
further progress is not made soon. It is obvious that much
more could have been achieved had the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina contributed fully to the
construction of a civic and democratic society in the
country. As we enter the third year of implementation of
the Peace Agreement and the last phase of the
consolidation period, major efforts are still needed to

 

ensure the functioning of viable structures in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its two entities. The European Union is
concerned about the fact that the central Government in
Bosnia and Herzegovina operates without any organic law,
secretariat or fixed headquarters. The Assembly has met
only five times since its election last year. The central
budget is not funded by the entities, which withhold
customs revenues or do not collect them. Large sums are
being managed without the necessary transparency and
outside the legal process. Bosnia and Herzegovina still has
neither a flag nor a common currency.

The Peace Implementation Council met in Bonn on 9
and 10 December 1997 to examine progress made since the
London Conference on 4 and 5 December 1996 and the
Sintra Ministerial Meeting. The European Union welcomes
the convening of the Bonn Conference and fully supports
its conclusions. We hope that the decisive impetus given to
the peace process during that Conference will be
complemented by the full cooperation of all the parties
concerned.

We fully support the High Representative in the
difficult discharge of his duties. This action, as well as that
of the international community, remains indispensable in
the foreseeable future. Our ultimate aim is a Bosnia and
Herzegovina with an impartial administration that is finally
capable of governing itself and living within borders
respected by its neighbours.

The European Union reaffirms that it will not tolerate
attempts within the entities to undermine the sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, nor will it tolerate attempts by
any group to dominate the political institutions of that
country.

The European Union would remind the neighbouring
countries of their obligations under the Peace Agreement.
These obligations must be fulfilled in their entirety,
voluntarily and immediately.
Furthermore, we would recall that in the framework of
its regional aid, the continuation of the European Union's
international assistance is linked to full compliance by the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina and by the
neighbouring States with the Peace Agreement as well as
all subsequent obligations.

