Ms. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Honore, for her statement.
The Argentine Minister of Defence's presence in the
Council shows the importance that the Argentine
presidency attaches to the issue of Haiti.

France would like to associate itself with the
statement to be made by the observer of the European
Union, as well as the statement to be made by the
representative of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. I shall focus my statement on two
topics, which are at the heart of the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
namely, the preparations for the elections and the
reform of the Haitian National Police.

We are of course concerned by the cumulative
delays in the organization of the electoral process,
and we welcome the establishment, on 19 April, of the
transitional College of the Permanent Electoral Council.
We regret that this measure, which was expected since
the end of last year, has remained for such a long time
without any further action due to a lack of an electoral
law and constructive political dialogue. Democracy
is fuelled by elections, and those elections, under the
terms of the press statement that the Security Council
adopted on 28 January, must be free, inclusive and
credible. The elections must also be carried out in line
with an electoral time line that is clear and stable. The
regularity of elections of course is a sign of the health
of a democracy. Partial legislative and local elections
have been delayed for too long, while other deadlines
are soon approaching. It is therefore essential that the
elections are held immediately.

We note with appreciation the information provided
by the Secretary-General on the strengthening of
the Haitian National Police. The reduction in certain
criminal acts and the presence of the police on an
increasingly larger territory in Haiti can be taken as
positive signs. We also note the quality of cooperation
between the Haitian National Police force and the
police component of MINUSTAH. We noted, and
I think it is very encouraging, that there is a lack of
increase in violence in departments where the military
component of MINUSTAH has withdrawn. Of course,
much remains to be done.

The national development plan for the Haitian
National Police foresees an increase from 10,000
to 15,000 officers by 2016, while the report of the
Secretary-General underscores the difficulties that
jeopardize the achievement of the goals of that plan.
MINUSTAH must therefore remain committed in the
collective effort to contribute to maintaining public
order, but also contribute to the national ownership
of the major instrument of the rule of law that a
professional police force represents.

With regard to the rule of law, we welcome the
signing of the decree that created the interministerial
commission on human rights in Haiti, on
13 May. However, we remain as troubled others are
by the persistent elements that call into question the
independence and effective functioning of the justice
system. In the area of human rights, we encourage the
Haitian Government and MINUSTAH to integrate
the advice and assistance supplied by the independent
expert appointed by the Human Rights Council.

We support the commitment of the United Nations
and the personal efforts of the Secretary-General
to assist Haiti in eradicating cholera. We consider
it to be an attainable goal, and we encourage as a
priority targeted interventions to be taken at active
infection sites, as well as better coordination between
epidemiological services and field activities. It is also
necessary to pursue a sustainable policy for access to
water and sanitation.

The consolidation of MINUSTAH continues
according to the plan agreed by the international
community and the Haitian Government. The Mission
should continue to adapt to the evolving situation, both
in scope and in quality. We favourably welcome the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to renew the
mandate of the Mission, while pursuing its reduction by
15 per cent through a reduction ofthe military personnel,
specifically the engineering contingents, in order to
enable the development of a local entrepreneurial fabric.
We also urge - and this is a phrase that the Council has
often heard in this debate - the preservation of the
capacity of the Blue Helmets to communicate with the
population in French.

Finally, we note with satisfaction the prospect that
was suggested by the Secretary-General to undertake
important consideration of the post-2016 period. The
transformation of MINUSTAH must not be taboo; its
possibility should be a catalyst. We must create the
conditions for its success in the framework ofa credible
time line. And we must consider the presence of the
United Nations after that deadline.

I would like to conclude by again commending
the staff of MINUSTAH for their dedication and the
Special Representative for her dynamic action in the
Mission's transitional period. I would also like to pay
tribute to Mr. Nigel Fisher for the work that he carried
out as interim Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

