Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me
begin by joining previous speakers in extending our
appreciation to you for convening this open debate.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/579). We are also grateful to the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their respective briefings.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
just delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Notwithstanding the pronounced focus on the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflicts
over the past decade, the deplorable fact remains:
civilians continue to fall victim to violence. Persistent
violations occur that include deliberate targeting of
civilians, the indiscriminate and excessive use of force,
sexual and gender-based violence, and attacks against
relief workers and humanitarian aid convoys, all in
violation of international law, human rights law and
refugee law.

However, we States Members of the United
Nations are adamant about respecting and promoting
the core principles of the Organization. Human life and
human dignity must be at the forefront of our
consideration, be that in time of peace or, more
importantly, in time of war. That is the core goal of the
United Nations. That objective has led us to evoke and
build an elaborate architecture for the protection of
civilians. That in turn has laid the foundation for the
further proliferation of initiatives and measures at the
regional and global level.

Allow me to express three points on the
Secretary-General's first report to stem from resolution
1894 (2009).

First, the Council's framework requires a
comprehensive approach that embodies the three pillars
of the United Nations, namely, human rights,
development and security. The report makes a strong
case for the link among human rights, humanitarian
relief and security efforts. However, there is little
mention of development efforts in the report. We can
argue that development is not within the purview of the
Council. For that matter, neither are human rights and
humanitarian issues. They are not, strictly speaking,
within the Security Council's mandate. Thus, because
we wish to see consistency in the application of the
three pillars mentioned earlier, we hope that the next
report will also highlight the development aspect. We
Members of the United Nations must have a complete
picture of the situation on the ground.

Capacity-building to resolve and deter possible
conflicts is an important part of the normative
framework to protect civilians. For that reason, we
support the report's recommendation to increase
funding for humanitarian and development actors in
the context of the drawdown of United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant operations.

Secondly, peacekeepers need to be provided with
the resources required to fulfil their mandated tasks.
The United Nations should provide a well-defined
benchmark for the ratio of peacekeepers to civilians in
the assigned areas of deployment. And there is a need
to provide peacekeeping missions with appropriate
guidelines on the protection of civilians.

We need to continue this dialogue across regions.
In line with paragraph 34 of resolution 1894 (2009), on
consultation and cooperation across the regions, we
recently collaborated with the Government of Norway
to organize a regional workshop in Jakarta on
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. It was the first of a series of regional
workshops, with two others planned for 2011, one in
Africa and the other in Latin America. The goal was to
enhance understanding of the application of
international humanitarian law in light of the
contemporary challenges we face.

Thirdly, the Geneva Conventions are the
underpinnings of international humanitarian law. The
report alludes to cases where humanitarian relief work
is impeded, which has led to mounting demands that
Member States be made accountable. We note that
approach, but accountability will fail to bear fruit
unless Member States have the capacity to deliver on
their responsibilities. Such capacity can be delivered
through international cooperation. That is the logic of
cooperation and accountability.
States that have capacity must be held
accountable. The report clearly describes that Israel has
not fully lifted its so-called bureaucratic restrictions
that continue to impede the implementation of a
humanitarian response commensurate with the existing
humanitarian need. Israel has the capacity to fulfil its
international obligations, and therefore Israel must be
held accountable.

We value the Security Council's continued efforts
to protect civilians in situations of armed conflict in a
way consistent with its Charter-mandated
responsibilities. We believe that while the best
protection from armed conflict is found in the
prevention and resolution of conflict, in the absence of
peace we must remain vigilant as to the impact of
conflict on the civilian population. We must do our best
to protect civilians and minimize human suffering and
death.

Having said that, let me conclude by stressing
that Indonesia values human rights, we value security
and we value development. That triangle of goals must
be preserved and promoted so that we can
unremittingly honour civilians in armed conflict.

