Malaysia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. The past few weeks have revealed that only diplomacy and de-escalation can lead to a safer and more stable world. We have seen a substantial number of parties to various conflicts expressing their support for an immediate ceasefire, including in the Middle East. In the latter case, a ceasefire does indeed offer a promising path for concerned parties to focus on what matters and work towards a peaceful solution to their conflict. Malaysia fully supports the Secretary-General's call for an immediate global ceasefire in all corners of the world in the light of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. But more importantly, we call on the relevant parties in the Middle East region to permanently end hostilities and return to the negotiating table and dialogue. Malaysia's position on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict remains clear and consistent. A negotiated two-State solution is the only viable solution. We call on the international community to assume its responsibilities to end the suffering of the brotherly Palestinian people and establish an independent Palestinian State based on the pre-1967 border, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also urge the relevant parties to ensure full respect for and implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) on Israel's illegal settlements in the Palestinian territory. The COVID-19 pandemic threatens to worsen the already dire situation by further aggravating the humanitarian crisis and economic situation in the occupied Palestinian territory. The restriction of movement as a result of the pandemic offers a glimpse of the grave situation in the occupied territory. For Palestinians living in Gaza, the blockade has been forced upon them for as long as 13 years now. Malaysia stresses the need for the Security Council to act urgently to enable the unhindered transfer of required medical supplies and equipment, particularly into Gaza, and the easing of the movement of Palestinians who are in need of medical attention. Malaysia commends the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and its partners in the effort to protect the Palestinian people in the fight against the pandemic. The Agency must be strongly supported. In conclusion, my delegation remains convinced that the United Nations must continue to play a central role in realizing the two-State solution for Palestine and Israel. We will continue to extend our support for the Palestinian people in their quest for fundamental rights, particularly their inalienable right to self-determination, as well as their rights to a dignified life, justice and prosperity.
