I would like to thank President Cyril Ramaphosa of the Republic of South Africa and Chair of the African Union (AU) for inviting me to contribute to this high-level debate on cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, with a specific focus on the relationship between the United Nations and the African Union. I would also like to congratulate him on his country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I also wish to thank South Africa, as one of the three African non-permanent members of the Security Council, for its strong leadership and coordination together with its two fellow African members in advocating African positions at the Council, in collaboration with the AU Mission in New York, the AU Peace and Security Council and the AU Commission at large. Bearing in mind that about 70 per cent of the agenda of the Security Council is devoted to issues of peace and security related to the African continent, it would seem obvious that Africa should have a permanent presence in the Security Council. This, however, is still not the case. Enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the AU Constitutive Act and, indeed, article 17 of the Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union is not only a necessity for both organizations but a prerequisite for the implementation of our respective mandates of promoting and upholding international peace and security. The signing in 2017 of the United Nations-AU Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security by myself and Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has further boosted our strategic partnership and cooperation, with a view to promoting Africa's ownership and leadership of peace processes on the continent. The subsequent signing, in 2018, of a similar framework agreement to harmonize the complementarity between the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development and the AU's Agenda 2063 was in keeping with the enhanced partnership between our two organizations to accelerate the development agenda for Africa, in recognition of the nexus between peace, security and human development. Since 2007, in practice, the annual consultative meetings between the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council have been key to strengthening Council-to-Council engagement. Meanwhile, on the ground, the two organizations have also increased operational cooperation and coordination by working hand in hand to support peace processes in the Sudan, Mali, the Central African Republic, Darfur, Somalia and other areas. In that regard, I want to highlight the strong support and commitment to the strategic United Nations-AU relationship displayed by Secretary-General Guterres. For its part, the African Union is deepening its cooperation with the regional economic communities and regional mechanisms, particularly with respect to consolidating our activities to maintain regional peace and security. Similarly, we continue to make joint efforts to ensure that the implementation of the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative works in tandem with the objectives that form our vibrant pan-African economic integration agenda. But the Africa we want also believes in the principles of international cooperation in our increasingly multipolar world, with a view to addressing common challenges as one global community. In this regard, the United Nations-AU strategic partnership is a blueprint for multilateral cooperation. We have entered into similar strategic partnerships with the European Union, and we hope to reinforce cooperation with other key member-driven organizations, including the League of Arab States, which has a large African membership, in order to strengthen strategic cooperation and better address shared threats to our common peace and security. In that regard, I will continue to urge the international community, in particular the Security Council, to acknowledge the principle of burden-sharing for the maintenance of global peace and security. This should include the provision of predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for AU-led or -authorized peace support operations, based on the principle of the use of United Nations assessed contributions. As we seek new ways to reinforce stronger multilateral cooperation, we must also address the contradictions in the Council that hamper, and sometimes prevent, the resolution of conflict in Africa. I wish the Council fruitful deliberations.
