Mr. Simao (Mozambique): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the current month, and pay
a well-deserved tribute to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of Namibia, for the diligent
manner in which he discharged his duties during the
month of August.

I would also like to express my appreciation, Sir, for
your initiative in convening this debate on the situation in
Africa. As we approach the new millennium, we think it
is high time to reflect on the developments and challenges
confronting our continent. I thank all countries which
have expressed kind and encouraging words to my
country.

Africa is well known as the cradle of ancient
civilizations that contributed to the scientific advance of
the world. It is also endowed with huge human and
natural resources. These positive aspects have been
gradually undermined by a combination of factors which
have had a negative impact on the continent's
development. The colonial legacy, poverty, the
deterioration of the terms of trade and the debt burden are

 

among the main obstacles to the attainment of peace and
economic and political stability in Africa.

However, we are proud to note that African States,
including the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) countries, are introducing political, social and
economic reforms, such as the adoption of multi-party
political systems and free market economies. This in our
view signals the Africans' commitment to seek solutions to
their own problems, aiming at achieving sustainable
development and stability as well as the well-being of the
peoples of the continent.

While recognizing that the fate of our continent lies
in our hands, we strongly believe that the international
community must provide the necessary support to ensure
the continuity of the progress so far achieved. Africa is still
marginalized. Therefore, the international community must
take practical steps to complement the efforts of Africa
towards regional integration, thus allowing the continent to
be fully integrated into the world economy. In this regard,
developed countries must reverse the decline in official
development assistance for Africa, provide debt relief or
cancellation and mitigate the impact of the deterioration in
terms of trade while allowing access of African goods to
world markets. The 1999 United Nations Development
Programme Human Development Report contains
staggering statistics on African countries.

Regrettably, conflicts in Africa continue to be a
source of concern for all of us on the continent as well as
for all peace- loving countries. We are all involved in the
search for solutions for those conflicts which are
undermining the development of the African countries. We
are conscious that in Southern Africa our concern remains
Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Without
peace there is neither stability nor development.

With regard to the situation in Angola we deeply
regret the resumption of war, caused by UNITA, which is
denying Angola the well deserved peace and stability which
are so long overdue. Hence, the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council against UNITA as a way to force
Mr. Savimbi to comply with resolutions 864 (1993), 1127
(1997) and 1173 (1998) must be both reinforced and
implemented. It is also urgently necessary to ensure that
humanitarian assistance is provided to mitigate the plight of
the people of Angola and avoid a human catastrophe.

We commend the work done by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 864 (1993),
chaired by Ambassador Robert Fowler of Canada, which
recommended effective measures for the implementation
of Security Council sanctions imposed against UNITA.
We encourage the Committee to continue with its work.

The maintenance of peace and security is the main
responsibility of the Security Council. However, regional
arrangements must also contribute to ensuring the
attainment of that objective. After all, in the particular
case of SADC, instability in Angola and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo also affects that whole
region. Taking this into account, the SADC countries are
ready to collaborate with the United Nations to monitor
the implementation of sanctions against UNITA. We think
that this will complement the efforts of the Security
Council, and indeed of the whole international
community, to achieve lasting peace in Angola.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has seen some positive progress, with the signature
of the Lusaka Agreement by all parties involved in the
conflict. However, the slow pace of implementation of
this Agreement constitutes a major concern for the whole
region. In this regard, we call upon the Security Council
to adopt practical measures to ensure an effective
ceasefire. To that end, the early and timely deployment of
peacekeeping forces, with an appropriate mandate under
Chapter VII of the Charter, and with enough manpower
and resources, is imperative for the achievement of lasting
peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. All SADC countries, and indeed many African
and other nations, are ready to contribute troops for this
peacekeeping mission.
It is our hope that, unlike previous occasions
elsewhere, solving the security issue will not be a
precondition for the deployment of peacekeeping forces.
We are concerned that a step-by-step approach by the
Security Council may jeopardize the smooth
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

It is regrettable that whenever the international
community is faced with taking action to solve a conflict
in Africa the issue of cost is always raised. Cost should
not be a determining factor because it has never been a
determining factor in dealing with conflicts in other parts
of the world.

In the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, what SADC is proposing is a strong and
structured partnership with the United Nations in order to
guarantee the implementation of the Lusaka Agreement.

 

Africa has the potential to solve its own problems as
has been demonstrated on many occasions. Our continental
organization, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), has
been involved in the search for solutions for the many
conflicts devastating the continent. Through its Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution, Africa can indeed play a
pivotal role in the maintenance of peace and security.
Similar regional mechanisms, such as our SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and other regional
mechanisms, are also capable of playing a meaningful role.

What we need is to endow these arrangements with
adequate financial and technical resources so that they also
can launch and participate in peacekeeping missions in
Africa. We call on the United Nations to collaborate closely
with Africa to enhance Africa's capacity to shoulder its own
responsibility to help maintain peace and security within
Africa. We call also on the international community to
provide the necessary resources in amounts sufficient to
allow these objectives to be realized.

The success of the Security Council, and of the
United Nations as a whole, will be judged by the degree of
success it achieves in the least developed of all our planet's
continents. Together we shall succeed.

