Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
15 September to 6 December 2016, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations and dealt with a number of issues via the
silence procedure.

At the outset, I would like to brief the Council on
the main points of the interim report of the Panel of
Experts under resolution 2278 (2016), which the Panel
submitted to the Security Council on 28 September. In
the report, the Panel described several spoiling actions
by armed groups and political actors, both in the east
and the west of Libya, that delayed or complicated
the political transition as laid out in the Libyan
Political Agreement.

On the security side, the Panel reported unabated
military activities, including the use of air assets by
different actors, in Benghazi and Darnah and in the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) in Sirte. The Panel noted a change in control over
oil facilities, and continued clashes between armed
groups in Tripoli and along the coastal road to Tunisia.
The Panel expressed concern about the increased
presence of foreign armed groups in Libya, as well as
continued human rights violations by various factions,
in particular by ISIL, including mass killings, arbitrary
arrests and detentions and kidnappings

Concerning violations of the arms embargo, the
Panel reported on transfers of military aircraft and
vehicles and the presence of mercenaries and foreign
military forces, as well as foreign airstrikes, and also
expressed its concern with regard to diversions, both
within and emanating from Libya. The Panel assessed
that armed groups continued to finance themselves
through illegal means, including through the smuggling
of fuel. The Panel noted with concern the continued
fragmentation of Libya's financial and oil institutions.

With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel informed
that it was investigating alleged attempts to move
large amounts of assets from other parts of Africa
back to Libya. The Panel furthermore reported on its
investigations concerning the assets of other listed
individuals and confirmed a violation of the travel ban
by a listed individual.

The Panel presented a total of 16 recommendations,
of which one was directed at the Security Council,

13 at the Committee and two at Member States. The
Committee discussed the Panel's interim report and its
recommendations during informal consultations held
on 20 October. The Panel's report was generally well
received. The main points emerging in the discussion
were concerns about the political transition and the
security situation; security assistance to the Government
of National Accord; arms flows into and out of Libya and
the financing of armed groups. The Committee agreed
to follow up on six recommendations. On 26 October,
the Committee issued a press release containing a brief
summary of the informal consultations.

Let me now very briefly touch on the activities
of the Committee during the reporting period, which
notably increased. On 4 October, the Committee
received an inspection report from the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR MED) Operation Sophia.
No prohibited items were found on board the inspected
vessel. In accordance with paragraph 10 of resolution
2292 (2016), the Committee informed the flag State
of the inspection on 14 October. On 25 October, the
Committee extended an invitation to the operations
commander of EUNAVFOR MED Operation Sophia
to brief the Committee, in accordance with paragraph
3 (c) of the Committee's guidelines. The date of the
briefing is in the process of being determined.

In follow-up to a recommendation made by the
Panel of Experts in its interim report, the Committee
updated the existing entries on its sanctions list with
additional identifying information on 11 November,
and subsequently issued a corresponding press release
and note verbale to all Member States. Also in follow-
up to recommendations contained in the Panel's interim
report, the Committee dispatched two notes verbales to
all Member States on 15 November, covering issues
relating to the arms embargo and to funding for
investigations by the International Criminal Court.

On 21 November, following receipt of a note
verbale from the Permanent Mission of Libya to the
United Nations nominating a focal point concerning the
measures set out in resolution 2146 (2014) in relation
to attempts to illicitly export crude oil from Libya, the
Committee wrote to Libya to request the contact details
of that focal point.

During the reporting period, the Committee
also received two arms embargo exemption requests
invoking paragraph 9 (c) of resolution 1970 (2011),
one of which it approved. The Committee furthermore
received an assets freeze exemption request invoking
paragraph 19 (b) of resolution 1970 (2011), which is
currently on hold pending the receipt of additional
information. The Committee also responded to two
requests for guidance on the arms embargo as it relates
to non-lethal military equipment, and to one request for
guidance on the assets freeze measure as it relates to a
listed entity.

Finally, given that this is my last briefing to the
Council under paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970
(2011), I would like to thank the Committee members
for all the cooperation and support rendered over the
past two years.

