Mr. Kama] (Malaysia): First and foremost, my
delegation would like to commend you, Sir, for holding
the open briefing on the situation in East Timor this
morning. This is very much in line with our consistent
position calling for more transparency in the work of the
Council, particularly as the issue is of great interest to
many Members of this Organization.

 

We would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his very
comprehensive and yet succinct briefing this morning. We
note with satisfaction the relative calm and stable situation
in East Timor, which we hope will be conducive to the
reconciliation efforts that are being undertaken among the
East Timorese. In this regard, we welcome the recent
meeting between Mr. Gusmao and the pro-autonomy
leaders, particularly with Mr. Joao da Silva Tavares, and
the subsequent announcement of the formal dissolution of
the militia organization and the hand-over of weapons to
the Indonesian army.

It is our firm belief that all East Timorese, of any
political backgrounds and persuasion whatsoever, have a
place in the future independent East Timor. We therefore
urge the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) to assist further, in close consultation
with the East Timorese leadership, towards a successful
process of reconciliation among them.

We were also gratified to hear from Mr. Annabi of the
good relations that have existed between the Government of
Indonesia and the East Timorese, particularly when he
mentioned the recent visit of Mr. Gusmao to Jakarta, where
he was warmly welcomed by President Abdurrahman
Wahid of Indonesia. The other developments he
mentioned - the release of the East Timorese political
prisoners, the proposed opening of Indonesian
representation in Dili, the resumption of lighting, the future
commercial bank and the intention of Abdurrahman Wahid
to visit East Timor - are all very positive and we welcome
them.

In this regard, as my delegation has stated before in
Council debate, in shaping the future of East Timor, due
recognition should be given to the unique roles that
Indonesia and Portugal have played in the context of history
and, in the case of Indonesia, also in the geopolitical
context. It is important that the future East Timor
Government come to terms with this reality and begin the
process of forging constructive and mutually beneficial
relationships with them, especially with its important
neighbour. We believe that this relationship is also the wish
and desire of both countries, particularly Indonesia, which
is physically inseparable from East Timor, with which it
shares land and sea boundaries. UNTAET can assist in
laying the groundwork for such cooperation.

We hope that all the refugees will be repatriated as
soon as possible to their homes and given assistance to
rebuild their lives. In this regard, we welcome and
commend the cooperation and commitment of the
Government of Indonesia to International Force, East
Timor (INTERFET) and the United Nations, culminating
in the signing of the memorandum of technical
understanding on border management, which represents a
positive step forward in managing the border regions and
signals a new level of cooperation between the Indonesian
Government, INTERFET and UNTAET. Even more, we
are of the view that it will help to ensure the safe and
secure return of displaced persons to East Timor.

We also wish to commend all the donor countries
that participated in and contributed to the recent
successful donors meeting in Tokyo recently. This is
indeed testimony to the acute concern and support of the
international community for the East Timorese people in
the preparations for their independence in the near future.

In conclusion, as a regional neighbour, Malaysia
looks forward to a future independent East Timor's
playing a full and constructive role in regional affairs and
to its integration with the region.

