The President (spoke in Spanish): Under rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I
should like to invite the representatives of Australia,
Bangladesh, Cuba, Egypt, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mexico, Morocco, Namibia,
Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that l have received a letter dated
18 April 2011 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2011/259 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Thursday, 21 April 2011, on the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of the
lnalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.


