Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
and Executive Director Mr. Peter Piot, of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS),
for their briefings on the actions taken to implement
resolution 1308 (2000).

The AIDS epidemic has become a global
emergency, threatening security, peace and the
economic and social development of all countries, not
only those located in the affected regions. It is not
strange, therefore, that there are countries that consider
this disease, AIDS, as the principal threat to their
security. In Africa alone, this disease has caused more
deaths than all of that continent's recent conflicts taken
together.

Combating AIDS requires a response based on
collective action through international cooperation.
Controlling the disease is in itself complex and
difficult and becomes even more so in situations of
conflict, which generate refugees and are the cause of
institutional breakdowns, the collapse of basic health
and education services, erosion of the social fabric,
interruption in productive processes and forced internal
displacements of persons. It increases the number of
cases of sexual abuse and prostitution and generates
violence, chaos and destruction. All of these factors, as
indicated by Mr. Piot in his briefing, create conditions
conducive to the accelerated spread of AIDS and other
contagious diseases. Military personnel, whether
regular personnel or peacekeeping personnel, are not
immune to contracting and spreading this disease.

In this context, Mexico believes that it is
appropriate to have named an advisor on AIDS in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
to create centres for coordination on AIDS in the
missions. My delegation believes that the Council
should continue cooperating and devising measures
within the framework of resolution 1308 (2000) to
reach the goal of reducing the spread of AIDS by the
year 2015, as laid out in the Millennium Declaration.

It is important that the Department continue to
encourage States, within the framework of a full
respect for human rights, to supply voluntary and
confidential counselling and testing services to all
peacekeeping personnel, both before and after
deployment. My delegation is also aware that these
kinds of services, due to their high cost, exceed the
financial capacity of developing countries that supply
troop contingents for peacekeeping operations.
Therefore, Mexico urges all Member States concerned
to enhance international cooperation between their
competent national organs to supply assistance in the
development and implementation of policies for
prevention, testing and treatment of AIDS for the
personnel to be deployed in such operations. The
operation of the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund in the DPKO,
with contributions from the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), to support the
development and execution of AIDS programmes is a
good example of those joint efforts that we should
encourage.

In Mexico's view, an avenue to be explored is the
development of a plan of action with concrete
strategies for peacekeeping operations in cooperation
with health organizations and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). In such a plan, we could
contemplate the following endeavours: direct technical
cooperation with affected States, including
epidemiological analysis; development of educational
materials and AIDS-monitoring reports addressed to
the population; development of prevention strategies;
promoting research on AIDS epidemiological trends in
affected countries and their neighbours; promoting
technical cooperation between missions with AIDS
components and affected countries to promote an
exchange of experience and of lessons learned; and
strengthening vigilance in countries that may be
vulnerable and are on the agenda of the Council.

Mexico has assumed an active role in combating
AIDS. Recently, together with nine Latin American
countries, we negotiated an agreement enabling us to
substantially reduce the prices of medication and
laboratory tests. Based on recent World Trade
Organization agreements, Mexico will promote the
production of high-quality generic medicines of proven
quality for the population that needs them in less
developed countries.

Similarly, my country is convinced of the
importance of regional and international cooperation,
and we therefore offer the capacities of our public
institutions to train staff in health care, to share our
cumulative experience and to provide technical
consultants in designing indicators enabling us to
evaluate the impact of the epidemic and the global
response to it.

To conclude, Mr. President, Mexico would like to
request the Secretary-General, through you, to submit
in July 2004 a report on the implementation of
resolution 1308 (2000), containing specific
recommendations for strengthening the instruments
available under that resolution.

