Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic ofIran): At the outset,
I would like to convey my delegation's appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate, with
a focus on the crucial linkages among peace, security
and development, and for Chile's skilled leadership of
the Security Council this month and its presentation
of the concept paper before us (S/2015/6, annex). I
would also like to express my delegation's thanks and
appreciation to the briefers.

General Assembly resolution 60/1, the 2005 World
Summit Outcome, highlights the important broad-
based consensus that we live in a global, interdependent
world and that collective security depends on effective
cooperation against transnational threats, in accordance
with international law. We urgently need to build
consensus on major threats and challenges, and we are
committed to translating such consensus into concrete
action, including by addressing their root causes.

We have acknowledged time and again that
development, peace and security and human rights are
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. They form the
major pillars of the United Nations system. Each pillar
should be focused on its specific mandate, but at the
same time they must all act in harmony and conformity
in order to maximize the efficiency and effectiveness of
functions of the United Nations as a system.

We agree with the concept paper's emphasis on
inclusiveness, but at the same time we believe that
such inclusiveness must be established and preserved
at both the national and international levels if we are
to overcome injustice and provide equal opportunities
for all countries and nations at the national level, as the
international community usually asks for.

It is an established fact that countries with the
lowest human-development indicators experience most
of the world's conflicts. Just as a lack of development
can feed the flames of conflict, economic and social
progress can help prevent it and secure peace. Sustained,
broad-based development can help address the roots of
conflict through such steps as ensuring that wealth is
shared equitably, providing better access to agricultural
land, strengthening governance and ensuring justice
for all. Countries and regions facing stark inequalities
and weak institutions are at an increased risk for
conflict; a lack of sufficient jobs and opportunities,
particularly for young people, can also increase the
risk of instability. Drug trafficking and international
organized crime have found fertile ground in places
that lack basic services and economic opportunities.

Development based on consensus and consultation
is perhaps the most effective route to diminishing risks
of conflict and enabling sustained peace and stability.
Development is a central goal in itself, and sustainable
development in its economic, social and environmental
aspects should be considered a key element in the
overarching framework of activity on the part of the
international community and the United Nations.
Without security there can be no development and
without development there can be no security.

It is a mistake to look at conflict, unrest and
tension in a fragmented way. If we fail to address them
comprehensively, connecting the political, security and
development challenges, we must be ready to face tragic
situations. Political commitment and determination are
essential to sustained economic growth, sustainable
development and the eradication of poverty and
hunger, frustration, hopelessness and helplessness,
the major causes of insecurity and instability around
the world. In order to promote international peace and
security, the international community should commit
to advancing human welfare, freedom and progress
everywhere and for all. That endeavour should be
supported by encouraging tolerance, respect, dialogue
and cooperation among different cultures, civilizations
and peoples.

Peace is another name for development. They
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Security is
a prerequisite for development, and development is
possible only in a peaceful and stable environment.
Development is a guarantee of security. Sustainable
peace is possible only by maintaining the momentum of
development. The Security Council, within its mandate,
must pay greater attention to the nexus between security
and development if it is to fulfil its primary mandate
of maintaining peace and security in a pragmatic and
efficient way.

