Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Presidents Agius and Meron
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their comprehensive
briefings. I also welcome the presence here today of the
President of the Republic of Croatia and the Minister of
Justice of Serbia.

At the time when, through its adoption on 25 May
1993 of resolution 827 (1993), the Security Council
created the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the region was still ravaged by
massacres and ethnic cleansing that amounted to
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
The civilian population was displaced and hundreds
of thousands of lives were destroyed in violation of
the most basic principles of international law and
international humanitarian law.

On 31 December this year, 24 years later, the ICTY
will close its doors after judging a total of 161 indicted
individuals, showing that it is possible to bring the
perpetrators of the most heinous crimes to justice and
hold them accountable for their actions, regardless of
their political function or rank. It has proved that today
we can prosecute the perpetrators of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity, and that no one is
above the law. Today the region is at peace. Slovenia and
Croatia are now members of the European Union, while
the other Western Balkan countries, as candidates for
membership or in the process of rapprochement with the
European Union, are on their way to stabilization. The
ICTY played a major role in that evolution by rigorously
establishing the facts, assigning clear responsibility for
the most serious crimes and enabling the victims to be
heard through their painful and courageous testimony
to the crimes that they suffered. It has undeniably
rendered them justice. It leaves a fundamental legacy
that concerns the international community as a whole.
We do not deny that the Tribunal has had its
difficulties. It has faced numerous challenges that have
forced it to learn from its mistakes, but its successes are
indisputable. It has been a pioneer in several respects.
Through its impressive judicial work, along with the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), it
has contributed to the development of an entirely new
branch of law - international criminal law. It has also
contributed to the establishment of the International
Criminal Court. For those reasons, we welcome the
Secretary-General's intention to participate in the
commemoration to be held in The Hague at the end of
December. My delegation believes that the Security
Council should commend the work accomplished by
the Tribunal.

The Security Council created the ICTY because it
was believed that it was vital to restore the rule of law
to a region that had been the victim of an especially
deadly conflict and to enable the judiciary to fully
and independently exercise its functions and establish
accountability for the crimes committed there without
the possibility of denial. But however crucial it is to
ensure that the people suspected of committing crimes
as serious as genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes are held accountable in a fair trial, we must also
remember that on their own, a court's judgments and
rulings cannot heal the profound wounds inflicted by
crimes of this nature. Judicial decisions alone cannot
lead to reconciliation. It is up to political officials,
members of the worst affected communities, civil
society, religious leaders, parents, teachers and
victims' representatives to find the strength and the
means to rebuild their communities without giving in
to revisionist temptations.

The ICTY has accomplished the task it was
assigned and it is now up to each ofthe States concerned
to preserve the work achieved by the international
justice system, by accepting its decisions and working
unceasingly to bring to justice the perpetrators
of crimes under their jurisdiction. Those are the
conditions for true national and regional reconciliation,
and that is our duty to their memory. With the closing
of the ICTY two years after the closing of the ICTR,
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals is fully responsible for implementing the
residual activities of those two institutions. Its work
continues to be extremely important. Several cases,
at first instance and on appeal, are currently pending
before the Mechanism, and France reiterates that all
States have the responsibility to cooperate fully with
it in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. In particular, we urge all States to make
every effort to ensure the arrest of the eight fugitives
indicted before the Rwanda Tribunal.

In conclusion, on behalf of my Government,
I would like to pay a sincere tribute to President
Agius, who has just spoken for the last time before
the Council as President of the ICTY with eloquence,
wisdom and justifiable pride. I thank him sincerely for
his commitment, professionalism and perseverance
in providing high-quality, impartial service to
international criminal justice. Through him, France
would like to pay tribute to all the judges and prosecutors
and their teams, the translators and interpreters, and the
lawyers and associations that have been involved in the
success of the Tribunal over the past 24 years. They are
an example to us all in their commitment to continuing
to advance along the path of justice and peace, one to
which the peoples of Syria and Myanmar, including
Sudan, Libya and all the peoples of the world aspire.

