Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the Cuban
delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, and your team on
your excellent work in the presidency of the Security
Council. I also thank the Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for the information provided at
this meeting.

Our country has for several years been providing
the Security Council with detailed information on the
terrorist attacks on Cuba perpetrated by several persons
and organizations, as well as on the conspiratorial
protection that the United States Government affords
them. On numerous occasions during the past few
months, we have addressed this Chamber to warn about
the potential release of the international terrorist Luis
Posada Carriles. We have requested again and again the
adoption of concrete steps to prevent such despicable
acts from being carried out. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee was informed about that issue in a timely
and comprehensive manner, to no avail.

Posada Carriles, who has been rightly called the
most notorious terrorist of the western hemisphere, was
released on 8 May amidst the protests of hundreds of
solidarity movements and political forces around the
world and within the United States itself, demanding
that the criminal be brought to justice. In spite of the
fact that the United States Government itself has
admitted that he is a dangerous terrorist, Posada
Carriles was charged only with petty migration
offences. There is no doubt that the intention has
always been to avoid his disclosure of the details of his
terrorist actions against Cuba, Venezuela and other
countries while acting under orders of the Central
Intelligence Agency for more than 25 years.

On 6 November, the United States Government
lodged an appeal to the Federal Court in response to
the release of Posada Carriles. It was nothing but a
smokescreen, a new underhanded publicity stunt. It
was yet another action to conceal the confessed
terrorist's guilt. The appeal further fails to mention
anything whatsoever about Posada Carriles's massive
terrorist record. The United States insists on assigning
mere immigration offence status to the case, thus
ensuring the terrorist's definitive release and the
disappearance of all charges against him.

Cuba stands once again before the Security
Council to firmly denounce and condemn the
complicity and absolute responsibility of the United
States Government for that person's release, while
American spokespersons seek to distort reality and
present Posada Carriles's case as a bilateral dispute
between Washington and Havana or between
Washington and Caracas.

On 6 October, we commemorate another
anniversary of the gruesome terrorist act committed by
Posada Carriles against a Cubana de Aviacion jetliner,
killing 73 people. When Cuba consequently requested
the Security Council to act, nothing was done. The
draft resolution that our country submitted to this organ
was not even considered. The representative of the
United States, in addressing the Council at that
meeting, deemed it a waste of time.

Another mastermind behind the mid-air bombing
of the Cuban jet, Orlando Bosch, continues to walk the
streets of the United States in freedom, while bragging
about his numerous terrorist acts against Cuba. The
Cuban Government demands once again that
Washington return Posada Carriles to Venezuela or try
him in United States territory under article 7 of the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
Against the Safety of Civil Aviation, which stipulates
that

"The Contracting State in the territory of which
the alleged offender is found shall, if it does not
extradite him, be obliged, without exception
whatsoever and whether or not the offence was
committed in its territory, to submit the case to its
competent authorities for the purpose of
prosecution."

The Cuban people have also had to mourn, on
11 September, another anniversary of the assassination
of Felix Garcia, a diplomat of the Cuban Mission to the
United Nations. He was riddled with bullets when he
stopped his car at a red light in Queens, not far from
this building. The murderer was Pedro Crispin Remon,
a member of the anti-Cuban terrorist organization
Omega-7 and the same person who decades later
attempted to assassinate President Fidel Castro at the
University of Panama, in complicity with Posada
Carriles. Despite Cuba's accusations, including those
submitted on numerous occasions to the Security
Council, that terrorist also lives today completely
freely in Miami.
While confessed and unscrupulous terrorists are
released, the United States Government keeps as
political prisoners in high-security jails five Cuban
youths who were only seeking, with lofty altruism and
courage, to obtain information on the Miami-based
terrorist groups in order to prevent their acts of
violence and save the lives of Cuban and United States
citizens. Cuba again demands the immediate release of
Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon Labafiino, Fernando
Gonzalez, Antonio Guerrero and Rene Gonzalez,
counter-terrorist fighters who have been held hostage
in United States prisons for 10 years now.

Cuba reiterates its request to the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to take urgently
into consideration the comprehensive information that
our country has provided and to ensure that all
necessary steps are taken in accordance with the
relevant resolutions. At a minimum, this organ must
demand that the United States Government try Luis
Posada Carriles immediately for his acts of terrorism or
extradite him to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
where he is wanted by the law.

Double standards must not prevail. The Security
Council must not continue to keep conspiratorial
silence in View of that blatant affront to the Victims of
terrorism throughout the world. It is impossible to
eradicate terrorism if some terrorist acts are
condemned while others are covered up, accepted or
justified or if the issue is simply manipulated in order
to protect narrow political interests.

Cuba has never allowed and never will it allow its
territory to be used for terrorist action against any
State, without exception. We will continue resolutely to
fight terrorism in all its manifestations and forms.

As it has done to date, Cuba will continue to
comply strictly with Security Council resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and will pursue
its cooperation with the subsidiary bodies created
pursuant to such resolutions.

