Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important open debate at this crucial juncture. I also
take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Mr. Ambassador, on your new assignment as the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and to wish you
every success.

As mentioned by many speakers who took the
floor before me, during the period under review, as
throughout the past six decades, the Israeli regime has
continued its expansionist and destructive policies and
practices and its illegal and colonization measures
against the Palestinian people. It has also persisted in
its aggressive and expansionist policies towards
Lebanon and the occupied Syrian Golan. It continues
to violate the most basic principles of international law,
international humanitarian and human rights law and
the United Nations Charter, and persists in its defiance
of numerous resolutions of different United Nations
bodies, including this Council.

Palestinian civilians continue to be under
constant Israeli threat and attacks. The construction of
the illegal apartheid wall is continuing unabated
despite the advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice and in spite of the strong condemnation
coming from the international community. Illegal
settlements are expanding much faster than in the past,
and Palestinian lives and livelihoods continue to be
shattered. More and more Palestinian homes are
demolished, including those located in refugee camps,
as a result of the widest campaign in the past 40 years
for the demolition by the Israeli regime of Palestinian
homes in the occupied Palestinian territories. This
move is undoubtedly orchestrated to illegally alter the
demographic composition and character of Palestinian
territories, particularly Al-Quds Al-Sharif and its
surrounding areas.

The international community has not forgotten,
nor will it ever forget, the Israeli atrocities in the Gaza
Strip. Every day, new faces of this regime's war
crimes, and of crimes against humanity perpetrated
against the innocent Palestinians during its aggression
against the Gaza Strip, are revealed and new
revelations in this regard emerge, causing more and
more outrage across the globe. The recent reports by
United Nations human rights rapporteurs, including
that prepared by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
clearly indicate and illustrate some aspects of the
Israeli crimes against innocent Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip. Those reports attest to the appalling fact that, in
the Zionist regime's aggression against Gaza, civilian
targets, particularly homes and their occupants, basic
infrastructure, schools, medical facilities and innocent
civilians, including women and children, have been
callously and deliberately targeted.

There are many shocking accounts of Israeli

crimes contained in those reports. For example, it is

mentioned that in one case, among many other similar
cases,

"Israeli soldiers shot a father after ordering him
out of his house and then opened fire into the
room where the rest of the family was sheltering,
wounding the mother and three brothers and
killing a fourth."

Those reports cite yet another inhumane practice
that is in violation of the most basic principles of
international humanitarian and human rights law:
Israeli soldiers used children as human shields. It is
mentioned in these reports that for instance,

"on January 15, at Tal al Hawa, south-west of
Gaza City, Israeli soldiers forced an 11-year-old
boy to walk in front of them for several hours as
they moved through the town, even after they had
been shot at".

Israeli soldiers are also confessing to the crimes
they have committed against the Palestinian people
during their aggression on Gaza. An Israeli commander
who was present during the aggression against Gaza
just recently told various international news agencies,
"If you want to know whether I think that we killed
innocents, the answer is unequivocally yes".

The news reports regarding the tee shirt designs
made for Israeli soldiers that encouraged them to shoot
children and pregnant Palestinian mothers are another
indication of the criminal policies and practices of the
said regime, as well as of the depths of its atrocities in
its aggression against the Gaza Strip. Appalling
captions, such as "1 shot, 2 kills" printed on a tee shirt
depicting a pregnant Palestinian, or the shocking
caption of "The smaller, the harder" on another tee
shirt depicting a child, are indicative of the atrocious
and criminal nature of the Israeli regime's policies and
practices in its aggression against the Palestinians and
other Arab peoples in the region.

There is now more than enough evidence for the
international judicial mechanism to move expeditiously
to bring Israeli war criminals to justice. The calls from
international public opinion to not allow these crimes
to go unpunished should be heard and heeded. The
Security Council has an important responsibility to
discharge in that regard.

We thank the Secretary-General for his efforts in
establishing a Board of Inquiry and dispatching it to
Gaza, as well as for his commitment to report back to
the Security Council on the findings of the Board. We
await that report and expect that more concerted steps
will be taken by the United Nations to hold the Israeli
war criminals accountable for their atrocities in Gaza.
The credibility of the United Nations is at stake.
International public opinion is closely watching how
the Security Council, and the United Nations in
general, will deal with these crimes.

As several human rights mandate-holders have
underlined in their reports recently, the suffering and
torment of the Palestinian people caused by the
inhuman Israeli blockade should be ended immediately.
The Israeli regime should be forced to end the
crippling blockade on Gaza and allow immediate and
unimpeded access by the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
to humanitarian assistance, including food, medical
supplies, fuel and construction materials. We hope that
the Security Council will take meaningful steps to
compel the regime to end its blockade, which has
brought about an unprecedented humanitarian crisis for
the innocent Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.

I wish to conclude by stressing that my
delegation rejects the unfounded allegations made
against the Islamic Republic of Iran by the
representative of the Zionist regime in today's meeting
of the Council. Nothing could be more preposterous
than to hear the representative of a regime that has no
respect for the most basic standards of humanity and
decency, with its known record of State terrorism and
its possession of a nuclear arsenal, levelling baseless
allegations against others.

