Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom joins others in welcoming the announcement
by the Secretary-General last week that agreement had
finally been reached on the Constitutional Committee.
As Mr. Pedersen said, it will be convened in Geneva
on 30 October. We are also grateful to him for setting
out the modalities and complexion of the Constitutional
Committee, which we also welcome. That progress is
a true testament to Mr. Pedersen's hard work over the
past nine months and, of course, that of his predecessor,
Staffan de Mistura.

Last week, the United Kingdom hosted a ministerial
meeting of the Syria small group, at which all members
welcomed the agreement. But we also recognized that
this is only the first step towards the inclusive political
settlement that Syria so desperately needs and which
must ultimately include transitional arrangements
and free and fair elections. As the Secretary-General
himself stated,

"this can and must be the beginning of the political
path out of the tragedy towards a solution in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) that meets the
legitimate aspirations of all Syrians".

To succeed, it will require the serious engagement and
commitment of all participants to succeed. We call
on the regime, in particular, to demonstrate genuine
commitment at the first meeting and beyond.

However, the problems in Syria were not caused
by flaws in the existing Constitution, but by how
that Constitution was implemented and the regime's
repressive policies. This is a critical first step, but
the deeper roots of this conflict still also need to be
addressed. With that in mind, progress on the political
process cannot be made in isolation. No one here is blind
to this. We agree wholeheartedly with the Secretary-
General that the Constitutional Committee's launch
and work must be accompanied by concrete actions to
build trust and confidence. It is therefore crucial that
all elements of 2254 (2015) be taken forward in tandem.
Mr. Pedersen has our support in advancing these efforts
and we ask that all sides, and in particular the regime,
engage fully with Mr. Pedersen's confidence-building
measures, especially in terms of greater humanitarian
access, the release of detainees and much-needed
information on the missing.

It is also crucial that the Constitutional Committee
represent the voices and views of the Syrian people,
freely expressed. Mr. Pedersen has done tremendous
work to secure balance, and particularly we welcome
the strong participation of civil society and women, but
it is also critical that Committee members be allowed
to fulfil their duties free of fear and intimidation, for
themselves or their family members, if this process is
to be truly free, legitimate and credible.

Today's briefing is rightly focused on the political
process, but it would be remiss of us, as Mr. Pedersen
and others have said, not to recall the dire situation
in Idlib, an issue that has quite rightly dominated the
Security Council's work over the past few months. Over
1,000 civilians, including 500 women and children,
have been killed. Over 676,000 people have been
forced to leave their homes since the beginning of May.
Idlib is the Syrian conflict in microcosm. The Syrian
regime has targeted civilians through indiscriminate
aerial bombardment, arbitrarily detaining and torturing
political opponents and deliberately bombing civilians
seeking shelter in schools and hospitals. We cannot
allow impunity for these crimes or any of the crimes
committed in the Syrian conflict, so it is a matter
of utmost importance that the people of Idlib and
throughout Syria be allowed to live free of fear.
In this respect, we welcome the most recent
ceasefire in Idlib, which has largely held since
31 August. However, we note its fragility, particularly
given the continued reports of regime shelling. To our
great disappointment, Russia and China vetoed draft
resolution S/2019/756 at the most recent humanitarian
meeting (see S/PV.8623). It is now morally incumbent
on them and on Damascus to ensure that the ceasefire
in Idlib continues and that international humanitarian
law is fully respected. Perhaps when the representative
of Syria speaks shortly, he might tell this Chamber what
they are doing to ensure that the ceasefire continues to
hold and to protect civilians on the ground.

Since our Turkish colleague is present today, the
United Kingdom would like to state again that we
welcome Turkey's ongoing efforts to end the violence
in Idlib and to work to protect the ceasefire.

The United Kingdom has so far given over
$3 billion in response to the crisis in Syria, which is
our largest-ever response to a single humanitarian
crisis. We will continue to do what we can to support
those in need. With more than 400,000 Syrian lives lost
and nearly 12 million people in continued dire need
of humanitarian support, a political settlement cannot
come soon enough. Therefore, the United Kingdom
this morning joins others in welcoming Mr. Pedersen's
briefing on the plans and prospects for the Constitutional
Committee. We support his efforts and wish him every
success in his continuing work. We call on all members
of the Security Council gathered here, all those in Syria
and all those across the region to support his work.

