We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We express our appreciation for the diligent work he has done in his nearly six years in office, which were extremely complex years for the Middle East peace process and required substantial efforts - not to achieve progress, unfortunately, but rather to maintain the central role of the United Nations and the international legal basis for a peaceful solution of the Palestinian question. We wish Mr. Mladenov every success in his new endeavours, in which he has our full support. We also stand ready to render comprehensive support to the new Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. At the same time, we will maintain our consistent and principled position in favour of a just solution of the Palestinian question on the basis of the international legal framework endorsed by the United Nations, including its resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principles of the two-State solution. That foundation provides for creating an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living in peace with Israel. Annual votes on relevant resolutions in the General Assembly clearly demonstrate the continuing international consensus that there is no alternative to that recognized foundation for a solution. All final-status issues must be resolved through direct negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. President Abbas has reiterated his readiness for dialogue under the auspices of the Quartet of international mediators. We call on our partners in the Quartet - the United Nations, the European Union and the United States of America - to step up their cooperation to that end. We are ready to involve key regional players in those efforts. We need to pool our efforts and use the entire potential of collective diplomacy. We are extremely concerned by the information received about the progress in implementing resolution 2334 (2016). We understand from the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/1234) that in October and November the Israeli authorities endorsed one of the largest-scale plans to date for the construction of new housing units, including in Area C and deep into the occupied Palestinian territories. Construction in the area of East Jerusalem threatens to further undermine the territorial contiguity of the Palestinian State as envisaged by United Nations resolutions. We reaffirm our principled position that Israeli settlements in the West Bank are unlawful. We call for an end to settlement activity and the policy of demolishing Palestinian property. We are also concerned by the statistics provided by the United Nations, which indicate that in 2020 the number of buildings demolished increased by 72 per cent as compared with the previous year. At the same time, violence and rocket launches against Israeli territory must stop, and joint efforts should be undertaken to counter the threat of terrorism. The task of restoring Palestinian unity remains as relevant as ever. We will continue our efforts in that area by providing assistance to our Egyptian friends. In addition, the international community must take active steps to improve the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, especially against the backdrop of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We are extremely concerned about the reports of the difficult financial situation currently facing the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), whose work spans not only the humanitarian but also the political dimension and acts as a stabilizing influence on the Palestinian territories and the Middle East as a whole. The leadership of UNRWA is taking steps to enhance performance and reduce overheads, which are commendable. For its part, Russia continues to support UNRWA and calls on the entire international community to do likewise.
