Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): Let me join other
delegations in congratulating you and your country,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We sincerely hope we
shall be able to support you.
At the outset, let me reiterate the importance that
Botswana attaches to the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. For that reason, we have
consistently called on the international community to
act in tandem to prevent the systematic and sometimes
institutionalized attempts to prevent journalists from
conducting their noble profession.

We further believe that there should be growing
commitment on the part of the international community
to implement the ideals espoused in international
human rights law and humanitarian law. Such efforts
should be tailored to complement national systems
aimed at protecting the human rights of those who
are not party to conflict. My delegation welcomes the
Security Council's continued focus on this important
topic, particularly as it takes place against the backdrop
of ongoing and erupting conflicts around the world.

Botswana notes with concern that in their quest
to provide the international community with valuable
information, journalists often face arbitrary arrests,
brutal harassment and even murder.

Journalists are by their nature data collectors,
record keepers, information specialists and preservers
of knowledge, whether in times of war or in times of
peace. Their role is to record events as they unfold,
analyse them and share them with the international
community or with the public. It is therefore deeply
regrettable that, despite calls by the international
community to respect the rights of journalists, there are
reports of escalating and widespread violations against
those working in conflict situations. Such atrocities are
often committed by those who perceive journalists not
as stakeholders in peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
but as irritants and unwelcome witnesses. Thus
perpetrators wish journalists could abort their noble
mission, primarily because they want their blatant
abuse of human rights hidden from the outside world.

It is our conviction that the existing international
legal frameworks provide a realistic basis for the
protection of journalists in conflict situations. We
therefore call on all warring factions across the world,
irrespective of their character and formation, to abide
by those normative frameworks.

We also wish to point out that while opposing
parties in times of war have a responsibility to ensure
the protection of journalists, it however remains the
primary responsibility of States to put in place measures
to respect and protect journalists. That should be done
by enacting and aggressively enforcing laws that
punish serious violations of human rights, as set out in
the Hague Convention and the Geneva Conventions, as
well as in their Additional Protocols.

Having said that, it is our belief that prior to
unleashing journalists into conflict zones, media
institutions should provide the necessary counselling
for journalists to enable them to confront extreme
situations. Such counselling should also be provided to
their families and other support structures so that they
may cope with unfriendly situations.

Botswana calls for cooperation among States, the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court
(ICC) to hold States accountable for the protection of
journalists, whether in times of conflict or in times
of peace. The Security Council can also do its part,
perhaps more vigorously, in referring all situations that
threaten international peace and security to the ICC as
the only Court that can open investigations into war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

