Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): I promise that my
further statement will be brief. Palestine, of course, is
not yet a Member of the United Nations; it is obviously
not a member of the Security Council; and it is not my
intention to defend the Council against undiplomatic
attacks - undiplomatic to say the least. However, I
feel the need to make a few quick points.

For the record, we believe that the problem with
the Security Council has never been that the Council
was anti-Israel. The real problem is that the Council
has long tolerated and allowed illegal Israeli actions; it
has tolerated and allowed foreign occupation for more
than 36 years - occupation that has been transformed
into blatant colonialism: colonizing Palestinian land,
destroying the lives of a whole people and preventing
the realization of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including our right to exercise our
sovereignty in our State, Palestine. That has been the
problem, and nothing else.

Secondly, we object to the low-level and, I would
say, immoral attempts to link illegal Israeli practices
and policies with the international fight against
terrorism. Israel is not a passive, peaceful country that
is subject to attacks from outside. Israel is a terrible
occupying Power that has never stopped violating all
aspects of international law and international
humanitarian law in particular. Israeli policies are not
part of the battle against international terrorism; they
are part of the problem of creating terrorism.

Finally, we have had it, frankly, with Israel's
actions outside this building against us. We have had it
with Israel's statements outside this building against
the Palestinian people. But in this Chamber, it is too
much. Statements such as "the Palestinian people do
not love their children" or "the Palestinian people send
their children to die because of their hatred of Israel"
are statements that are full of racism and that reflect a
kind of attitude that should be rejected out of hand -
and I am trying to do that now.

