Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to
welcome you, Madam President, and we want to
thank you for presiding over this meeting. We thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing. In general,
Madam President, we wish to thank your delegation
for organizing this debate. We also thank the outgoing
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Eugene-Richard Gasana of Rwanda, for the
outstanding work done during his term. We would like
to congratulate Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen
of Bangladesh on his assumption of the important role
of Chair of the Commission. We wish him all the best
and pledge our support to his leadership.

In the intervening period between the 2005 World
Summit, which took the decision to establish the
peacebuilding architecture, and today's debate, we have
had discussions about the relevance or the value that
the PBC brings to the international peace and security
equation. Among others, the principal questions that
have been asked include, first, what is the added value
ofthe PBC? Secondly, what is the relevance of the PBC?
Thirdly, what is the role of the PBC? Those are critical
questions that the United Nations system ponders every
day, sometimes with limited answers.

The establishment ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
was a major milestone in recognizing the nexus and
interrelatedness between security and development.
Ideally, the Commission should be a premier United
Nations body for dealing with the challenges of security
and development. It could serve well as a point of
convergence between the different organs of the United
Nations with Charter mandates.

Nonetheless, South Africa would like to say from
the outset that we believe that the PBC remains a
relevant and critical tool in the broad realm of conflict
prevention and peace consolidation. It cannot be an
over-exaggeration to purport that without the efforts of
the PBC in the countries on its agenda, the situation
would have been different to what it is currently, that
is, that we could have seen those countries relapse into
conflict.

In that context, our objective analysis of the PBC
further leads us to conclude that the Commission is still
evolving and that it has not yet reached its full potential.
All six countries on its agenda recently witnessed a
reversal in their democratic processes, in particular
in Guinea-Bissau. A reflection on the achievement
and challenges of the PBC is therefore crucial as we
continue sharpening the tools of this important body. It
is our well-considered view that we should not shy away
from continuous reflection on the need to strengthen
the Commission's capacity with the necessary tools,
skills and expertise. That may well mean differentiating
between the notion of peacebuilding and the nature
and configuration of the actual structure that is the
Commission.

Today's discussion should also be seen as an
important opportunity to recommit ourselves to the
pledge that we took when we unanimously adopted the
resolutions that created the peacebuilding architecture,
in 2005. One critical moment in which the international
community intervened in the life ofthe Commission was
the 2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which provided concrete recommendations
on how to enhance the work of the Commission. My
delegation is pleased to learn, as stated in the report
(S/2012/70) under discussion, that there is a growing
momentum to implement relevant recommendations
developed during that review.

South Africa is encouraged at the progress made by
the Peacebuilding Commission and the country-specific
configurations in the countries on its agenda. While we
welcome those positive developments, we also believe
that more can and should be done. In that regard, I
would like to focus on the issue of enhancing the utility
of the country-specific configurations.

We believe that the membership of the country-
specific configurations should be encouraged to take
on specific responsibilities, ranging from political to
financial support. One of the main tasks of the PBC is
to provide political attention to, and advocacy for, the
countries on its agenda. In that context, the members of
the configurations should be encouraged to bring their
influence to bear and to provide the necessary political
backbone to the countries on whose configurations they
Sit.

Furthermore, membership in those configurations
should not be simply a label of prestige for its members,
but should come with responsibility. Therefore, as
recommended in the 2010 review, in order to improve
the PBC'S effectiveness on the ground, the Chairs of
configurations should not be personalized, so as to
allow the country from which the configuration Chair
comes or that the Chair represents at the United Nations
to take the lead in the process, or at least to be actively
engaged. That could be even easier and more effective
where the country that the Chair represents at the
United Nations has diplomatic representation in the
country on the PBC agenda. It is a fact that we have
not yet reflected on whether the composition, which is
currently made up of State representatives based here in
New York, is the only way to make up the Commission,
or whether we should be flexible and open-minded
about expertise residing elsewhere, whether in the civil
service or in the private sector.

With respect to coordination and strategic
partnerships, we believe that increased coordination is
crucial for ensuring effective international efforts in
post-conflict situations and international interventions.
United Nations efforts are often fragmented and face
a struggle to pull the critical resources together and
maximize the strength of collective efforts. Over the
years, the PBC, as part ofthat United Nations machinery,
has also had to struggle to coordinate resources that
are necessary to strengthen and sustain new peace. In
that regard, South Africa strongly supports the call
for greater coherence, coordination and interaction
between various United Nations organs and agencies,
especially in the field. Greater coordination has the
potential to avert duplication of efforts and maximize
output at a time of limited and constantly shrinking
resources.

The interaction with the World Bank and donor
organizations is welcome and should be sustained.
We also welcome the dynamic partnership between
the Commission and the African Development Bank.
However, we would encourage cooperation with the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa as
well. We further welcome the engagement with the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of African
States.

Having recognized the inextricable link between
security and development, we welcome the growing
relationship between the Commission and the
Economic and Social Council. As regards coordination
in the field, the PBC should be given the mandate to be
the sole convener or coordinator of at least the United
Nations peacebuilding interventions in countries on its
agenda. In consultation with other stakeholders, the
United Nations should ensure that all other agencies,
including civil society, should channel their efforts
through the PBC at the country level in the interest of
avoiding possible duplication and competition for space
and attention. The integrated peacebuilding Mission
in Sierra Leone, where the PBC involvement was
aligned with the priorities of the Government through
its national Agenda for Change, could be used as an
example.

We believe that the relationship between the
Security Council and the PBC is perhaps the most
important one, given the mandates of both entities.
The PBC report notes that, "The relationship with the
Security Council has continued to develop during the
reporting period." (S/2012/70, para. 24) That positive
development is evidenced, inter alia, by the introduction
of informal interactions between the Council and the
Chairs of the country configurations.

We would once again like to stress the need for the
Council to consider flexible working methods so as to
enable the PBC to play its role effectively in advising
the Council on post-conflict situations. Whereas
the Council has incorporated peacebuilding tasks in
virtually all, if not all its peacekeeping mandates, we
nevertheless emphasize that the advice of the PBC
should be sought at all times where it is deemed relevant.
We also reiterate that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
should be mutually reinforcing in the pursuance of
lasting peace in post-conflict countries.

With respect to resource mobilization, it goes
without saying that peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries requires a substantive injection of resources.
In that regard, we believe that timely, sustainable and
predictable financing remains a crucial ingredient
in realizing the objectives of peacebuilding. We
therefore emphasize the need for the United Nations
to consider utilizing sustainable mechanisms as a
means of kick-starting peacebuilding activities in
countries emerging from conflict, including assessed
contributions, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects. Such projects are critical for the consolidation
of peace dividends so as to avert a total relapse into
conflict.

Post-conflict countries often have weak human
and institutional capacities for peacebuilding. South
Africa emphasizes the importance of building local
institutional and human capacities and of providing
training to create new, and enhance already existing,
capacities. We welcome the process led by the United
Nations Development Programme to strengthen the
United Nations system-wide approach to capacity
development for peacebuilding. In developing such
capacities, we cannot over-emphasize the importance
of forging partnerships at the local, regional and
subregional levels in order to exploit the unique
advantages inherent in human capacities at those
levels. In that context, the notion of developing and
tapping into civilian capacities, particularly from the
global South, is crucial. In developing those capacities,
national ownership should be emphasized at all the
stages of the peacebuilding process.

To conclude, South Africa reiterates its commitment
to the work of the PBC. We believe that the Commission
has a critical role to play in terms of conflict prevention,
including in the early detection of root and proximate
causes, as well as in identifying potential triggers of
conflict. Africa has benefited from the efforts of the
PBC. We want to see a more robust, agile and resourced
body that will help the continent avert conflict and
consolidate fragile peace where it is created.

