Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French):
Mediation is a clear demonstration of the increased
power of diplomacy for peace, as the Secretary-General
has said. That is a cornerstone our Organization and
a key part of the Security Council's duty to maintain
international peace and security.

The United Nations is the forum for great mediators.
Therefore, I would like to pay tribute to Kofi Annan
for his work as Secretary-General and as mediator in
several crises - notably, in Kenya, Syria and Burma.
He was the embodiment ofa good listener, impartiality
and personal authority, which are indispensable for a
mediator. He knew how to achieve the key to successful
mediation: establishing unity where there are divisions
and a common framework that expands stakeholders'
outlook in order to overcome conflicts and free them
from the prison of binary win-lose logic and zero-
sum games.

Mediation is one of the essential tools provided
by Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. The Gambia and
Colombia are recent success stories that underscore
the usefulness of that tool in conflict prevention,
management and resolution.

In that context, France fully endorses the Secretary-
General's vision, according to which we must be
collectively more effective in preventing the emergence
and deterioration of crisis situations. France therefore
welcomes the efforts the Secretary-General has made
to strengthen the mediation capacities of the United
Nations, namely, through the establishment of the High-
level Advisory Board on Mediation in September 2017.
France also welcomes the other measures that have
been taken in recent years, such as the establishment
of the Mediation Support Unit and the Standby Team
of Senior Mediation Advisers and the development of
United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation.

The United Nations plays a key mediation role
in many crisis situations today. I have in mind in
particular the cases of Syria, Yemen and Libya, where
United Nations representatives are directly responsible
for conflict resolution processes. I would also mention
Mali, the Central African Republic, Iraq, Colombia and
West Africa, where the special representatives of the
Secretary-General and regional offices are playing a
crucial role through their good offices.

Despite that progress and the indispensable role
played by the United Nations, the increased number of
conflicts in the world and the increasing complexity and
global nature of conflicts make mediation efforts much
more complex. In Mali, for example, the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
with the support of international mediation, is facing
both obstruction by criminal and terrorist groups
and difficulties encountered by the various parties in
joining their efforts to develop solutions to the crisis.

Elsewhere, mediation efforts are too often
hampered by political or ideological positions that limit
mediators' room for manoeuvre. The lack of political
will and ownership by stakeholders is also a major
challenge for mediation processes.

Finally, global challenges are now a potential
source of increased conflict that cannot be ignored. I
would mention climate change, which is exacerbating
traditional sources of conflict, as evidenced, for
example, by the tensions between breeders and farmers
in West and Central Africa.

Against that backdrop, the Security Council must,
more than ever, redouble its efforts to support ongoing
mediation efforts. As I mentioned earlier, the Security
Council itself has entrusted the United Nations with
the responsibility for managing the political processes
in Syria, Yemen and Libya. However, those political
processes can succeed only if the Security Council is
united in supporting the United Nations mediators and
if its members remove certain political or ideological
obstacles that undermine such processes.

In that context, France reiterates its full support
to the United Nations mediators. In Syria, after years
of bloody conflict, today hope lies in the political
process launched by Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura
in Geneva, the only forum in a position to achieve a
negotiated political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015). In Yemen, France also fully supports
the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and the
holding on 6 September of the Geneva conference with
all the parties. Lastly, in Libya, France reiterates its full
support to Special Representative Ghassan Salame and
his appeal to the parties to meet the commitments made
in Paris last June.

Apart from the unity of the Security Council, other
elements seem essential to the success of mediation
initiatives. In particular, it concerns their inclusiveness,
especially the effective participation of women in all
stages of the political process, which is an essential
prerequisite for ensuring the emergence of lasting
peace. It is also a matter of working with civil society
and all those that support non-violence in society in
order to fully benefit from the tremendous momentum
in serving peace that they represent, be they young
people, professional organizations or religious leaders.

The effectiveness of mediation efforts can also be
enhanced by strengthening the links and coordination
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. The latter bring the United
Nations close to the field and an in-depth knowledge of
the local environment.

Finally, today it seems to be necessary to
further increase our ability to anticipate crises by
strengthening early-warning mechanisms, but also
by using preventive diplomacy. Preventing a conflict
rather than having to resolve it must be a priority, and
the case of the Gambia is an example to follow. The
joint efforts of the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
made it possible to prevent the post-electoral crisis
from turning into a conflict, whose main victim would
have been the people.

I will conclude my statement by emphasizing
that, while mediation is an essential element of
crisis prevention and resolution, it must of course be
supported by the promotion of respect for international
law, in particular human rights law and international
humanitarian law, and recourse to international justice
and arbitration. International law remains an enduring
linchpin of the multilateral order and an essential
instrument for preventing or resolving crises and for
restoring peace.

