Mr. Cardi (Italy): I thank Mr. O'Brien for his
briefing. He and the humanitarian agencies have the
full support of Italy.

As we know, the Syrian conflict has already
caused unspeakable levels of human suffering, death
and displacement. International humanitarian law is
violated. Terrorists continue to kill scores of Syrians,
including children - like in the barbaric attack in
Al-Rashidin on 15 April. The carnage, which reached
new heights of horror with the chemical weapons attack
in Khan Shaykhun, offends our common humanity and
can undermine any path towards a credible end to the
Syrian conflict.

We take note of the increase in the number
of inter-agency convoys that have reached their
destinations in hard-to-reach areas since last month.
That demonstrates that humanitarian access can be
provided in Syria. But it is not enough. It is important
to focus on besieged areas, where the situation clearly
is worsening, especially in eastern Ghouta, where the
400,000 people under siege have no medical facilities
to rely upon since all has been destroyed. Convoys are
ready to deliver much-needed assistance to Douma and
elsewhere, but cannot proceed. The armed faction has
provided written guarantee for the convoys, whereas
the regime - despite Russian pressure - continues to
deny this authorization. We support the call, therefore,
for an immediate pause in the fighting to allow for
humanitarian aid to be delivered to eastern Ghouta,
which cannot become the next Aleppo. The Security
Council should closely monitor this issue and step up
the pressure on the relevant parties.

Local agreements between the parties to the
conflict, often reached after months of siege and
bombings - such as the agreement of the four
towns - are also cause for concern. They respond to
the military logic of the conflict rather than ensure the
protection of civilians. The evacuations that follow
such agreements, in which the United Nations is neither
involved nor an observer, have to respect humanitarian
principles. We encourage the United Nations to monitor
the evacuation in the four towns and Al-Waer in order
to ensure the protection of civilians and prevent further
violations of humanitarian law.

The consequences of the conflict have spread
across the region. Instability radiates far beyond
Syria, be it in the form of terrorism or in the form of
uncontrolled flows of refugees. Legal and safe ways to
ensure the movement of people fleeing from conflicts
are paramount. We commend neighbouring countries
that provide refuge to the millions of people who have
fled the fighting. In that regard, the Italian Government
is carrying out a programme called Humanitarian
Corridors, which allows safe and legal entry to Italy for
people fleeing the horrors of the combat. It is an act of
solidarity and a means to combat trafficking, a model
that other countries are following.

I also wish to highlight the contribution of the recent
Brussels conference. Italy confirmed its commitment
of humanitarian aid and longer-term assistance for
2017-2018; but of course humanitarian assistance
must be delivered to the population. The conference
also resulted in renewed efforts by the international
community, both in the response to the humanitarian
tragedy and also in the direction of a political solution
because. As we know, the humanitarian and political
dimensions are deeply interconnected. Improving the
humanitarian situation is key to creating a constructive
environment in Geneva, where talks will resume
under the leadership of Staffan de Mistura. We cannot
allow that critical negotiation to be jeopardized by an
intensification offighting on the ground or by continued
lack of humanitarian access to the population. The
co-guarantors of the ceasefire and the Special Envoy
have a responsibility in that respect, and we look
forward to the next Astana meeting.
What emerged also in the Group ofSeven ministerial
meetings in Italy recently, which also included key
regional stakeholders, is that only a political settlement
to implement resolution 2254 (2015) will bring this
conflict and the dire humanitarian situation to an end.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm the importance
of accountability for those responsible for the terrible
crimes we are witnessing in Syria. Italy will continue
to work with Council members to that end.

