Mr. Roet (Israel): The girls and boys of today
represent the hope for a better tomorrow. When a
child is a victim of war, his world, his family and his
community lose their most precious possession: their
hope for a brighter future. The loss of any child is an
incomparable tragedy. The deliberate infliction of harm
on children is an inhumane crime. Protecting children
is our highest obligation.

According to the Jewish tradition, whoever saves
one life it is as if he has saved the entire world. Seventy
years after the establishment of this institution, there
are far too many lives we fail to save. The painful fact
is that children all over the world are suffering from
unprecedented cruelty and inhumanity.

In Nigeria, Boko Haram has already abducted
1,000 children, many of whom were placed on the
front line to act as human shields. In the Democratic
Republic of Congo, civilians, including children,
are being beheaded, mutilated and raped. In Yemen,
Saudi Arabia's massive and indiscriminate air strikes
have hit hospitals and schools and killed hundreds of
civilians, including many children. The Houthis are
recruiting boys as young as 14 to use as child soldiers,
arming them with Kalashnikovs and sending them to
the front lines. In Iraq, the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) is forcing young girls to call their parents
to detail being gang-raped by dozens of men. In Syria,
ISIS forces abducted and tortured Kurdish children and
forced them to watch footage of ISIS beheadings and
attacks.

When we look at the world today through the
eyes of children, we see a terrifying picture. Too
many dreams are being shattered, too many hopes are
being extinguished and too many are robbed of their
childhoods by unimaginable brutality. It must stop.
The Security Council must act to end those atrocities
against children. Today's resolution 2225 (2015), which
Israel sponsored, is a positive step forward.

Last week, the Secretary-General published his
annual report (S/2015/404) on children and armed
conflict. With all the regimes, with all the organizations
that intentionally and strategically target children
throughout the world, it is simply absurd that the report
disproportionately focuses on Israel. The report has
17 paragraphs on Syria, 9 on Yemen, 8 on Iraq, 6 on
Libya and no less than 32 paragraphs on Israel. Yes, the
Council heard right: twice as much space was dedicated
to Israel than to Syria, where approximately a quarter of
a million people have been killed, including, according
to The New York Times, more than 3,500 children just
this year, while the report misleads by inexplicably
putting the number at 368.

The reason for that skewed presentation is evident.
Instead of being balanced, neutral and focused on fact,
the report's discussion of Israel is politicized, stained
with interests and distorts reality. What about Hamas,
a terrorist organization that as we speak runs military
summer camps for elementary school children? Surely
a report about the use of children in warfare would
discuss it in detail. Well, read through the report and
try to count how many times the name Hamas even
appears. Finding Hamas in this report is harder than
finding a needle in a haystack. In reality, Hamas and
other terrorist organizations launched approximately
4,000 rockets and mortars during last summer's
conflict. Those missiles were deliberately directed
at Israel's civilian population. In the words of Hamas
spokesman, Fawzi Barhoum,

"Our rockets are aimed at the Hebrews, the
murderers, the Israelis, the criminals. Our missiles
accurately target the homes of the Israelis and the
Zionists."

More than 15,000 rockets and mortars have
been fired at Israel from Gaza since 2001. There is a
generation of children in Israel that lives under daily
threat of Hamas rockets and mortars.

Not only did Hamas deliberately target Israeli
civilians and children, it also demonstrates complete
disregard for the lives of Palestinian children. While
Israel tried to save Palestinian lives by warning them to
leave combat areas, Hamas threatened their lives ifthey
did. While Israel takes every precaution to avoid harm
to non-combatants, Hamas voids international law by
launching rockets from schools, hospitals, mosques and
other places in which children would usually be safe.
The military use of schools by Hamas is dreadful. As
today's resolution states, such use is "in contravention
of applicable international law" (resolution 2225 (2015),
para. 4).

Omitted from the report was one clear fact: this
was not a war that Israel wanted. Israel deeply regrets
the harm caused to the Palestinian civilian population
during Operation Protective Edge. That operation
was in response to more than 450 rockets and mortars
launched from the Gaza Strip, including more than 60
in just one day, while Israel did not react. Israel took
all measures to de-escalate the conflict by accepting
ceasefire after ceasefire, while Hamas rejected all
attempts. In a war forced on Israel by Hamas Israel,
took unprecedented precautions to avoid the loss of life
of innocent civilians, going beyond what is required by
international law and what is done by any army in the
world.

The Israel Defense Forces used leaflets, phone
calls and text messages to warn the civilian population
to evacuate rocket launch sites. It aborted or suspended
operations against terror targets when it became
apparent that civilians would be harmed. And, even
while attacked by the ruling authority in Gaza, Israel
kept the flow of humanitarian assistance to the people
of Gaza.

I ask myself why all of these clear and crucial
facts are absent from the report of the Special
Representative. Is it possible that they simply failed to
notice? Unfortunately, the failure of this report goes far
deeper than mere oversight. The drafting of the report
was marked at every level by widespread, systematic
and institutionalized biased conduct against Israel.

From the outset, the regional working group
conveniently forgot to inform Israel of the writing of
the report, nor did they deem it necessary to seek input
from the Israeli authorities. Time after time, Israel tried
to provide official evidence and facts to the working
group, but we were flatly refused. Yet non-governmental
organizations with a publicly available record of
notorious anti-Israel activity were welcomed with open
arms as an integral part of the working group.

Furthermore, the Office ofthe Special Representative
left no real opportunity for Israel's extensive
reservations to even be considered, thus making it
evident that the engagement with Israel by that Office
was a mere formality for the sake of checking the box.
Such practices contradict the relevant Security Council

resolutions and guidelines to involve Governments as
an integral part throughout the process.

We are extremely troubled by the fact that internal
sensitive information that was supposed to be known
only to the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to United Nations officials was
leaked to the press in an intentional attempt to pressure
and dictate the final outcome to include Israel in the
report's annex. Have members ever heard anywhere a
consideration of the Special Representative with regard
to listing or not listing countries except this time? Such
unauthorized and irresponsible leaks should not be
tolerated. They serve only to undermine the credibility
of the report, the Office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the entire United Nations
system. This conduct should be investigated.

No organization is perfect, and no procedure is
immune to criticism. Raising concerns with regard to
the practices and procedures ofthe Office ofthe Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict should not be automatically
perceived as mere national interest and is essential for
the protection of children.

I must express as well deep concern about the
report's statement that the question of intent when
determining responsibility will not be a crucial
consideration. The laws of armed conflict provide one
of the critical barriers preventing war from descending
into unrestrained barbarism. Ignoring intention would
be contrary to existing international law and would
play into the hands of those who intentionally target
and use civilians in combat and leave children more
vulnerable. Without attention to intentions, those who
are responsible for harming children will remain free
to repeat their crimes, and we will fail in our sacred
obligation to the children of the world.

The Bible tells us that all children are a gift of God.
We have an obligation to do all we can to protect the
lives of the most vulnerable among us, no matter who
they are or where they are from. Israel's concern for
the life and well-being of children knows no colour,
no ethnicity, no nationality or faith, and it knows no
borders. Israel's commitment to the protection of
children is absolute. We will remain committed to
safeguard the lives of all children in accordance with
our democratic values, our moral conscience and our
belief in the sanctity of human life.
