Mr. Eitel (Germany): Germany has just voted in
favour of the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) for a further period of
seven months. Since its full deployment, which began last
February, considerable progress has been achieved. With
the assistance of UNMIH, a secure and stable environment
was consolidated. The establishment of a civilian police
force is well on its way. UNMIH's presence permitted
elections to take place in a climate of unprecedented
freedom and security. My Government therefore wishes to
express its gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and to the members and staff of UNMIH
for their assistance to the Government and the people of
Haiti in their quest for strong and lasting democracy,
economic prosperity and national reconciliation.

However, further efforts are required. The situation is
still fragile. Further stabilization of democracy in Haiti
depends on success in the economic and social
reconstruction of the country. The international community
will have to continue its efforts to enable the Government
and people of Haiti to consolidate the gains achieved so far.
My Government is committed to participating fully in this
endeavour.

We are further hopeful that, in the end, the ongoing
elections will provide a generally accepted foundation for
the future political life of Haiti. We feel, however, that an
improved dialogue among all political actors will be
necessary in order to establish a national consensus
concerning the future of Haiti. The organizational
shortcomings in the first round of the elections will have
to be overcome in order to establish an atmosphere of
trust and confidence. All parties are called upon to
intensify their cooperation in order to achieve a common
understanding, which should enable all of them to
participate in the next electoral rounds. In the end, this
should lead to a self-sustained peace process, to stable
democracy and to economic development. We will have
to follow closely events in Haiti as the present mandate
evolves in order to determine to what extent our further
assistance will be required.

