Mr. Heusgen (Germany): First of all, I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this topic on the agenda. At
least from what we have heard so far, this is a matter on
which the Security Council really is united - again, it
is a very important issue.

Let me start by thanking Mr. Lacroix for his
briefing and the work he is doing. Very early on
in his presentation, he made a proposal that was
basically taken up by all of the speakers afterwards.
It is a question of more regular meetings among the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
(TCCs/PCCs) and Members States. I also thank
Ms. Alexandra Novosseloff, who I believe made the
most formal proposal in terms of institutionalizing it.
Mr. Lacroix seemed more open to it being an informal
process, which was echoed by Ambassador Adom on
behalf of the three African members of the Council, as
well as by Ambassador Singer Weisinger.

I think we really have to look at how can we
intensify this. Personally, I would lean more towards
the proposal that Mr. Lacroix made, therefore in a more
informal way. As Ambassador Singer Weisinger said, it
has to be meaningful and substantive, so this meeting
should notjust be allocated a regular slot on the agenda,
but rather as and when missions or thematic topics
require them. Nevertheless, we should have more of
these meetings. I think that everybody who has spoken
so far sees the benefit in this.

The second point I wanted to make, on the subject
of TCCs/PCCs, is that we could perhaps invite the head
of a police component to the next meeting, as they are
a very important element of our cooperation, as well as
our missions on the ground.
Thirdly, something that was mentioned by
almost everybody is cooperation with regional and
subregional actors. We have seen this here when we
have seen representatives from the African Union
or the European Union (EU); we have missions like
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur where it is, in fact, ajoint mission, or in Mali we
have the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and then
we have the EU Training Mission. Therefore, I think
we should really look more into having these kinds of
meetings where we work together with all actors on the
ground. We are very much in favour of that.

I would like to thank Lieutenant General
Gyllensporre for coming all the way from Mali to brief
us and give us a very practical view on one of the most
important and critical missions there. I think that, for
those of us who attended the trips to Mali and Burkina
Faso, we saw how important it was for us to go there,
too, to actually meet with the mission, the Government
and United Nations representatives on the ground. I
think that Mr. Lacroix, in his intervention, said that
visits to missions are very important - I can speak
only for myself, but since my visit with the Security
Council I am far better able to understand the situation
on the ground.

I also support what Lieutenant General Gyllensporre
said with regard to expectations of peacekeepers and
that they are more agile, mobile, proactive, flexible
and robust. This is provided for in the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and what is expected but, at
the same time, we have to be aware that, in Mali in
particular, peacekeepers are paying a very high price.
Some Council members may have attended the meeting
ofthe Peacebuilding Commission this morning, attended
by the Minister ofEconomy, Planning and Cooperation.
Chad has sent approximately 2,500 soldiers to Mali, and
they have paid the highest price: 60 of the 200 soldiers
who have died in Mali were Chadian.

Of course, formally, the TCCs are asked to do
everything, such as providing equipment and overseeing
all the logistics, but this is an illusion. We have to do
more as Member States and beyond in order to support
those countries that are actually serving in the missions
and therefore I think we have to do more, as Lieutenant
General Gyllensporre said, in terms of predeployment
and mission training. Germany, for instance, is
supplying Chad with security vests and helmets, but
I think we have to do it more systematically so that,
when these countries go out and represent the United
Nations, we are doing everything we can to ensure their
troops do not lose their lives.

My last point concerns trilateral cooperation, which
is something I think we can even go beyond. Moreover,
going back to MINUSMA, I think we can achieve a
lot when we work together and when we have the best
peacekeepers, but we will not solve the problem on the
ground if the peace agreement is not actually being
implemented, or if good governance and respect for
human rights, inter alia, are absent in the country in
question. We must therefore further expand our global
view if we are to achieve success in our missions.
However, this is not the subject on the agenda today. I
thank you again Sir, for convening this meeting today
on what is, from our perspective, a very important
matter where there is a lot to be achieved.

