Mr. Gilmour: As the Deputy Secretary-General
has just described, one year has passed since the
situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea was last discussed by this body
(see S/PV.7575). Our concern expressed back then
has only deepened. There has been no improvement
in the truly appalling human rights violations in
the country. The nature and scale of the violations
occurring in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea thoroughly underscore the link between human
rights and peace and security. The commission of
inquiry found that numerous crimes against humanity
had been committed - and they continue - including
extermination, murder, enslavement, torture,
imprisonment, rape, forced abortions and other sexual
violence, persecution on political, religious, racial and
gender grounds, the forcible transfer of populations, the
enforced disappearance of persons and the inhumane
act of knowingly causing prolonged starvation.

The Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) continues its efforts to help ensure
accountability for violations, while seeking every
opportunity to engage with the Government. Although
monitoring the human rights situation in the country
remains a challenge, the testimonies of people who
have left the country and information gathered through
other sources indicate that the pattern of human rights
violations documented by the commission of inquiry
are continuing. Major political events, such as the
seventh Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea in
May and the Supreme People's Assembly in June this
year seemingly failed to create an opening for any new
policies that protect human rights.

In the past 12 months, OHCHR has conducted
more than 110 interviews with persons who had left
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. A major
issue that emerged during these interviews was the
treatment of people in the custody of law enforcement
agencies. All of those who had been detained stated
that they were subject to, or else personally witnessed,
practices that clearly contravened international human
rights standards. Violations included torture and ill-
treatment, which is routinely used during detention,
investigation and imprisonment. Cases were reported
of solitary confinement for several days in a cell so
small that the detainee was unable even to sit down.
Other violations included poor detention conditions;
inadequate access to food, water and sanitation; lack
ofjudicial review; lack of access to lawyers and family
members; and other violations. Suspects are rarely
allowed to present evidence that contests the charge
against them. These violations reflect the larger context
in which the criminal justice system fails to protect the
rights of individuals. The system is characterized by
significant oversight by the Workers' Party of Korea,
while the role played by the judiciary and lawyers is
very limited.

The procedures surrounding the persecution
of individuals deemed to have committed political
crimes is even more secretly guarded. While the
Government continues to deny even the existence of
these prison camps, many citizens of the Democratic
People's Republic ofKorea are aware oftheir existence.
Observation from the outside, including through satellite
images, has confirmed their continued operation. No
independent international human rights monitors have
ever been able to access one of these camps.

The freedom of expression, association and
peaceful assembly remain almost entirely restricted.
Despite a reported increase in ownership and use of
mobile phones and Internet services, all mass media
remains under Government control and access to foreign
media is prohibited. Harsh restrictions on freedom
of movement continue to affect citizens, who are not
allowed to travel abroad or even within the country
without permission. The restrictions at the border area
have reportedly been increasingly tightened making it
even more difficult for individuals to leave the country.
Those who seek to leave are at risk of trafficking and
refoulement in contravention of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status ofRefugees. Women, in particular,
are at risk of sexual abuse, detention and ill-treatment
following refoulement. There is no known independent
civil society movement whatsoever. Nationals of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea working
outside the country live in substandard conditions
and are subject to severe surveillance and oversight,
while the Government appropriates most of the income
they generate.

Turning to economic and social rights, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea also faces
significant challenges in fulfilling this important area
of the rights of its citizens, despite the authorities'
stated commitment to improve the living conditions of
the population. The country continues to be affected
by chronic food shortages, which have resulted in
protracted undernutrition, affecting in particular
children, pregnant and nursing women, and older
persons. The public distribution system of food is not
functioning, except for a few privileged classes. Most
citizens depend on private, mostly illegal, commercial
activities to fulfil basic needs. Frequent mobilization for
public work, such as the 200-day campaign before the
Workers' Party Congress in May, reportedly impacted
negatively on the ability of residents to engage in
commercial activities. Residents of the north-eastern
provinces who were affected by the typhoon and flood in
late August are likely to remain particularly vulnerable
to food insecurity this winter. Discrimination in access
to employment, education and other services based on
a person's family background, or songbun, continues to
be reported.

The heightened security tensions have direct
consequences on human rights. For example, the
people-to-people contact between the two Koreas, also
recommended by the commission of inquiry, ceased
after the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
nuclear test in January. Reunions of separated families
have not taken place since October 2015. The report
released by OHCHR two days ago, highlights the plight
of tens of thousands families who have been separated
across the border during and since the Korean War
without possibility of reconnecting with relatives on
the other side.

There has also been no progress in resolving the
issue of international abductions of 516 individuals
who were abducted from the Republic of Korea after
the armistice. Likewise, no satisfactory answers have
been given to establish the fate of individuals abducted
from Japan and other countries.

Following the adoption in March this year of
Human Rights Council resolution 31/18, the High
Commissioner appointed two independent experts in
support of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of
human rights in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, Ms. Sonja Biserko and Ms. Sara Hossain, to focus
on issues of accountability, in particular where such
violations amount to crimes against humanity. The two
experts have just concluded a mission to the Republic
of Korea and Japan, and have also sought to engage the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to share the
Government's views and information. Their report will
be included as an annex to the Special Rapporteur's
report to the Human Rights Council in March 2017. The
new Special Rapporteur, Mr. Quintana, is exploring
the possibility for dialogue with Democratic People's
Republic of Korea authorities while recognizing that
accountability must be part of such engagement.

We remain committed to continuing engaging
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
improve the human rights situation inside the country.
In a positive development, in 2016, the Government
submitted reports to the Committee on the Rights
of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination
of Discrimination against Women. Our Office has
continued to offer technical assistance to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to help the Government
implement its human rights obligations.

Failure to hold perpetrators of gross human rights
violations accountable, some of which amount to
crimes against humanity, will be a disappointment for
the victims and will sow the seeds of further instability
and tension. Accountability is vital and we hope the
Security Council will remain seized of this matter.
The General Assembly has again in its resolution
this year encouraged the Security Council to take
appropriate action to ensure accountability, including
through consideration of a referral of the situation
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the
International Criminal Court.

Improvement in human rights in the country will
not only protect the livelihoods and dignity of people
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, but
also promote long-term security and stability in the
region and beyond. Conversely, escalated security
tensions will further isolate the country and leave the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea population as
usual to bear the terrible consequences at yet further
expense of their human rights.

