Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Ms. O'Brien for her
briefing and for the thorough analysis contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/360) on the
legal and practical aspects of the establishment of
specialized anti-piracy courts in Somaliland and
Puntland and an extraterritorial Somali court with
international participation. The report provides
sufficient basis for further movement forward towards
the creation of an effective system for the judicial
prosecution of pirates. It is important to carefully
analyse the constitutional and legal framework for the
establishment of new anti-piracy courts and their
possible material and procedural bases, as well as
questions relating to staffing and security.

We welcome in particular the readiness of
Tanzania, as noted in the report, to host the
extraterritorial court on its territory. The Security
Council would thus have, in the leadership of that
country, a responsible and reliable regional partner in
the criminal prosecution of pirates.

However, we share the view of Tanzania that
strengthening the extraterritorial court by adding an
international component is a necessary condition for its
effective functioning in accordance with international
standards.

There are numerous problems noted in the report
concerning the creation of a system of anti-piracy
courts. We had expected that there would be many, but
there are no more than there were when the Security
Council helped to create other judicial organs, and they
can all be resolved with sufficient political will.

In that connection, we are concerned at the
information contained in the report on the lack of
consent from the Transitional Federal Government and
regional Somali authorities with respect to the idea of
two anti-piracy courts, in Somaliland and Puntland,
and an extraterritorial court. We do not believe that
such a position is rational. It is clear that neither
Somalia nor other States that are in a more favourable
position can deal alone with the problem of the judicial
prosecution of pirates. Even international efforts to
strengthen the capacity of the judicial systems of
Somalia and other States in the region have proved
insufficient, as is evident from the statistics contained
in the report. Thousands of Somalis are involved in the
piracy business, and, in spite of all the efforts made to
strengthen the capacity of national judicial systems,
only a few of them reach the court system.

If we look beyond narrow interests, it is clear that
there is no choice other than to create two specialized
courts, in Somaliland and Puntland, and an
extraterritorial court with international participation.
That is the absolute minimum.

The current situation involving piracy in general
and the judicial prosecution of pirates in particular is
far from being acceptable. It is necessary to continue to
make clear to the Somali authorities the advantages of
the option for the criminal prosecution of piracy, which
is exclusively pro-Somali in essence. Together with the
other members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat, we will endeavour, in the near future, to
work on eliminating existing obstacles to the creation
of courts in Somaliland and Puntland and an
anti-piracy court with international participation. We
do not rule out the possibility of other options that do
not stipulate the need to obtain consent from the
Somali authorities. We will also look for ways to
resolve other problems noted in the report.

We are convinced that any measures provided for
in resolution 1976 (2011) to fight against piracy in the
economic and security areas can be successful only if
they are paired with steps aimed at the effective
creation of a mechanism involving international
participation for the judicial prosecution of pirates.

