Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Sir, for organizing this timely and important debate. In
honour of Egypt's presidency of the Security Council,
let me try to say this in Arabic:

(spoke in Arabic)
I thank you very much, Mr. President.
(spoke in English)

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement made by the observer of the European
Union and welcomes, Sir, your excellent concept paper
(S/2017/692, annex) for this debate. Furthermore, in
the context of the split-term with Italy in the Council,
let me also endorse the statement made by my Italian
colleague earlier today.

I shall address three topics today: first, the need
to get the mandate right; secondly, the need for
benchmarks to measure progress; and, thirdly, the need
to strengthen force generation.

With regard to the subject of the right mandate,
I should like to draw an analogy between medical
treatment, on the one hand, and peacekeeping
operations, on the other. Prevention is always better
than needing a cure, but once somebody falls ill, the
right prescription is required. Mandates need to be
crafted with equal surgical precision. There is no one
remedy for all ills. A United Nations mission must
be based upon a careful diagnosis of the situation at
hand, whether a small and focused political mission
or a full-fledged peace operation. As stated in the
first paragraph of the concept note, current security
challenges "necessitate a more robust, coherent and
comprehensive United Nations approach". Once
a mission has begun, adaptations to the mandate
may be necessary, depending on changing needs on
the ground. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is a good case
in point illustrating the United Nations flexibility,
which it showed, by changing the geographical focus
the moment at which the security situation in central
part of Mali worsened. In that context, let me highlight
that the Government of Mali should do more to bring
security, stability and development to the northern part
of the country.

My second point concerns benchmarks. To an
important extent, in continuing with my metaphor,
the responsibility for one's health lies with the patient,
and the responsibility for sustaining peace equally
lies with the host nation. Furthermore, United Nations
missions have an important role to play in enabling host
nations to recover and prevent relapse. We therefore
need an integrated approach, as was mentioned in the
concept note, entailing a coherent United Nations with
comprehensive delivery by all pillars of the United
Nations system. In our view, the Council should enable a
well-managed exit and help prevent relapse. Therefore,
mandates must include clearly defined political and
governance benchmarks against which the success of
a mandate can be measured. Such benchmarks could
include inclusive institutions, human rights, the status
of women, the protection of civilians and countering
human trafficking, where appropriate. In our view, the
Security Council should be firm with host nations that
are not cooperating with the United Nations, and even
firmer with those that attack their own citizens and
deliberately obstruct the work of the United Nations.
That is simply unacceptable. Host nations must be held
accountable. A case in point is South Sudan, where that
problem is persistent.

In continuing with my metaphor, I will address
my third topic - force generation. Just like a medical
doctor, the peacekeeper needs the right instruments.
Peace operations must be as robust as needed to fulfil
their mandate. We therefore must modernize United
Nations peace operations. Our missions now often lack
the means, the quality and the capacity to carry out
their jobs effectively. We send out Blue Helmets without
proper protection, while knowing full well that they run
a high risk of being attacked. Medical transportation
and facilities and force protection are not always up to
standard. One of our most important priorities should
be to strengthen force generation and to encourage
more countries to pledge more troops and capacity. The
Council should also intensify action with the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs), which our colleague
from Bangladesh just pointed out. We underline that
point. Furthermore, we call on those TCCs that have
not done so to subscribe to the Kigali Principles for
peacekeeping. We pay tribute to Rwanda's leadership
in that regard.

We are one of the hosts of the United Nations
peacekeeping defence ministerial meeting to be held
in Vancouver in November, to which we look forward.
We hope that it will give this process an extra boost.
Furthermore, we support the United Nations and the
development of rotation schemes. That should make
it possible for TCCs to provide missions with high-
end capabilities for a predetermined period. We pay
tribute to the work of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in that respect, for instance on helicopter
rotation in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
Peace operations need to have enablers and state-of-
the-art equipment in order to conduct some of today's
most difficult operations. In that regard, let me highlight
the enhanced use of information sources in MINUSMA
initiated by the Netherlands, among others.

In conclusion, sustaining peace requires our
continued efforts, politically and financially, from the
start of a mission to its very end and beyond - from
preventive care to daily care and after care. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands wholeheartedly supports
efforts to modernize United Nations peacekeeping. We
stand ready to join the Council in doing its part as of
1 January 2018.

