Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): Madam
President, I should like to welcome you to New York in
the context of this debate. I should like to congratulate
you most warmly on your country's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. The
subject matter of today's public debate is extremely
topical. Benin, my country, made this issue one of its
priorities during its term in the Council, in 2004-2005.
It is another African country - South Africa - that
has put this issue once again at the centre of the
Council's concerns. My delegation welcomes this.

Benin was one of the authors of the presidential
statement adopted at Nairobi on 19 November 2004 on
institutional relations with the African Union (AU).
The goal was to encourage the United Nations to take
advantage of the new prospects for cooperation opened
up by the creation of the African Union, given its
expanded mandate and its new bodies.

Benin thus associated itself with the efforts made
by Romania with respect to the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2004/27 and resolution 1631 (2005),
on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. Indeed, the relationship with
the African Union offers an opportunity to implement,
in a tangible way, the provisions of Chapter VIII of the
Charter in the spirit of the system of collective security
which it established.

We welcome the fact that, pursuant to that
resolution, the Secretary-General on 28 July 2006
submitted to the Security Council a very enlightening
report on the possibilities and challenges of partnership
in the area of security at the regional and global levels.
From that perspective, today we have a prime
opportunity to assess the progress made in structuring
and streamlining cooperation with regional
organizations, in particular with the African Union.

Through the establishment of an operational
mechanism for conflict prevention and peacekeeping
the African Union has clearly shown its determination
to assume greater responsibility in the resolution of
crises and conflicts on the continent through an active
policy of prevention and stabilization. That
commitment makes the African Union a special partner
for the Security Council, which devotes so much of its
time to questions of peace and security affecting the
continent.

My delegation associates itself fully with the
analysis contained in the concept paper provided by
South Africa, which directs today's debate towards
specific questions which require clear responses from
us in order to guide the actions of the Security Council
and the United Nations. As a key organ, the Security
Council is mandated to support the initiatives of
regional organizations operating in the area of the
maintenance of peace and security. That prerogative of
the Security Council must be maintained, since
complete independence of regional organizations could
lead to the neutralization of world governance. Such a
development would not be a stabilizing factor.

It is important that Security Council decisions be
taken in close consultation with the States concerned,
in order to achieve the full potential for synergy
offered by the existence of operational regional
organizations. In the context of the African Union,
such synergy can best be optimized only through
coordination among the various elements of the
decision-making hierarchy, with the Security Council
taking a decision as a last resort in situations that
threaten international peace and security.

In that respect, the strengthening of the
relationship between regional organizations and the
United Nations can be beneficial only if it is carried
out with strict respect for the norms established in
Chapter VIII of the Charter. In its resolution 1631
(2005), the Security Council rightly invited regional
and subregional organizations that have a capacity for
conflict prevention or peacekeeping capacities to place
such capacity in the framework of the United Nations
Standby Arrangements System.

From that point of view, the United Nations and
the African Union should conclude an agreement to
make troops available as soon as progress in the
establishment of the African Union Standby Force
permits. That would create conditions for resolving, in
the best possible way, the question of United Nations
support for African troop deployment for operations
carried out under a United Nations mandate.

My delegation welcomes the November 2006
conclusion of the memorandum of understanding
between the United Nations and the African Union on
the implementation of the Framework for the Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union in
various areas, in particular those relating to peace and
security.

I wish to remind the Council of the outcome of
the seminar held on 15 December 2005 under the
chairmanship of Benin, by the Ad Hoc Working Group
on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa on the
topic of today's debate, with an outstanding intellectual
contribution by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission. From among those conclusions I would
recall five specific measures aimed at structuring
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. Those measures are the following:
ensuring the connections between the African Union
early warning system and the United Nations;
mobilizing the financial and logistical resources
necessary to fill the crucial gap of means needed for
the rapid implementation of decisions; strengthening
United Nations capacities in terms of good offices and
mediation in order to better support capacities at the
regional level; ensuring better coordination among the
Security Council, the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the competent bodies of the
African subregional organizations; and strengthening
the African Union's capacity to ensure coordination of
subregional peace and security mechanisms on the
continent.

I urge the Security Council to consider those
proposals for concrete action. They fall within the
context of the definition and implementation of a
coherent strategic plan for conflict prevention in
Africa. In that respect, my delegation urgently appeals
for consistent implementation of resolution 1625
(2005) on conflict prevention, in particular in Africa,
adopted at the Security Council summit held on
14 September 2005. Full implementation of that
resolution requires a change of perspective in terms of
the establishment of appropriate capacities. The United
Nations and Africa have everything to gain in moving
from a culture of reaction to one of proactive
prevention.

From that viewpoint, my delegation welcomes the
recent appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Special Adviser on matters relating to the prevention
and resolution of conflict. We are confident that the
renewed commitment of the Security Council,
expressed in its presidential statement of 8 January
2007 (S/PRST/2007/1), will be reflected in further
concrete acts.

In conclusion, Madam President, my delegation
strongly encourages your country resolutely to
continue its efforts within the Security Council to
strengthen the effectiveness of the cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union in the area of
international peace and security.

