Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time I am taking the floor under the United
Kingdom presidency, I would first like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. Knowing your experience and your team's
proven professionalism and dynamism, we have no
doubt that your presidency will be a successful one,
and you can count on Burundi's cooperation throughout
your tenure. I would also like convey through you my
thanks to all the members of the Security Council, who
since 2015 have always supported the sovereignty and
political independence of Burundi and respected the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations during
their consultations on Burundi.

I thank all the delegations that spoke this morning,
but we regret that a small number among them remain
wedded to the narrative of 2015 and fail to note
positive developments in Burundi that have led to the
positive situation referred to by the Special Envoy, who
enjoys the support of everyone here. The tendency to
diametrically oppose the position held by the Special
Envoy and the majority of States Members and disregard
developments of the situation on the ground, while
adhering to the 2015 narrative, is not a constructive
approach, and it should change.

I warmly welcome the presence of Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi, this morning. I cannot thank him enough for
his briefing.

The purpose of my statement this morning is
to share with members of the Security Council new
developments in Burundi since previous briefing on
the situation in my country, on 24 May (see S/PV.8268).

As one can see, the security situation in
Burundi has remained calm, stable and fully under
control. The return to normalcy in the country has
allowed, inter alia, the holding of the constitutional
referendum, which took place without major incident,
the large-scale return of refugees and the hosting of
several conferences at the regional and continental
levels, as well as the welcoming of foreign dignitaries
visiting Burundi. The visit of the Chairperson of the
African Group of the Inter-Parliamentary Union took
place just this past week. At the conclusion of his visit
and after having travelled to six provinces within the
country, the Chairperson issued a statement in which
he declared that he had found Burundi to be a calm and
stable country. He was impressed by the evident will
of the Burundian political class to turn over a new leaf
vis-a-Vis 2015, in order to work towards the holding of
free, transparent and peaceful elections in 2020.

With regard to the political situation, the Council
will recall that, upon the promulgation of Burundi's new
Constitution on 7 June, the President of the Republic
informed Burundians and the international community
that his second term of office would end in 2020 and
that he would support the new President to be elected
the same year. Contrary to the statements of some - as
you will recall, Mr. President - who had attributed to
him the intention to fashion the new Constitution to
his own ends so as to remain in power until 2034, the
President's gesture was of great political and democratic
significance and strengthened democratic processes in
the region and on the African continent. His gesture
should be encouraged and welcomed. I thank all the
delegations that commended that action, which was
extremely important not only for Burundi but also for
the subregion.

Furthermore, with regard to the political sphere,
it would not be an overstatement to say that the spirit
of tolerance and the process clearing the way for and
opening Burundian political space are becoming
increasingly strengthened. That has been reflected
in the return and reintegration of several thousand
refugees, as well as several political leaders who had
fled the country, including former President Sylvestre
Ntibantunganya and former Vice-President Alice
Nzomukanda, as well as several former Burundian
parliamentarians. Those politicians who returned
to their country are freely enjoying their civil and
political rights today. The release of more than 2,000
prisoners in early 2018 is also part of that dynamic of
reconciliation, social cohesion and political tolerance
under way in the country.

With regard to the inter-Burundian dialogue, my
delegation recalls that, as a means of finding peaceful
solutions to political disputes, dialogue has become
a way of life in our country. Those asking us to
promote dialogue today are pushing on an open door.
Besides the commendable efforts of the East African
Community, Burundi enjoys a Political Party Forum,
which is an excellent platform for promoting dialogue
among authorized political parties in Burundi. Within
that context, all political parties met in Kayanza, in the
north of Burundi, on 3 August to discuss informally
significant issues concerning the 2020 elections. That
meeting resulted in the adoption of a road map by more
than 20 political parties with a view towards free,
inclusive and peaceful elections in 2020.

With regard to regional dynamics, they remain on
course. Contacts at the highest level have continued
since the Council's latest meeting on the subject. This
past week, His Excellency the President of Uganda,
the chief mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
granted an audience to the first Vice-President of
Burundi, who conveyed a special message from His
Excellency President Nkurunziza to his Ugandan
counterpart. Similarly, early this week, His Excellency
the President of the United Republic of Tanzania also
received in audience the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi, who also carried a special message from the
President of the Republic of Burundi to his Tanzanian
counterpart - all of which is an indication that regional
political dynamics are healthy despite what has been
said in this Chamber.

With regard to the return of refugees, I am pleased
to inform the Council that, to date, since 2016, more
than 206,000 refugees have voluntarily returned to
Burundi. That number includes 100,000 refugees,
who decided to return in 2016; 168,000 who returned
to their families from January to August 2017; and
another 38,254 who have returned to the country since
the tripartite agreement of August 2017 among the
Governments of Burundi, Tanzania and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR). The voluntary return of refugees is
continuing at a satisfactory pace.

My delegation nevertheless reiterates its request
to UNHCR and our friends in the region to work with
certain host countries holding our compatriots hostage
in exile by erecting artificial barriers towards their
voluntary return to Burundi and towards ensuring that
the refugee camps maintain their civilian character in
accordance with the Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees of 1951 and resolution 2389 (2017), on the
Great Lakes Region, adopted on 8 December 2017.

With regard to human rights, Burundi once again
reiterates its readiness to work and cooperate with
other nations and the United Nations to promote the
protection of human rights in Burundi and elsewhere
throughout the world. That noble mission will be made
possible only through stepped-up cooperation and
frank dialogue among Member States. In that context,
Burundi continues to cooperate in implementing the
resolution adopted by the Group of African States on
28 September 2017 in Geneva within the framework of
cooperation and capacity-building. Burundi is awaiting
official notification from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on
the appointment of three experts in transparency and
due process. What has been said about Burundi's so-
called lack of cooperation in the implementation of that
resolution, which we own as our own, as we supported it,
is owing to misinformation and a lack of transparency.
The same can be said concerning the memorandum of
understanding on the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Burundi. Burundi remains very
open to pursuing discussions in a constructive spirit.

With regard to the economic sanctions that European
Union partners imposed upon Burundi following the
unrest caused by the 2015 elections, my delegation
would like to inform the members of the Council that
the context in which those sanctions were imposed has
fundamentally changed. The electoral tensions of 2015
are no more. For us, they are a page in history that will
serve as a lesson to irreversibly reconcile our country.
I also recall that, following the undisputed return of
peace and security in our country, the African Union
Summit of Heads of State and Government held in early
July in Mauritania adopted a resolution demanding
the European Union to lift the unjust and immoral
sanctions weighing heavily on Burundi, which are, as
members know, contrary to the principles of Charter
of the United Nations and negatively affect vulnerable
groups like women and children.

Concerning cooperation with the United Nations,
Burundi is proudto participate actively and outstandingly
in United Nations and African Union peacekeeping
missions. More than 6,000 Burundian men and women
have been deployed in various peacekeeping operations
throughout the world, especially in the Central African
Republic and Somalia. The excellent work of our brave
soldiers on a peace mission, who have voluntarily
chosen to sacrifice their lives by saving those of others,
far from their native land and in particularly difficult
conditions, must be appreciated and recognized at its
true value.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its strong
appeal to the Security Council to have the courage to
remove Burundi from its agenda. It is worth noting
that the current political and security situation in the
country is calm, stable and completely under control.
It is far from posing a threat to international peace and
security, which is the Council's area of competence. No
objective argument can justify the holding of untimely
meetings on Burundi at this juncture.

My delegation draws particular attention to the fact
that the organization of a spate of meetings on Burundi
that are not motivated by the reality on the ground
could become a factor of destabilization for the country,
instead of promoting the peace and stability sought by
all, and could monopolize regional efforts. This fury
against Burundi, a country whose return to normalcy is
well established, should cease; ifit does not, history will
remember that our country was kept on the Council's
agenda unjustly in order to meet non-Burundian and
non-African interests. The valuable time that Council
alloeates to Burundi should be devoted to other areas
oftension and conflict, which are legion at the moment,
as we all know. The place that Burundi deserves
today is not in this Chamber; it should be within the
United Nations agencies in charge of socioeconomic
development to boost its economic recovery.

