Mr. Kitaoka (Japan): Mr. President, at the outset,
I would like to express my appreciation to you for
having convened this very important meeting; to
Minister Maurtua de Romana of Peru for his presence
and participation; and to Ms. Hannelore Hoppe for her
introduction of the Secretary-General's report. The
report, which effectively identifies both the progress
made in the area of small arms over a period of slightly
more than a year and the challenges to be addressed in
the future, will serve as a valuable guidepost for our
future endeavours.

Since the last time the Council discussed this
issue, on 17 February 2005, there have been some
remarkable achievements. Most notable, after a long
debate and painstaking efforts by the Open-ended
Working Group last June, was the adoption of the
international instrument on marking and tracing. It is
my pleasure to say that, despite some diverging views,
in the end, the instrument was nevertheless adopted by
consensus.

I would like to commend Ambassador Anton
Thalmann of Switzerland for his outstanding
chairmanship. He showed enormous patience and
perseverance in accommodating the different positions
of Member States. Credit should also be given to the
Member States, which showed the flexibility necessary
to conclude the work of the Open-ended Working
Group. Hereafter all States should work steadily to
ensure the full implementation of the instrument.

Another important development last year was the
Second Biennial Meeting of States to Consider the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. The
dynamic chairmanship of Ambassador Pasi Patokallio
of Finland greatly contributed to the deliberations'
having proceeded so smoothly.

This year is of particular significance in the
context of efforts to address the issue of small arms
and light weapons. First and foremost, the first Review
Conference is to be held toward the end of June. That
important event will provide an opportunity for
Member States to take a comprehensive look at the
status of the implementation of the Programme of
Action adopted in 2001 and to set a course for future
action.

Although we were fortunate enough to witness
the developments I mentioned, as well as others
described in the Secretary-General's report, we all
know that there remain a number of outstanding issues
to be addressed. Japan, recognizing how great the
stakes are for the Review Conference, will provide its
full support to Ambassador Prasad Kariyawasam, the
Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka and the
President-designate of the Conference, both at the
preparatory stage and at the Conference itself.

Japan is of the view that, in the context of efforts
to make tangible progress in the field of small arms
and light weapons, international rule-making efforts
and the implementation of small-arms-related projects
on the ground should be promoted in parallel. Only
through balanced efforts in both areas will it be
possible to make real headway on this issue.

With regard to rule-making efforts, we look
forward to the discussions to be held by the group of
governmental experts on brokering when it is
established following the Review Conference. Japan
hopes that the group will produce a good report that
will provide a comprehensive picture of the present
situation, so that the international community can
better address the problem it faces.

In addition, Japan, as a non-arms-exporter in
principle, believes it essential for Member States to
strengthen arms transfer control, with a View to curbing
the unregulated trade in small arms and light weapons.
On that front, my delegation is pleased that some
encouraging initiatives have been taken, and Japan will
continue to participate actively in related discussions.

Just as important as international rule-making
efforts is the promotion of projects on the ground. For
the issue of small arms and light weapons to be dealt
with effectively, the national and public authorities of
affected countries are required to implement and
enforce those rules. We have been paying a great deal
of attention to the state of affairs in this area. In that
respect, what is needed is assistance in the collection
and destruction of weapons and in the development of
the capacity of national and local authorities.

The execution of projects on the ground is of
paramount importance. Japan considers that the
expertise and experience gained by implementing
projects in the field can and should be widely shared
with other countries and regions. The idea of collecting
best practices is based on that conviction. In this
regard, since a number of projects have been carried
out by members of civil society, the participation of the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that have
been engaged in those activities is indispensable and
should be encouraged. Japan welcomes the inclusion of
this topic as part of the provisional work programme of
the forthcoming Review Conference and hopes that the
exercise will serve to enhance understanding of the
importance of lessons learned.

We very much hope that the Security Council will
continue to pay attention to this cross-cutting issue in
the area of international peace and security. We would
like to request that the Secretary-General continue to
update us with progress reports as he deems necessary.

Finally, Mr. President, I appreciate the efforts that
you and your team have made to arrive at a text that
Japan believes the Council will be able to adopt soon.
My delegation will continue to work constructively
with other delegations to sort out outstanding issues.

