Mr. Apakan (Turkey): I warmly welcome you,
Madam President, as Secretary of Foreign Affairs of
Mexico presiding over the Council today. I also thank
you for the comprehensive observations that you have
made. Allow me to extend to the delegation of Mexico
our most sincere congratulations on its work under the
leadership of Ambassador Heller as the Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
on its efforts to prepare the draft presidential statement
that we are going to adopt today.

Let me thank Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her briefing, and the other
briefers - Ms. Johnson, Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF; Mr. Atul Khare, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations; and Ms. Manju Gurung.

Children are faced with appalling forms of abuse
and violence every day in different parts of the world.
They are reported to be forcibly abducted and recruited
as militants. Children are also victims of sexual
trafficking, and girls in particular face sexual violence.
Many children do not have access to education or basic
health care during armed conflicts. We must reverse
that trend and protect children at all costs, and the
Council plays an imperative role in that regard.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2010/181)
provides us with very useful information for ending all
violations and abuses committed against children. We
take note of his observations and support his
recommendations. We welcome the attention focused
on persistent violators.

Important progress has been made over the past
year, and we welcome the adoption of resolution 1882
(2009) and the expansion of the triggers for listing to
include the killing and maiming of children, as well
rape and other sexual violence. Human rights
violations committed against children cannot and will
not be tolerated. Therefore, we believe that the
protection of children is part of the collective cultural
values of humanity.

Our aim in the Council for the better protection
of children is stronger child protection frameworks. We
must continue our collective efforts to that end. Turkey
also believes in the importance of investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all those who commit grave
violations against children. We would also like to
emphasize our grave concern about the increased
number of attacks on education facilities, schools and
pupils. Since education is the future of new
generations, the Security Council should address the
problem in its future deliberations.

While working to achieve our goals, we believe
that three points should always be kept in mind. First,
States must be encouraged at every stage to cooperate
with the Working Group. Secondly, the work of the
Group should be expedited and facilitated in order to
cover more situations. Thirdly, we should give priority
to the implementation of United Nations documents
first.

On that last point, Turkey strongly supports each
United Nations instrument and initiative related to the
rights of children. We show our dedication and
sensitivity to the issue of violations against children by
being party to every relevant United Nations
instrument. Needless to say, these United Nations
instruments have become a fundamental part of
Turkey's legislation. We are party to various
instruments promoting the rights of children outside
the framework of the United Nations. Our first priority
should be to recruit every country to support and
ensure the implementation of all United Nations
conventions and protocols.

Children comprise almost one-third of our
population. They are our future. We have to unite for
their future. We should act against persistent violators
of their rights to free them from the devastating effects
of armed conflicts. The Security Council should not
refrain from taking the essential steps to stop Violations
against children and to fulfil our responsibility to
protect our children.

Turkey is committed to contributing to all efforts
in order to halt persistent perpetrators of crimes against
children, and we call all Member States to be active on
the issue.

