Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland,
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union welcomes this new
opportunity to review the work of the Security Council
Counter-Terrorism Committee. We commend and
support the transparency with which it works, and we
thank Ambassador Greenstock for his commitment and
involvement in this essential task.

The fight against terrorism remains an absolute
priority for the European Union. In this context we
acknowledge the central role of the United Nations
through the Security Council and the CTC, and we
affirm our full commitment. The Committee is now
entering the second phase in its consideration of the
reports. A great effort has been made by members of
the Committee, its experts and the Secretariat to
analyse the wealth of information provided by more
than one hundred and fifty reports. Member States
should provide the CTC with their pending reports,
whether initial or subsequent. We urge those countries

that have not yet presented their national reports to do
so.

However, resolution 1373 (2001) is not complied
with through mere presentation of reports. The
essential point is to implement the resolution fully, and
reports should reflect the reality of legal and practical
measures adopted at the national or regional level. The
European Union will provide a timely response to the
Committee's request for clarifications. Similarly, its
member States will do likewise in their national
capacity.

International solidarity and cooperation constitute
essential instruments to fight the scourge of terrorism.
The European Union stands ready to assist third
countries to reinforce their capacity to respond
effectively to this international threat. The European
Commission has further scope to offer assistance in the
areas covered by resolution 1373 (2001) through
existing programmes.

The European Union expects that the CTC and
countries or regions in serious need of assistance will
provide specific requests. This would enable the
Commission and the European Union member States,
together with the international financial institutions and
other donors, to enhance coordination to identify and
implement concrete actions. An overview of the
European Union assistance programmes appears on the
CTC's website. The European Union will remain in
close consultation with the CTC, since it is an
important forum for coordinating requests with offers
of assistance in counter-terrorism actions.

The Chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe organized an
important conference in Lisbon in June, at which
representatives of various international organizations
discussed the need for coordination among regional
organizations. The European Union stated there that we
must try to avoid overlapping and proliferation of
bodies with similar or identical tasks. Time and
resources should be used more effectively through
identifying the added value each organization can
provide. To that end, the CTC is optimally qualified to
serve as a clearing house for contacts and information
exchange on the activities of the various international
bodies.

The effectiveness of national counter-terrorism
efforts can be greatly enhanced through regional
organizations. The Union is well prepared for that, as it
is not just a cooperation organization; it is geared
towards developing common norms and policies.
During these past three months, the Union has
continued to implement the Common Position and the
Action Plan adopted after the events of 11 September.
We have revised and substantively enlarged the list of
terrorist individuals, entities and groups, which is
annexed to the European Common Position of 27
December 2001.

We recently adopted European Council regulation
881/2002, which incorporates the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1390 (2002). The most
recent development occurred on 13 June 2002, when
the competent European ministers approved
harmonization of the criminal offence of terrorism
through an agreement that entails a common definition
of terrorism that carries the most severe penalties of
each national legal system.

The establishment of joint investigation teams
and the framework decision on the common European
arrest warrant and surrender procedures were also
approved. This will result in a procedure that is much
simpler than the traditional extradition procedures,
which judges will use to detain terrorist suspects and to
turn them over to the requesting State member of the
Union.

The European Union is convinced that the fight
against terrorism must respect human rights and the
rule of law, and that individual human rights must be
taken into account in the design and implementation of
sanctions in the fight against terrorism. The Union
believes that States, in fighting terrorism, must not
condone acts of indiscriminate violence against
civilians or use counter-terrorism as a pretext for
political repression. We commend the Committee's
contacts with the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and its acceptance of parallel
monitoring of the observance of human rights
obligations.

The European Union is trying to assist in the fight
of the international community, urging the speedy
signature or ratification of the 12 United Nations
instruments against terrorism. We remain committed to
finalizing negotiation of the draft comprehensive
convention against terrorism. The United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention at
Vienna should provide Member States upon request
technical assistance for the signature, accession,
ratification and effective implementation of those
international instruments. The Union awaits the report
of the Secretary-General, requested by the General
Assembly in its resolution 56/253, which will make
proposals to strengthen the United Nations Terrorism
Prevention Branch to enable it to carry out its mandate,
as approved by the General Assembly.

In conclusion, the international fight against
terrorism is going to require a long and costly effort on
the part of us all. It can succeed only through strong
and sustained international cooperation. The United
Nations, particularly the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, will be crucial to its success. We urge all
States and international organizations to offer full
assistance.

