Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to welcome His Excellency the Vice President
of Colombia, Mr. Oscar Naranjo Trujillo, to the
Security Council. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing and the active
role of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.

Kazakhstan welcomes all the positive developments
in Colombia and commends the significant efforts that
have been made to ensure the irreversibility of the
peace process. In view of the recent presidential and
congressional elections, the first held in Colombia since
its achievement of a historic peace deal in 2016, we
hope its new Administration will respect and guarantee
the full implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, treasuring and building on the gains
achieved to the benefit of all Colombians. And with
the swearing in of the new Congress on 20 July, we
hope to see faster implementation of the peace-related
legislation, especially as it pertains to important rural
and political reforms.

It is gratifying to know that Colombia is the first
country to have created a transitional justice system.
We are confident that the Colombian legislative body
and political forces will remain dedicated to justice. It
is also essential that they commit to peace and ensure
the smooth functioning of the comprehensive system for
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition proposed in
the peace accord. Kazakhstan welcomes the holding of
the first public hearings within the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace and looks forward to the effective operation
of the other justice-system institutions, the Truth
Commission and the Special Unit for the Search for
Persons Deemed as Missing.

At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing deadly violence against social leaders,
community activists and human rights defenders.
Kazakhstan welcomes the eight new measures
announced by President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon,
to be taken in addition to the previous launch of a
rapid response system and the reorganization of the
army. We hope that those measures, along with the
recently adopted pact of repudiation of violence against
social leaders, will guarantee the collective security
of all the threatened groups and curb their killings.
Kazakhstan is also dismayed by the current vulnerable
security state of former combatants of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo and their family members, which could very
likely jeopardize their reincorporation into society. We
believe, however, that the Colombian Government and
all the parties concerned will make every effort to avoid
an escalation of violence and do their best to guarantee
the peace process's smooth continuation and success.

We welcome the continuation of the peace talks
between the Colombian Government and the last
remaining guerrilla group, the Ejercito de Liberacion
Nacional (ELN). However, Kazakhstan notes with
regret that the hostile activity of militia groups in the
Colombian-Ecuadorian border region has resulted in
the killing of innocent people. We hope that during the
sixth cycle of inclusive consultations, which started on
2 July, the Colombian Government and the ELN will
be able to achieve a new bilateral ceasefire. We also
urge Colombia's incoming administration to continue
negotiations to that end.

Lastly, Kazakhstan reiterates its firm commitment
to the Colombian peace process and calls upon all
interested parties to do their best to foster reconciliation.

