Mrs. Haley (United States of America): We have
reached a decisive moment as the Security Council.
On Saturday the first haunting images appeared
from Douma, in Syria. We gathered around this table
yesterday (see S/PV.8225) to express our collective
outrage. We then collectively agreed that the Council
needed to take steps to determine exactly what happened
in Douma and to put an end to these barbaric attacks.

The United States has put forward a draft resolution
(S/2018/321) that accomplishes those shared goals.
For weeks we have been working with every single
delegation on the Council to develop a new attribution
mechanism for chemical-weapons attacks in Syria. We
held open and transparent negotiations so that every
delegation could provide its input. And we went the extra
mile for one Council member. We adopted paragraph
after paragraph of Russia's proposed draft resolution
(S/2018/175). We tried to take every Russian proposal
that did not compromise the impartiality, independence
or professionalism of a new attribution mechanism.

After the Douma attack, we updated our draft
resolution with common sense changes. Our proposal
condemns the attack. It demands unhindered
humanitarian access for the people in Douma. It calls
on the parties to give maximum cooperation to the
investigation. And it creates the attribution mechanism
that we worked so hard with each member to develop.

The draft resolution is the bare minimum that the
Council can do to respond to the attack. The United
States did everything possible to work towards
Council unity on this text. Again, we accepted
every recommendation that did not compromise
the impartiality and independence of the proposed
attribution mechanism.

I want to say a brief word about Russia's draft
resolution, which is also before us for a vote. Our
draft resolutions are similar, but there are important
differences. The key point is that our draft resolution
guarantees that any investigations will truly
be independent. Russia's draft resolution gives Russia
itself the chance to choose the investigators and then
to assess the outcome. There is nothing independent
about that. The United States is not asking to choose
the investigators, and neither should Russia. The
United States is not asking to review the findings of any
investigation before they are final, and neither should
Russia. All of us say that we want an independent
investigation. Our draft resolution achieves that goal.
Russia's does not. This is not an issue that more time
or more consultations could have resolved. At a certain
point, you are either for an independent and impartial
investigation or you are not. And now that the Douma
attack has happened, this is not a decision that we can
delay any longer.

The United States calls on all Security Council
members to vote in favour of our draft resolution and to
abstain or vote against the Russian draft resolution. The
Syrian people are counting on us.

