Mr. Sharma (Nepal): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on the excellent manner in
which you have been conducting the business of the
Security Council. I also thank you for convening this
open debate on United Nations peacekeeping
operations and for the superb background paper that
you prepared for this purpose.

Nepal is committed to world peace and to
peacekeeping. Our commitment is apparent and
abiding. We have contributed more than 40,000
military and police personnel since 1958, helping bring
peace to Asia, Africa, Latin America and Europe; 43 of
our young nationals have lost their lives in the line of
duty.

Peacekeeping is an instrument of peace, not a
panacea. To have durable peace, the world community
should help conflict-ridden and other vulnerable
nations come to grips with the root causes of conflict:
poverty, illiteracy, disease and injustice.

Central to effective peacekeeping is an optimal
mix of human, material and financial resources and a
seamless partnership among nations that bring those
contributions. The United Nations, pivotal in this
partnership for peace, should bridge the resource gaps
and manage missions to produce the desired results.

The Security Council must respond to crises in
time, adequately and objectively. Its mandates must be
tailored to the realities on the ground, with achievable
goals, clear entry and exit strategies and practical time
lines. Lessons learned, too, could help in that process.
Fully integrated mission planning ought to be
pursued to foster understanding, cooperation and
ownership among all players involved in a mission.
The Integrated Mission Task Force should encompass
not only the relevant United Nations departments but
also other key stakeholders, including troop-
contributing countries. The command and control
structure of a mission ought to be efficient, effective
and, of course, inclusive. The principles of quality,
equity and representation should determine the
composition of staff in missions and at headquarters,
including in senior positions.

To build quick deployment capacities, standby
arrangements and strategic deployment stocks ought to
be strengthened. Resources should be provided to poor
nations so that they can keep their pledged standby
troop strength ready to deploy. Enough supplies should
be stocked at Brindisi to launch two missions at a time,
one large and one medium-sized. Clearly, all countries
must pay their assessed contributions to peacekeeping
missions in full and on time. To leverage the start-up of
missions, the Peacekeeping Reserve Fund should be
doubled.

Quick impact projects are necessary to win
people's hearts and minds in a mission area and should
be consistent with local development priorities. Every
peacekeeping mission should be followed by a smaller
stabilization mission to help the country emerging from
conflict to find its feet. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process is a key
mission component for preventing a relapse into
violence. The transfer and integration of ex-combatants
into a restructured security apparatus could be part of
the solution in that respect.

Regional cooperation is crucial from two
perspectives. First, it is crucial to stemming the spread
of conflict from one country to another and to
addressing the root causes of conflict. The Security
Council should ask adjacent missions to coordinate
implementation of common elements of their
mandates. Secondly, it is crucial to creating synergy
based on shared training, expertise and, in some cases,
even compatible weapon systems, as well as to
building and augmenting regional capacities for quick
force generation and deployment.

Once implemented, the Secretary-General's
recent proposal will enhance the safety of United
Nations personnel and the security of its premises. The
Organization should do more to achieve that paramount
goal; the cost should be shared with its beneficiary
agencies and host countries.

At a different level, the United Nations should
preserve its image as an unbiased and objective player
in order to enhance its security. It must be - and be
seen by all law-abiding nations and peoples to be - an
objective arbiter of peace and development.

Nepal believes that all human, logistic and
financial resources are essential to peacekeeping
missions. But the human lives that troop-contributing
countries bring to the equation of this partnership for
peace should receive the respect they deserve.

