The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Kuwait.

I should like at the outset to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the biannual report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2019/492).
I also thank the representative ofBelgium, as Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and the
representative of the European Union, on behalf of the
Joint Commission, for their briefings.

As we hold this meeting under the item
"Non-proliferation", the State of Kuwait stresses once
again our steadfast and principled position vis-a-vis
all issues pertaining to nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament, namely, we condemn the use of nuclear
weapons and all weapons of mass destruction, which is
a grave violation of international law. The establishment
of world peace, security and stability will not be
possible as long as such weapons exist.

Based on these principles and constants, we
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015),
despite our knowledge that the agreement did not
meet all of the concerns of countries of the region that
continue to suffer from escalating tensions, insecurity
and instability. However, we preferred to support the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) based on
our belief in multilateralism and full commitment to
all United Nations resolutions and efforts to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East.

The Middle East region continues to suffer from
instability and insecurity and is today experiencing
great tension that threatens international navigation
routes and the provision of fuel supply. with respect
to recent developments in the Gulf, we welcome the
unified position that the Council expressed to the media
two days ago, condemning the attacks on oil tankers as
a violation to international law and a dangerous threat
to international peace and security.

We have read the current report of the Secretary-
General and welcome its content on the continued
implementation by Iran of its commitments with
regards to its nuclear programme, as certified by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in its
fifteenth report. It is important that Iran continue to
implement all of its commitments under the JCPOA,
including by adhering to the limits on enriched uranium;
to comply with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its comprehensive
safeguards agreements with the IAEA; and to ratify
the additional protocol, which would guarantee its
continued status as a non-nuclear-weapon State.

In accordance with the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015), the report of the Secretary-General is
not restricted to aspects pertaining to nuclear matters
but follows up on the implementation of controls
on ballistic missile technology activities and the
transfer of conventional weapons. We are concerned
about information contained in the report on the
specifications and origin of the ballistic missiles that
targeted the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as well as the
weapons seized in international waters.

Despite the fact that the Secretariat has not been able
to pinpoint the date of the transfer of the missiles and
weapons mentioned in the report, this is an extremely
serious issue that threatens international and regional
peace and security. We condemn the repeated targeting
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the launching
of ballistic missiles, which undermines its security
and threatens the lives of its civilians. The most recent
attack targeted Abha international airport. We express
our full solidarity with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
and our support for all measures necessary to protect
its security and stability.

We also recall the relevant decisions of the League
of Arab States requesting Iran to end any activities that
undermine the security and interests of the countries
of the region, while taking steps to build trust with
its neighbours and establish relations based on good-
neighbourliness, cooperation, mutual respect and
non-interference in their internal affairs.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait emphasizes
the importance of the Security Council continuing
to shoulder its responsibilities to follow up on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in a
comprehensive manner that ensures that Iran and
other States comply with their obligations vis-a-vis
not only nuclear non-proliferation, but also other areas
mentioned in the resolution.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iran.

