Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this
important debate. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and High Commissioner Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein for their remarks and for their efforts
to promote and protect human rights, which is at the
heart of the issue before us.

Today the international community has come
together in the Security Council to discuss the situation
of persecuted religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East. In doing so, we are also sending a message
to all citizens of the world that we stand by their
inalienable human rights - whatever their religion or
ethnicity and wherever they may be. But we must also
recognize that today in our region the terrible acts that
have brought us here are being perpetrated through the
cynical exploitation of religious and ethnic differences
by extremists to further their brutal and violent
aims. This is not a new, nor a regional phenomenon;
extremists throughout history and across the world
have manipulated differences to achieve their agendas.

As many of today's speakers have affirmed, the
current crisis is not representative of the region's
history. Yet, a generation of children are growing up
in a world where there is a widespread perception that
discord is the natural state of being in the Middle East.
They do not know or believe that the region was once a
vast interwoven mosaic of communities characterized
by different faiths, tribes and ethnicities living in
harmony side by side. And I fear that as civil wars rage
and Violent extremism persists in the Middle East, an
even darker perception will prevail that our region
is hopelessly divided and that Islam is an inherently
intolerant religion.

That is simply not true. Islam recognizes and
honours the great faiths that preceded it. Throughout
our history, religious minorities have been protected in
Muslim communities from those who sought to harm
them because of their beliefs. The same broad tolerance
that gave refuge to the Jews who were expelled with
Muslims from their homes in parts of Europe in the
fifteenth century also protected the adherents of other
religions, not only people of the Jewish and Christian
faiths, but also Yazidis, Samaritans, Mandeans, Druze
and Alawites. In historic Alexandria and Damascus,
the great cosmopolitan capitals of the region, all
could freely practice their faith and govern their own
communities, coexisting peacefully alongside Islam.

That peaceful coexistence was perhaps best
exemplified in the holy city of Jerusalem at the apex of
its history. While Jerusalem has often been the focus
of stories of division and conflict among people of
different religions, all are united in their reverence for
that holy ground. That is why the General Assembly
last year adopted resolution 69/24, which reiterated that
the international community has "a legitimate interest
in the question of the City of Jerusalem and in the
protection of the unique spiritual, religious and cultural
dimensions ofthe city". The great civilizations, religions
and peoples of the world are part of Jerusalem's rich
history, and it cannot be allowed to turn into the next
theatre of conflict. Jerusalem is a symbol not only of
our shared history of spiritual coexistence, but also a
shining beacon of hope that peace and tolerance can be
achieved in the holy land once again.
It is against that rich tide of history that Daesh has
emerged today to commit unspeakable atrocities against
defenceless people in Iraq, Libya and Syria. Their
ambitions extend even further, beyond the boundaries
of those countries, threatening to engulf the entire
region in their totalitarian and Takfiri worldview, as
was so eloquently described by the High Commissioner
this morning. Their behaviour - the brutal persecution
and systematic attempts to erase any trace of cultural
diversity in the name of Islam 4 is the antithesis of
our region's proud past. Attempts by Daesh to justify
murder and mayhem through the language of our
religion should be seen for what they are: the desperate
lies of a demented few. As long as Daesh continues
to survive, all communities are under threat. Violent
extremism knows no boundaries.

Yet, the rich cultural tapestry of the Middle East,
which we hold dear, does not have to be relegated to
antiquity. It is possible today. I know this because it
exists in the United Arab Emirates. More than 200
different nationalities live and work and worship in
their own faiths freely in the United Arab Emirates.
And, while our infrastructure is modern, the values of
tolerance, moderation and unity that are the foundation
of our country's multi-ethnic, multi-religious diversity
are ancient.

Fostering such a model requires a conception of
State-building that is underpinned by educational
opportunity, economic development and the respect for
human rights, the rule of law and the prominent role of
women as partners in these endeavours. In the United
Arab Emirates, we have also found that visionary
leadership and strong institutions are the pillars of
stability. It is Vital to sustain those pillars in the many
countries undergoing transition in our region. Our lives
and faiths have always been and will always remain
interconnected in our region. That is why we cannot
isolate ourselves from injustice when it occurs around
us. In Egypt, whose stability the United Arab Emirates
believes to be the cornerstone of the stability of entire
region, as well as Iraq and Syria and Yemen, our long
history of harmony is threatened by the actions of
extremists.

Underlying the shifting landscape in the Arab
scene, the ongoing injustice of the Palestinian question
fuels the narrative of Daesh's recruitment efforts, both
in our region and globally. An end to that tragic conflict
must be achieved, and we commend France's leading
diplomatic efforts to secure a meaningful resolution of
that tragic injustice. In our region, but elsewhere too,
it is Vital to shore up the economic, social, legal and
institutional infrastructures of States. They provide
the framework of critical protections for people when
societies break down, and they deliver the means to
prevent and stop Violence and disorder, even when
leadership fails. That must be our focus as we shape the
broad ambitions of the post-2015 development agenda.

In that context, the United Arab Emirates would
like to offer some recommendations for addressing the
problem. First, the Security Council must consistently
condemn the systematic persecution of minorities
wherever it takes place. And in finding solutions, we
must respect the Charter of the United Nations, the
paramount document of common principles that we
have as an international community. Member States
must have the courage to do what is right and not only
what is politically convenient. The United Nations can,
however, only fulfil its mandate if it is empowered to
do so by its membership.
Secondly, it is imperative to consult and listen
closely to the States of the affected region itself. We
understand the issues and the context, and we will bear
the consequences in the long term.

Thirdly, the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators
must be addressed through the formation of resolute
international coalitions. Secure and stable societies are
the cornerstone of good governance, and we must help
our region to stabilize during this turbulent period.

Fourthly, Governments must be encouraged to
extend their protections to all their citizens and uphold
their freedoms.

Fifthly, strong institutions and mechanisms that
protect human rights and provide early warning to
prevent and respond to Violations must be built and
maintained.

The responsibility for implementing those
recommendations nationally and supporting them
internationally lies with all ofus, ifwe wish to continue
to emulate the model of the human values of tolerance,
moderation and diversity that began with our forebears.

Let me end by congratulating the delegation of
France on the successful stewardship of the Security
Council during its presidency across a broad range of
issues that are fundamental to international peace and
security.

