Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has been closely following the situation in Syria. Over
the past three years, the escalating conflict in Syria
has brought untold suffering to the Syrian people and
resulted in the worsening of the humanitarian situation
in parts of the country.

China is deeply concerned about the suffering of
the population and has made ongoing efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in the country. On many
occasions, China has provided significant amounts of
humanitarian assistance to Syria and its neighbours
through various channels. In June, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced a new round of humanitarian
assistance to the Syrian refugees in Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries, which is being acted upon. China
has actively participated in the assistance actions within
the United Nations framework and has contributed to
the United Nations Syria Humanitarian Assistance
Response Plan. We will continue to do our utmost to
help improve the humanitarian situation of the Syrians.

China supports the efforts of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to ease the
humanitarian situation in Syria. We support the due role
of the Council in that process. Resolution 2165 (2014),
which we have just adopted unanimously, once again
demonstrates that, as long as all parties put the interests

of the Syrian people first and meet each other half
way, the Council's consensus on the Syrian issue and
robust actions are possible. The unanimous support for
resolution 2165 (2014) reflects the important consensus
of the Council and the international community on the
question of Syria's humanitarian issue. China calls on
all parties in Syria to implement in practice resolution
2165 (2014) and other relevant Security Council
resolutions and presidential statements and to actively
cooperate with the United Nations and the international
community in their humanitarian efforts.

Syria's neighbours should actively support the
work of United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies so as to ensure the prompt deployment of the
monitoring mechanism and the unimpeded delivery
of humanitarian supplies. In providing humanitarian
relief, United Nations and other humanitarian agencies
should act strictly in accordance with the resolution's
mandate. They should respect Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity, follow
the guiding principles of United Nations humanitarian
assistance set out in relevant General Assembly
resolutions, and try to ensure the understanding,
support and cooperation of the country concerned. The
international community should uphold the neutral and
impartial nature of humanitarian assistance and should
avoid the politicization of humanitarian issues and the
militarization of humanitarian actions.

A political solution is the only way out ofthe Syrian
problem. It is also the right way to resolve all matters,
including the humanitarian issue. The international
community should stay the course of a political
solution, continue to engage in coordination and
cooperation and step up its efforts in that regard. China
calls on all parties in Syria to effectively implement the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), launch an
inclusive political transition and find a middle way that
takes into account the country's specific conditions and
accommodates the interests of all parties concerned
in order to achieve a political settlement of the Syrian
issue.

China has consistently supported the good offices
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the issue of
Syria and welcomes his appointment of Mr. De Mistura
as the new Joint Special Representative for Syria. We
believe that that appointment will give new momentum
to the political efforts. As a permanent member of the
Council and a responsible member of the international
community, China will continue to actively work for
a comprehensive, lasting and proper solution of the
Syrian issue as soon as possible.

