Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Madam President,
I thank you for convening this meeting in the
open Chamber.

Let me also thank Special Representative De
Mistura for his dedicated efforts and diligent approach
as the deep waters of the complex Syria political
situation become ever harder to navigate.

Today we are clearly at the low point with regard to
the Syrian political situation. Following the latest two
rounds of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva, I believe that
it is fair to say that, unfortunately, we have not seen
the much-desired progress on either of the 3+1 baskets.
Be it with respect to political transition, constitution,
elections or counterterrorism, there is not much to be
optimistic about. The only achievement so far is that
we have managed to get two delegations to Geneva.
Why? The answer is obvious; it is the lack of political
will, particularly from the Syrian regime, to negotiate
in full faith on the core issues. The stalled political
process may set in motion a vast number of alternative
scenarios that nobody would like.

It is only natural that every actor in Syria has a wish-
list, yet Damascus and its allies need to understand that
a my-way-or-no-way kind of approach - the "ultimate
victory" attitude - will lead nowhere, prolong the crisis
and feed the extremists. Damascus needs to understand
one more thing - the international community has
made it crystal-clear that the political solution is the
only way out of the Syrian quagmire, and that the recipe
for this solution has long been out there. Any progress
on the political track will be unsustainable without clear
adherence to the letter and spirit of the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015), a transparent and strictly scheduled political

transition, and the guidance of the United Nations.
We believe that Russia has all the means at its
disposal to influence Damascus and its allied militias to
reconsider their militaristic approach, begin supporting
political process and national reconciliation, and finally
enter negotiations. For some reason, that influence has
never been never employed to good ends. I remain
convinced that, unless serious pressure is applied
on Damascus and an accountability mechanism is
established in Syria, we will not see any progress on the
political track. The chemical weapons attack on 4 April
is a grim reminder of that.

We are discouraged by the absence of real results
from the Astana process and the ceasefire negotiated
within its framework. One lesson to be learned from that
bitter experience is that the proliferation of negotiating
platforms does not necessarily bear fruit. It was a good
try, but it did not work. It is now time to concentrate
all efforts on the United Nations-led Geneva process
and ensure that it works. We therefore look forward
to the resumption of the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
hopefully, next month. It will already be high time for
Damascus and its allies to demonstrate a change in
mindset, intentions and attitude.

