The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, Canada, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, India, Indonesia, Israel,
Japan, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, Malaysia,
Nepal, Netherlands, Nigeria, Peru, Samoa,
Switzerland, Thailand, Uganda and Ukraine in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Andrey Denisov,
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001)
concerning counter-terrorism.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Andrey Denisov to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding also
reached in the Council's prior consultations, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Javier Ruperez, Executive Director of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ruperez to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Council will now begin its consideration of
the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2004/820, containing the text of a letter
dated 15 October 2004 from the Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Andrey Denisov, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism.

I give the floor to Mr. Andrey Denisov.


