The Secretary-General: I thank you, Sir, for
your very kind, warm words. I also thank the Turkish
presidency of the Security Council for its initiative in
convening this debate, and I extend a warm welcome to
His Excellency Foreign Minister Davutoglu. I also
warmly welcome the other ministers who are
participating in this very important meeting of the
Council.

Terrorism poses a grave threat to international
peace and security. Many of the countries represented
around this table have first-hand experience of this
menace. There have been so many attacks, lives lost
and families destroyed. The United Nations has been
targeted, too, from Iraq to Pakistan and Algeria to
Afghanistan.

Terrorism may be a gathering storm, but the
international response is gathering steam. Over the past
five years, the United Nations has expanded its
counter-terrorism activities, increased inter-agency
coordination and enhanced partnerships with a wide
range of international and regional organizations. Joint
initiatives with Member States in many regions -
including the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the Middle
East and South and Central Asia - have shown that
there is much we can do.

Countering terrorism demands a broad approach.
First, we must continue our efforts in the fields of
security and law enforcement. That includes measures
to further deprive terrorists of financial resources and
mobility, and to prevent them from acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction.

Secondly, other areas deserve more attention.
Education, development, intercultural dialogue and
conflict prevention all have growing relevance in
addressing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism.
10-55136
Thirdly, we must do more to better understand the
reasons people are drawn to violence so that we can do
more to prevent others from following that path.

Fourthly, we need to continue strengthening the
legal regime, building on existing international
counter-terrorism instruments and relevant resolutions
of the Security Council. The value of these measures
and of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy lies in their consistent and equal
implementation.

Fifthly, we must improve the way we share
information and best practices. That means establishing
national focal points and regional networks and
mobilizing civil society, the private sector and the
media.

No counter-terrorism approach would be
complete without a full commitment to human rights
and the rule of law. Both the Security Council and the
General Assembly have consistently endorsed the
protection of human rights as an integral component of
any effective counter-terrorism policy, and I welcome
the attention the Council has devoted to this topic.
Several States - including those that have been
victimized by terrorism - are eager to implement their
obligations under the counter-terrorism frameworks but
lack the resources and other capacities to do so.
Capacity-building is therefore a priority for the United
Nations.

Considering the gravity of the situation in the
Sahel-Maghreb region, I am committed to working
with the region's leaders on strengthening State
capacity for counter-terrorism. In Central Asia, the
United Nations is already working on capacity-building
in the areas of law enforcement, criminal justice and
international cooperation.

I would also like to stress the importance of
supporting victims of terrorism. It will be recalled that
two years ago we held a very moving seminar here at
Headquarters at which many victims of terrorism spoke
about their experiences. On 8 October, again here at
the United Nations, we will screen "Killing in the
Name", a documentary that not only highlights the
plight of terrorism's victims but also, we hope, will
help empower them and others towards greater levels
of engagement in bringing an end to such crimes.

With respect to the Security Council itself, I
welcome the enhanced coordination between the
3

Council's subsidiary organs and partner entities in the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. All of
us should broaden engagement with bodies that deal
with measures listed under pillar l of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, such as the
Alliance of Civilizations. The Alliance is a central part
of the United Nations response to extremism and
intolerance, and a necessary voice of moderation to
counter the incitement and hatred that are such
prominent parts of terrorism's playbook.

No cause or grievance can justify terrorism. Let
me stress again the determination of the United
Nations to rise to a global, cross-border challenge that
seeks to do such harm to us all.

