Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me start by joining
other speakers in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Augustine Mahiga for his
briefing. Let me also thank him for his efforts in the
past years in support of Somalia. We commend him and
his team for the part they have played in moving the
political process in the country forward and helping it
to cross the critical threshold that paved the way for a
brighter future for Somalia.

I would like to focus briefly on three points
today - the political situation in Somalia, the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
upcoming strategic review.

Germany strongly welcomes the completion of
the transition. We congratulate the authorities and
the people of Somalia on the peaceful conduct of the
process, and I pay tribute to all the signatories of
the road map for their contribution to the successful
conclusion of the transition.

The creation of a new Parliament, the election of
a new Speaker and the election of a new President are
landmarks in Somali history. Now Somalia must focus
on stabilization, reconciliation and building sustainable
and accountable institutions, based on respect for human
rights. The Somali people need to see a peace dividend
after decades of civil war and massive destruction.

During the mini-summit on Somalia that took
place on the margins of the General Assembly three
weeks ago, we listened carefully to the priorities of
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. We think those
priorities - security and peacebuilding to begin
with - are rightly chosen. President Mohamud can
be sure of the continued support of the international
community. My country will carry on playing its part
in the efforts, particularly within the European Union
and through the United Nations.

The success we are celebrating would not have
been possible without the critical contribution of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, which provided
for the security environment for the political process
to make headway. Let me reiterate our appreciation
for AMISOM. and what it has achieved under very
difficult circumstances. It deserves our full political
support. But also, among other things, sustainable
and predictable financing should also be supported
by initiatives with regard to the building the capacity
of the Somali security forces. Eventually, the Somalis
should be in a position to provide peace and security in
their country on their own.

In that context, let me reiterate that the European
Union (EU) supports the Somali security sector
through the European Union training mission Somalia.
Since the beginning of 2009, my country has actively
participated in that mission. Several thousand Somali
soldiers trained by the EU's mission continue to
play a crucial role in improving security jointly with
AMISOM. Security remains key for any progress, and
all efforts by partners in the security sector should be
coordinated and should take into account the lessons
learned.

The achievements of AMISOM. and its partners in
the field of security must also translate into political
progress and improvements in the economic and social
situation of the Somali people. That is foremost a
task for the Somalis themselves, but the international
community stands ready to support them.

Finally, the ongoing assessment and the strategic
review of the United Nations presence in Somalia are
welcome in order to further stabilize and consolidate
the peace in Somalia. We believe that the challenges
Somalia is facing require ajoint approach, a sound and
coherent strategy, and a clear division oflabour. Let me
offer assurances that Germany continues to stand by
Somalia and its people.

