Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): I am not going to dwell too long on the vote that we needed to take today. It is unfortunate that we had to vote on a briefer. My delegation would be the last to stifle any kind of view that should or needs to be brought to the Council, or that others feel should be brought to the Council, as long as it is relevant. And we believe that Mr. Bustani, as a former Director General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), eminently understands the procedures of the organization - how it works and how to deal with previous and current chemical-weapon States. Therefore, we were not open to supporting the stifling of any kind of view, whether we agreed with it or not. We would not necessarily have agreed with his opinions, but we would have wanted to hear them. Be that as it may, let me continue with my statement. South Africa would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing and the information she provided to the Council.South Africa strongly supports multilateralism and the international rule of law, which includes the non-discriminatory and consistent application of the provisions of relevant multilateral instruments and the preservation of the international norms against weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. The use of chemical weapons undermines the international norms against the production, use and stockpiling of such weapons, established under the Chemical Weapons Convention. In that regard, South Africa reiterates its long-standing position against the use of chemical weapons. No cause can ever justify the use of any weapon of mass destruction by any actor under any circumstance. South Africa remains committed to its international obligations as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and as a member of the OPCW. The alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention is a very serious matter that would constitute a material breach of obligations under the Convention. In order to ensure that States parties adhere to their obligations, it is imperative that they have full faith and confidence in the work and processes of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. As it is the only technically competent international authority in this area, external interference in its work should not be tolerated. States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention should therefore unite in preserving the international norm against chemical weapons and the provisions of the Convention, along with its consistent and non-discriminatory implementation. As indicated ona number of occasions, South Africa will continue to work for the depoliticization of the relevant management and decision-making structures established under the Chemical Weapons Convention and also towards ensuring that States parties be held accountable for any violations of their obligations, based on credible, impartial and irrefutable evidence. In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that we should endeavour to approach the situation in Syria in a holistic manner, whereby the political, humanitarian and chemical weapons tracks all converge in a single unified path to long-term peace, security and stability for Syria. The only sustainable solution to the Syrian question remains the achievement of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue aimed at a political resolution reflective of the will of the people of Syria.
