Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Haiti, which includes Argentina, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Colombia, France, Guatemala, Peru,
the United States and my country, Uruguay. I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President and Minister of
Defence of the Argentine Republic, and your delegation
for holding this debate to discuss the most recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/493) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

The Group of Friends welcomes the presence of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and thanks her for her
comprehensive briefing and her intensive work during
her few first months in Haiti.

The Group of Friends notes the progress achieved
in Haiti since the previous reporting period in key areas
for Haiti's development such as employment, education,
the environment, energy and the rule of law, which are
the Government's five policy priorities, known as the
"five Es".

The Group also notes with satisfaction that, during
the reporting period, the levels of civil unrest and major
crimes, in particular homicides and kidnappings, have
decreased. The significant decrease in the number of
people displaced by the 2010 earthquake is another
encouraging trend. However, the Group would like
to underscore the fact that Haiti continues to face
significant humanitarian challenges, especially with
respect to women and children, with over 279,000
internally displaced persons still dependent on
humanitarian assistance for their basic survival and
extremely vulnerable to natural disasters.

The ongoing cholera epidemic is a major concern
for the Group of Friends. In that regard, we highlight
the importance of redoubling the efforts by the United
Nations and the broader international community
to assist the Haitian Government in preventing and
treating the disease and to achieve crucial structural
improvements in Haiti's water and sanitation sector. To
that end, it is urgent and critical to fund the national plan
for the elimination of cholera in a sustainable manner
and to seize any opportunity to reduce the threat posed
by that disease by means of targeted actions.

On the political front, the Group ofFriends notes the
establishment of the transitional Electoral Council, an
important step towards the holding of the long-overdue
partial legislative, municipal and local elections. The
Group notes, however, that preparations for the elections
are still experiencing significant delays, including
the pending approval of the electoral law. The Group
calls on the Haitian Government and all the relevant
stakeholders to redouble their efforts to allow those
elections to take place in 2013 in a transparent, fair
and credible manner, which will strengthen democratic
institutions.
With regard tp the differing interpretations of when
the term of the second of the three groups of senators
will expire, it is important that all political stakeholders
in Haiti work cooperatively and constructively towards
a resolution of that matter.

The Group of Friends notes that the overall security
situation in Haiti remained relatively stable during the
reporting period. That has allowed MINUSTAH to
continue its drawdown in accordance with its conditions-
based consolidation plan without undermining the
security and stability of Haiti.

The Group of Friends of Haiti recognizes
MINUSTAH's critical role in ensuring stability and
security in Haiti and commends MINUSTAH for
continuing to assist the Government of Haiti in ensuring
a secure and stable environment.

The Group of Friends notes the commitment by
the Government of Haiti to strengthen the rule of law
and to make further progress in security sector reform.
In that respect, the Group would like to highlight the
critical role of the Haitian National Police (HNP)
in Haiti's security and stability, and to stress the
importance of completing the ongoing strengthening,
professionalization and reform of the Haitian National
Police so that it can assume full responsibility for
Haiti's security. In that regard, the Group notes the
progress made in the implementation of the five-year
Haitian National Police development plan 2012-2016
and reiterates the importance of maintaining support
for the plan.

The Group of Friends of Haiti believes that security,
development and stability are closely interlinked and
mutually reinforcing. We therefore underscore the need
to address the issues of unemployment, education,
the delivery of basic social services and ensuring
women's economic and political empowerment. At
the same time, the Group stresses that there can be no
genuine stability or sustainable development in Haiti
without strengthening democratic institutions and a
credible democratic process. In that context, the Group
emphasizes the importance of promoting the rule of
law by strengthening Haitian institutions, including
an independent judiciary, and reaffirms MINUSTAH's
responsibility for supporting the Haitian State in the
areas of democratic governance, the expansion of the
State's authority and the promotion and protection of
human rights, in accordance with its mandate.

The Group of Friends of Haiti reiterates the
importance of respecting the zero-tolerance policy
against sexual exploitation and abuse. It expects all
United Nations personnel to adhere to the highest
standards of conduct and urges all the actors involved to
make every effort and to shoulder their responsibilities
in order to prevent cases of misconduct, investigate
allegations and hold those responsible to account.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the Group of
Friends will exhaustively consider the recommendations
in the report in the next few days with the aim of making
a substantive and constructive contribution to the
discussions in the Security Council on MINUSTAH's
mandate, so that the Mission can continue to discharge
its responsibilities and consolidate its presence.
The Group of Friends of Haiti would like to express
its support and gratitude to the women and men of
MINUSTAH for their dedication and tireless efforts in
supporting the goals of recovery and stability in Haiti.

