Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): We have met
too many times this year to discuss the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's flagrant violations of
unanimous Security Council decisions, and I am
deeply disappointed that we have to meet again today
following yet another such violation. For the third time,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea regime
has tested an intercontinental ballistic missile. Based
on an initial assessment, that missile flew higher and
longer than any of those previously launched by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. We therefore
condemn in the strongest terms North Korea's actions,
and its continued pursuit of its illegal ballistic missile
and nuclear programme. Today we summoned the
Ambassador of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in London to convey our deep concern about that
reckless behaviour.

The latest missile launch is not a one-off: it follows
19 previous launches this year, and North Korea's
sixth nuclear test in September. The latest violation
demonstrate once more North Korea's disregard for
collective security and the international obligations that
all of us, as law-abiding States, take upon themselves.
We have condemned the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea many times before. The Security Council,
along with the broader international community, must
now redouble its efforts to persuade the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to change course.

This year through the Council we have worked
together to implement measures to curtail the regime's
illegal ballistic missile and nuclear programmes. In
developing those measures, we have ensured that the
humanitarian needs of the population are protected. It
is not the people of North Korea who are threatening
global security, it is the regime. Our actions are in stark
contrast to the brutality of that regime towards its long-
suffering people, who are being held hostage to the
whims of its reckless leadership. When those measures
are fully implemented, we know that they have an
effect. We also know that we must exhaust every avenue
to resolve the issue peacefully and diplomatically.
We all hope to avoid the need to use military force.
That would not only be devastating for the citizens of
North Korea, but also for global stability and all of us.
Therefore, we must all pursue existing measures and
all other diplomatic avenues available to us - fully and
without delay.

The existing measures will be effective only ifthey
are robustly implemented in full by all Members of the
United Nations, beginning with all ofus in the Security
Council. Many States carry out those responsibilities
diligently, but it is clear that more must, and can, be
done. The reporting deadline under resolution 2371
(2107) was on the 3 November, but by 21 November
only 29 Member States had submitted reports on their
implementation ofthe measures set out in the resolution.
Given the scale of the threat, that is simply not good
enough. The reporting deadline under resolution 2375
(2017) is on 12 December. We call on all United Nations
States Members to meet that deadline and provide an
update on the implementation of those measures. We
will continue to work with partners around the world to
further improve the enforcement of existing measures.

We welcome the valuable work of the Panel
of Experts as part of our shared efforts to stop the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's illegal
programmes. It provides us with information that we
need to implement all the relevant measures, and we
urge all States to cooperate fully with the Panel and
take swift and robust action in response to the Panel's
recommendations. If they do not, then they would be
helping the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
regime to threaten the world.

I have focused so far on our shared efforts to
persuade the regime of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to change course. In conclusion,
however, I must emphasize that it is that regime alone
that the bears responsibility for those programmes, and
therefore for its international isolation. It has chosen
that path. It can change course. A better future is
possible for the country and its benighted people. It
must now make the responsible decision to step back
towards the negotiating table and to comply with the
obligations set by our community of nations.

