Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
first wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, for his
briefing. I am sorry that I did not hear it, but his
briefings are always very useful and important.

We express our appreciation to the Security
Council mission for the progress it made in its visit to
West Timor. In its report the mission has made a
number of recommendations that merit our attention
and positive consideration.

In the course of the past year the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
has made marked progress in various areas of its work,
especially with regard to participation by East
Timorese in their political affairs. Many administrative
departments have rapidly achieved Timorization. The
development of the situation is encouraging. Of course,
quite a number of problems remain in the areas of
reconstruction, justice and administration, requiring the
continued assistance and support of the international
community.

We support the efforts of the international
community to help East Timor achieve independence.
In the light of the actual situation, it will still be
necessary after independence for the international
community to continue to provide the necessary
assistance to East Timor so that the East Timorese
people may truly achieve self-governance, in keeping
with their own aspirations.

In its report, the Council's mission recommended
a follow-on presence of the United Nations in East
Timor. That recommendation is forward-looking, and
we hope that UNTAET will continue to carry out an
in-depth study in this regard, while fully respecting the
opinions of East Timorese, so as to attain the
understanding and support of the people of East Timor
and to enable the efforts of the international
community to yield the expected results.

With regard to the question of West Timor, we
welcome the progress made in disarming and
disbanding militias, investigating perpetrators of
crimes, and finding a lasting settlement of the question
of refugees. We hope the international community will
provide support and encouragement to the Indonesian
Government in the actions it has taken in order to
enhance its capacity to solve problems. We also wish to
express our deepest sympathies over the tragic
situation in refugee camps in West Timor. We hope the
Indonesian Government will take the necessary
measures to improve the security environment and
create the necessary favourable conditions for the
return of international personnel to work with refugees.

We also believe that given the gradual
improvement in the security situation, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and other international agencies should, as
soon as possible, return to West Timor to provide
assistance to the refugees, who are badly in need of
help.

We also note that the Security Council mission
presented a number of recommendations in these areas.
The implementation of these recommendations cannot
be carried out without the understanding and
cooperation of Indonesia, especially as concerns the
dispatch of security experts to West Timor and the
payment of pensions. We hope that UNTAET can
further enhance communications and consultation with
the Indonesian Government.

Finally, I wish to express our appreciation and
support for Mr. Vieira de Mello and UNTAET for the
considerable amount of work they have done. The
Chinese Government will, through bilateral and
multilateral channels, continue to provide assistance to
East Timor to the extent of its ability.

