Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): My delegation, like
others, would first like to express its condolences to
the People's Republic of China on the natural calamity
it has just suffered.

Austria would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Lynn Pascoe for his update on recent
developments in the Middle East. We thank the
Permanent Representative of Israel and the Permanent
Observer of Palestine for their presence here today and
for their contributions to our debate.

Austria aligns itself with the statement that will
be made by the delegation of the European Union on
behalf of the Union.
The renewal of direct negotiations between the
parties on all final status issues is both urgent and
without alternative. To deliver on the peace and
security that Israelis and Palestinians have been
yearning for, leaders on both sides need to engage in
good faith and come to a settlement which ends the
occupation and implements the two-State solution.

The 24 months stipulated by the Middle East
Quartet should be more than sufficient to agree on final
terms, provided that there is genuine political will on
both sides. Each day without tangible progress
undermines the position of those who argue in favour
of dialogue and strengthens those who advocate
extremism and violence. If there is to be trust in a
renewed peace process, both parties must honour the
obligations they have agreed to under the Road Map
and refrain from any action that may lead to further
violence and confrontation.

As for Israel, that requires an effective halt to all
settlement activities, including natural growth, and the
dismantling of all outposts; the end of the construction
of the separation barrier on all occupied land; and an
end to evictions and demolitions. In this context, we
also wish to express our grave concern about the
negative implications of Military Order No. 1650 for
residency and freedom of movement of Palestinians in
the occupied territories, and we call on Israel to
reconsider its implementation.

We also urge Israel to reverse recent decisions to
build additional housing units in East Jerusalem. We
have taken note of the very clear statement that the
Middle East Quartet has made, including in particular
on this issue. These illegal and illegitimate policies
pre-empt the outcome of final status negotiations and
undercut the viability of the two-State solution.

At the same time, we call on the Palestinian
Authority to continue to make every effort to improve
law and order, to confront violent extremism and to
end incitement. We also look to Palestinian leaders to
actively discourage any attempts to escalate tensions in
East Jerusalem.

The launch of results-oriented negotiations is also
essential to Palestinian efforts to build the
infrastructure and institutions of a future State that will
provide opportunities, justice and security for both its
citizens and their Israeli neighbours. Austria, both
bilaterally and within the overall efforts of the
European Union, will continue to assist Palestinian
State-building. However, these efforts can ultimately
succeed only with the backup of a clear and time-
bound perspective of a handover of administrative and
security responsibility and with funding generated by
normal economic activity rather than donor
dependence. As confirmed by the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund ahead of yesterday's
meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee in Madrid,
the acceleration of improvements regarding freedom of
movement and access across the West Bank and Gaza
is key to sustained economic growth and hence the
viability of a future State of Palestine. Austria therefore
strongly encourages Israel to decisively remove
remaining obstacles and give positive consideration to
increasing Palestinian access to land and resources in
Area C.

The persistent deprivation of the population of
Gaza of basic commodities underscores once again the
critical need for full compliance with resolution 1860
(2009). That is also true with regard to the, regrettably,
continuing rocket and mortar attacks on southern
Israel. In view of the undiminished urgency of
reconstruction, Austria has positively noted Israel's
decision to facilitate access for construction materials
for a limited number of recovery projects, including
construction in Khan Younis and the ongoing efforts in
water and sewage treatment. We hope that this
welcome and overdue step will be followed by a
comprehensive positive response to our long-standing
demand to de-block all other United Nations recovery
projects, and to the international community's
unanimous call for the unimpeded flow of
humanitarian aid and commercial goods to and from
Gaza.

We wish to underline the continued need for
thorough and credible investigations of all allegations
of grave violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law in relation to the Gaza conflict.
There must be accountability and an effective remedy
for victims of such violations.

Regarding Lebanon, we welcome the reconvening
of the national dialogue by President Sleiman. Ahead
of tomorrow's next round, we call on leaders across the
political spectrum to advance the development of a
national defence strategy. We wish to reiterate that the
monopoly of the Lebanese State regarding the
legitimate use of force must be respected. All arms in
the country must be brought under the sole and unique
control of the Government. Immediate and
unconditional compliance with the embargo on all
transfers of arms outside the authority of the Lebanese
State is also essential to achieve the objective of
exclusive Government control over all arms.

There is broad consensus in the international
community on the urgency of overcoming the ongoing
deadlock in the search for a just and lasting regional
peace. We wish to underline our continued support for
the efforts of the United States in this regard. In the
framework of the European Union, Austria will
continue actively to look for ways to make a peace deal
possible within the next 24 months and stands ready to
support concrete steps on the path to comprehensive
peace.

