Mr. Moriko (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Following the adoption of resolution 2480 (2019),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) for a period of 12 months until June
2020, I would like to make this statement explaining the
vote of the African members of the Security Council,
namely, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa and C6te
d'Ivoire.

We voted in favour of renewing the mandate of
MINUSMA in the interests of peace, security and
stability in Mali and the Sahel region. We are ofthe view
that the continued presence of MINUSMA in Mali is
essential to the stability of the country and of the entire
Sahel region. The situation in Mali remains worrisome,
and the security environment is fragile. Persistent
asymmetrical threats are a source of serious concern
and exacerbate the current humanitarian challenges.

In his most recent briefing to the Council,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Mali (see S/PV.8547), told
us of the achievements of the Government of Mali in
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We recognize that the ongoing
political process, carried out by the new Government of
national unity, is a step in the right direction and that
the Security Council should make every effort to fully
support this process, including through holding an
inclusive political dialogue to address issues related to
the revision of the Constitution and the reaffirmation of
the commitment of the signatory parties to implement
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We are also aware that the Malian parties must do
more to make progress in other important areas of
the peace agreement, including the redeployment of
the reconstituted and reformed Malian defence and
security forces, decentralization and the establishment
of the northern economic development zone. With the
renewal of this mandate, we encourage the Malian
authorities to redouble their efforts, with the support of
MINUSMA, to fully implement the peace agreement,
which is essential for the realization of its political,
economic and development vision and is in the best
interests of the Malian people.

It is disturbing to note that questions concerning
the MINUSMA transition and withdrawal strategy
have already been raised even though the situation in
Mali is still unstable. We believe that discussions on the
transitions and mandates of peacekeeping operations
must be based on a factual and thorough assessment
of political and security conditions on the ground.
Moreover, such discussions should be considered only
when the circumstances on the ground have improved
substantially. We have also reiterated that we are in
favour of MINUSMA providing support to the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We welcome
the fact that the issue continues to remain on the
Security Council's agenda.

In principle, we believe that sanctions can be
adopted as useful instruments to constructively
contribute to a political process, as provided for in
the Charter of the United Nations. We are concerned
about an approach whereby sanctions might be used
and could have unintended consequences on political
processes. We therefore wish to draw the attention of
Council members to the need for due process of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017), concerning Mali, and we stress
the importance of leaving sufficient time for Council
members to deliberate on the issues before them.

In conclusion, Equatorial Guinea, South Africa
and C6te d'Ivoire encourage all Malian stakeholders,
especially women, to participate fully and inclusively
in the political process to put an end to the crisis in
Mali. We remain firmly convinced of the need for an
inclusive approach and strong national ownership so
that the political process can fulfil its potential and
bring about the dividends of lasting peace, security and
stability for the brotherly people of Mali.

As Ambassador Francois Delattre is preparing
to leave his position as Permanent Representative of
France to the United Nations, I wish to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Permanent Representatives of the three
African members of the Council, to a highly skilled
diplomat and talented negotiator. Throughout some
of the Council's most sensitive moments, he has been
able to bring about a sense of compromise in order to
find consensus-based solutions to the often-complex
challenges we face. We wish him the very best in his
new role and hope that our paths will cross again, in
other forums, as we continue working together towards
our common goal of peace, security and development
throughout the world.
