Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): Today, two months will have
passed since the Iraqi authorities decided, on 5 August, to
suspend cooperation with regard to the inspection
activities of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) and the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA).

The Security Council at that time unequivocally
rejected that decision as being totally unacceptable and in
contravention of Iraqi obligations. While demanding in
vain that Iraq rescind its decision, the Council showed
remarkable patience. Moreover, in its resolution 1194
(1998) of 9 September 1998, the Council clearly indicated
its willingness to address the concerns of Iraqi authorities
by expressing its readiness to conduct a comprehensive
review of Iraq's compliance with its obligations and by
welcoming the Secretary-General's proposal in this
regard.

In the face of the persistent absence of full Iraqi
cooperation with UNSCOM. and the IAEA, the Security

 

Council and the Secretary-General continued to work
towards the realization of a comprehensive review, to be
conducted once Iraq resumes full cooperation. These efforts
culminated last Friday when the Council, after intensive
consultations, reached a consensus on an outline of the
comprehensive review.

This was an achievement of great importance. It was
also a clear signal to Iraq that the Council is serious about
a comprehensive review. Faced with this clear and
promising prospect, Iraq, however, decided to cease
cooperation with UNSCOM.

This reaction from Iraq is really astonishing. While the
Council was patiently moving towards meeting Iraqi
concerns, Iraq chose to move in the opposite direction. It is
difficult to understand the motives for this reaction. It is
also difficult to see how this grave challenge to the
Council's authority can result in anything other than a
serious aggravation of the situation.

This will not serve any of Iraq's interests. Indeed, the
only way for Iraq to progress towards the lifting of the
sanctions remains the fulfilment of its obligations under all
relevant resolutions, notably resolution 687 (1991). If
paragraph 22 of that resolution is to be implemented, the
effective operation of the Special Commission and the
IAEA is essential. This is clearly stated in the draft
resolution before us today.

We believe that this draft resolution is a timely and
necessary one. Slovenia co-sponsored it and will vote in
favour of it. It is well-balanced and focused. It signals to
Iraq in no uncertain terms that it still has a choice: either to
resume full cooperation, whereupon the Council will
proceed to the comprehensive review, or to forfeit another
opportunity and further delay the moment the Council can
act in its favour.

We strongly hope that Iraq will make the right choice
and that it will do so soon.

