Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I must say
that, listening this afternoon to the representative of Cuba,
I found myself wondering whether I was listening to
something out of Alice in Wonderland, where everything
is topsy-turvy and back-to-front - what you might call
either Wonderland or Looking-Glass Land. It is rather
revealing, I thought, that early in his statement he should
have been quoting Lewis Carroll at us. But to adapt a line
of Shakespeare, perhaps the envoy doth protest too much.

The Security Council is about to vote on a draft
resolution which makes clear this Council's condemnation
of the use of weapons against civil aircraft in flight. That
is why my delegation will be voting in favour of the draft
resolution. The United Kingdom would like to take this
 

opportunity to express its deep condolences to the families
of those who were killed on 24 February 1996.

In the Council President's statement of 27 February
1996, the Council strongly deplored the shooting down by
the Cuban Air Force of two civil aircraft on 24 February
and requested the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) to investigate this incident and to report its findings
to the Security Council. The United Kingdom strongly
supports the draft resolution's endorsement of the ICAO
report and resolution. And I think it is fair in the context of
this afternoon's discussion to remind ourselves of what
some of the conclusions of that report are.

Conclusion 3.12 is that the first aircraft was destroyed
by an air-to-air missile fired by a Cuban MiG-29 aircraft.
Conclusion 3.13 is that the second aircraft was destroyed by
an air-to-air missile fired by a Cuban MiG-29 military
aircraft. Conclusion 3.18 is that means other than
interception were available to Cuba, but had not been
utilized. Conclusion 3.19 is that during the interceptions no
attempt was made to guide them away or instruct them to
effect a landing at a designated aerodrome. Conclusion 3.20
is that the standard procedures for manoeuvring and signals
by the military interceptor aircraft were not followed.
Conclusion 3.22 is that the rule of customary international
law that States must refrain from resorting to the use of
weapons, as codified in article 3 bis of the Chicago
Convention, apply irrespective of whether or not such
aircraft is within the territorial airspace of that State.

There can be no doubt that Cuba has contravened
principles of international law in using force against civil
aircraft and in not following established international
procedures on interception of such aircraft. The message in
this draft resolution is clear. Such incidents are
unacceptable to the international community.

There is an obligation on all States to comply with the
provisions of international law and the standards and
recommended practices set down in the Chicago
Convention and its annexes, and to cooperate fully with the
International Civil Aviation Organization. The United
Kingdom looks to all States to abide by their obligations in
this regard.

The United Kingdom would draw the Council's
attention to paragraph 7 of the resolution before us. We
urge all States who have not yet ratified the Protocol adding
Article 3 his to the Chicago Convention to take the
necessary steps to do so as soon as possible.

The purpose of this draft resolution is firstly to draw
attention to the illegal use of weapons in this incident.
And I think it really is important to recall this afternoon
against the background of what I might call the cloud of
unknowing to which we had to listen earlier - a virtuoso
demonstration of the art of filibuster in the grand manner.
I heard the representative of Cuba say in part of his
statement that Cuba had a lot of very long experience of
this and that. Well, I think this Council also has very long
experience - experience, among other things, of tactics
deployed in this Chamber in relation to the policy of the
Government of Cuba. I myself remember very clearly
first hearing that kind of approach one autumn day in the
year 1962 in this very Chamber. It brings to mind
something that I might call the tactic of the Whopper. I
make no accusations. But the tactic of the Whopper
applies when one wants to take liberties with the truth
and rather than indulging in what Churchill would have
called a little terminological inexactitude, the tactic of the
Whopper dictates that if you tell it long enough and you
tell it big enough, there is a sporting chance that someone
will believe part of it, even if only out of sheer
exhaustion. Plus ca change, plus c'est la meme chose.

But this draft resolution also looks forward and
seeks to prevent the recurrence of similar actions which
put at risk the lives of those travelling in civil aircraft in
the future. My delegation hopes that all States will take
due note, acknowledge their obligations and take every
possible measure to ensure that the tragic events of
24 February are not repeated.

In taking action this day, the Security Council is
doing no more than upholding the principles of
international law and fulfilling its responsibilities to
safeguard international peace and security. It is with this
in mind that I commend the draft resolution to colleagues
in this Council, and that is why we shall vote for it
ourselves.

