Mr. Kridelka (Belgium) (spoke in French): Yesterday we celebrated the first International Day to Protect Education from Attack, thanks to the initiative and unwavering commitment of Qatar and its Permanent Representative, whom I thank, and with the full support of the Niger in its capacity as President of the Security Council. The International Day serves above all as a wake-up call. Last year - as the briefers explained today - the United Nations recorded nearly 500 attacks on schools in various conflict zones. Since 2010, the number of serious violations verified by the United Nations has tripled. In the Sahel, the number of schools closed as a result of violence has increased six-fold since 2017, which has had a particularly strong impact on girls. Hundreds of thousands of girls and young women are at risk of never going back to school and even of becoming victims of assault, forced marriage, exploitation and sexual violence. Entire generations are being robbed of their hopes and entire communities are being robbed of their future. Just recently, we were all shocked by the violent attacks targeting students preparing for their exams in two provinces of the Democratic Republic of Congo, a country that President Abarry knows well. Students were killed, others were raped and hundreds have had their exam dates postponed due to violence and insecurity. This is alarming to us, which is why I would like to congratulate President Abarry on taking the initiative to convene today's meeting. It is also why we fully support the presidential statement that Belgium co-facilitated and which was adopted today under the Niger's effective presidency (S/PRST/2020/8). It is our collective duty to protect the right to quality education for all. In this context, I would like to draw the attention of the Security Council to four points: the fight against impunity, our role as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the Security Council's mandate on children in armed conflict, and the training of peacekeeping personnel. First, the fight against impunity is a cornerstone for Belgium. We therefore welcome the fact that the presidential statement condemns the lack of accountability for violations committed and calls on Member States to ensure the investigation and prosecution of those responsible for attacks in violation of international humanitarian law. In accordance with Council resolutions, the full range of justice mechanisms must be used, including national, international or mixed criminal courts and tribunals and, of course, transitional justice mechanisms. Secondly, my goal as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as Council members know, is to adopt conclusions on each of the 14 situations of armed conflict in which parties are committing grave violations against children. We are, of course, working closely with Special Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia Gamba de Potgieter, whose commitment and dynamism I commend. The increased frequency of reports boosts the relevance of the conclusions that we adopt on the basis of those reports. In this way, we can keep the pressure on parties in order to improve efforts aimed at preventing grave violations against children and protecting children in armed conflict. Thirdly, as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, Belgium is striving to uphold the main thrust of the mandate given to us by the Security Council with regard to children in situations of armed conflict and, in particular, the integrity and impartiality of the mechanism for listing parties that engage in violations of the rights of the child. This mechanism gives the United Nations the opportunity to work with listed parties to prevent grave violations and improve the situation of children. It remains a valuable, powerful and results-oriented tool. Highlighting violations of children's rights and denouncing their perpetrators are indeed indispensable preliminary actions. This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. The mechanism deserves our continued support to ensure the systematic collection of information on the six grave violations against children in situations of armed conflict. In the same vein, we welcome the fact that today's presidential statement calls on the Secretary-General continue monitoring and reporting on the use of schools by the military in violation of international humanitarian law. This brings me to my last point. Last February, we adopted a presidential statement calling for the use of the practical guidance for mediators to better protect children in situations of armed conflict (S/PRST/2020/3). In view of the Secretary-General's call for a comprehensive ceasefire in response to the coronavirus disease pandemic, it is more relevant than ever that child protection issues, including attacks on schools, be at the centre of mediation efforts as well as at the centre of training for peacekeeping personnel.Finally, we call on all States to join the 2015 Safe Schools Declaration and congratulate Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on doing so. We call on all States to also ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict and to endorse the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers and the Paris Commitments. I would like to conclude with the words of our young partners - the young Faisal, who asked us yesterday during the celebration of the International Day for the Protection of Education against Attacks if we can really build back better when the most important tool for this purpose is constantly under attack. I would like to welcome our two young briefers today from the Niger, Ms. Rimana Mayaki and Ms. Hadiza, who explained to us the concrete role that young people in the Niger play to enhance the safety of schools. They are both models for young people of the South and the North. "Education is the most powerful weapon to change the world," Rimana told us, and I would like to end with that quotation.
