Mr. Koroma (Sierra Leone): I would like to
thank the United Kingdom Government for its
initiative in convening this meeting in the form of a
workshop. We are grateful that it will provide an
opportunity for an interactive discussion and an
exchange of views on the situation in the Mano River
Union subregion.

Madam President, if you will allow me, may I
take this opportunity to recognize the presence of the
Secretary-General. I bring you greetings, Sir, from His
Excellency President Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, and
I thank you for your statement during our inaugural
state opening of Parliament.

This meeting is very timely. It comes at the end
of a historic and successful phase in the search for
peace and stability not only in the Mano River Union
countries but also in the West African subregion as a
whole. I refer to the situation in my country, Sierra
Leone, where we have witnessed the end of a brutal
war, the successful disarmament and demobilization of
ex-combatants under the auspices of the leadership of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and the holding of a violence-free and
transparent election. Secondly, this meeting is timely
because we can see patches of dark clouds floating
around the radiance of the success we are celebrating
in Sierra Leone. This is why we are delighted that the
subject of the second session of this workshop is "The
way forward: a coordinated Mano River Union action
plan".

The United Nations peace mission in Sierra
Leone is the largest, but certainly not the first,
undertaken by the Organization. It emerged and
developed from more than four decades of experience
by the United Nations in the deployment of troops and
observers wearing the blue helmets of the United
Nations to help maintain international peace and
security. It benefited from the mistakes and successes
of other peace operations.

However, the United Nations peace mission in
Sierra Leone was, in many ways, unique. It had its own
specific characteristics. And here I believe lies the first
lesson learned in UNAMSIL. The Mission in Sierra
Leone has taught us that, in deciding to deploy a peace
operation, the United Nations should take into account
the particular circumstances of the conflict it is about
to help manage or contain; the political climate of the
area surrounding the theatre of operation; and the
capacity or capability of regional and subregional
organizations to perform peacekeeping activities - the
role of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and
its relations with the Security Council come into focus
here. The United Nations should also take into
consideration certain unique circumstances, such as the
humanitarian dimension of the conflict, the role of
natural resources in fuelling the conflict, the interaction
between the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries and, of course, the special role of certain
countries. By this, I mean, in our case, the role of the
United Kingdom Government in assisting the United
Nations deployment in Sierra Leone.

Sierra Leone has over the years tested the
capacity of the United Nations to operate large and
complex peace operations, ranging from the
disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants, the
facilitation of an electoral process and the
establishment of a unique hybrid judicial process in
addressing the question of impunity, which comprises
the Special Court and the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission (TRC), each with its own specific
mandate. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission,
for example, is a quasi-judicial non-punitive
institution, whereas the Special Court operates under a
dual judicial system that will indict and judge those
persons who bear the greatest responsibility for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, for
all intents and purposes, has lived up to expectation in
the discharge of its mandate. Suffice it to say that
UNAMSIL's success did not come easy. There were
many challenges. The uniqueness of the peace
operations in Sierra Leone reflects the links among
peacekeeping, peace-building, good governance,
security and post-conflict concerns; the scope of
United Nations offices in Sierra Leone also clearly
reflects these concerns. The Mission further recognizes
the cooperation between the United Nations and other
regional and bilateral partners that are providing
support. Examples of such bilateral and United Nations
cooperation are the training of Sierra Leone's military
by the United Kingdom Government and the training of
our police force. The success of UNAMSIL in
achieving its objectives in Sierra Leone is due in large
part to its acting in concert with those partners, and this
could augur well for future United Nations peace
operations in similar situations in countries of conflict
elsewhere.

Having spoken about the lessons that the United
Nations has learned, we should remind ourselves that it
is important that these lessons be applied properly in
the subregion because the subregion itself is still a
region of conflict. The gains achieved in Sierra Leone
will be temporary without security and stability in the
subregion. The current situation in the subregion is
indeed cause for concern, as the escalating violence in
Liberia overshadows the recent success in Sierra
Leone.

Neither should we forget that before the conflict
in Liberia escalated there was conflict and much
fighting in Guinea. The arms, the ammunition and
those who were fighting in Guinea cannot be easily
wished away. They are lurking somewhere, in some
corner of the subregion, and they have not been located
yet.

The droves of refugees now swarming into our
border regions, escaping the violence and its attendant
consequences in Liberia, no doubt give rise to
speculation among members of the international
community that conflict will re-emerge in Sierra
Leone. But the mobilization of vast amounts of
financial, material, technological and human resources
to secure peace for our country must be seen by
members of the international community as an act of
faith in our nation's survival. They must not lose hope
in us as we strive to consolidate those gains. Our
President, Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, has not lost
sight of the need to hold continuous consultations with
other heads of State of the subregion, namely those of
Guinea and Liberia, concerning the peaceful resolution
of the crisis in the region, because the fact of the matter
is that crisis and conflict in one of the countries
indirectly affect every other country.

One would therefore be tempted to ask at this
point whether the vast amount of resources that have
been committed to Sierra Leone would be wasted
simply because we ignored the conflict in the
subregion. One would also be tempted to ask whether
the subregion itself is not a candidate for the testing of
the lessons that the United Nations has learned in
Sierra Leone.

The pacts and protocols initially signed among
the member States of the Mano River Union to enhance
the Union's capability in promoting social, economic
and political integration became inoperative during the
periods of conflict in Liberia and in Sierra Leone. The
ideal would be to revive the defunct institutions of the
Union and effectively and efficiently to implement the
existing protocols, especially those relating to security
and defence. The deterioration of the security situation
led to another meeting of heads of State of the Mano
River Union subregion, held in February 2002 at Rabat,
Morocco. The conclusions adopted in the communique
have not been effectively implemented. Nor have we
been able to revive the institutions of the Union
effectively, simply because we lack the resources to do
so.

Indeed it is now widely accepted that peace and
stability in the Mano River Union area is a key factor
for peace, stability and development in the West
African subregion. Modalities have being worked out
by countries members of the Mano River Union with a
view to revitalizing the Union and to expanding its
scope to include cooperation in the areas of politics,
security, foreign affairs and defence. The signing on 9
May 2000 of the Fifteenth Protocol to the Mano River
Union Declaration on Defence and Security has
engendered a greater degree of confidence-building and
security within the Union. Further initiatives structured
to forge dialogue and cooperation among the States
members of the Mano River Union have also been
recommended by both the African Union and the
subregional organization, the Economic Community of
West African States. Sierra Leone supports these
measures in principle, but what is lacking, of course, is
the resources to fully implement the measures that can
put the Union back in place.

I would like to conclude by saying that it must be
noted that the countries of the subregion are faced with
enormous financial constraints. Those constraints
prevent the countries of the subregion from easily
reviving the Union. My appeal is that this workshop
consider ways in which the Mano River Union
situation can be studied carefully with a view to
securing cooperation among the United Nations,
regional organizations and the countries of the Mano
River Union subregion in order to ensure that there is
support and assistance from the international
community to help build a Union, which, of course,
would take over the role of whatever organization is
currently operating in the subregion when that
organization leaves.

