Ms. Gamba: I took up the position of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in May. This is
the first time I have the pleasure ofbriefing the Security
Council in the Chamber in that capacity. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank France and its Foreign
Minister, His Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, for
taking the initiative to hold this debate.

I will start by echoing the sentiments of the
Secretary-General, and stress my worry at the
information outlined in his report (S/2017/821). In my
short time in this position, I have observed with grave
concern the picture painted through the information
collected by United Nations child-protection actors on
the ground, including UNICEF, whose representatives
are seated behind me. Over 20,000 violations affecting
children were documented by those dedicated
colleagues in 2016. That is a horrifying number of
boys and girls who were subjected to unspeakable acts,
mostly by armed groups, but also by Government forces
and unknown armed actors.

Children were used as the fuel of war in the
reporting period, and they have fared little better in
2017. Our most recent information indicates that the
number of children recruited and used has remained at
startling levels in South Sudan and Somalia. Attacks on
schools and hospitals have been alarmingly high in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Conflict is ongoing
in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria and Yemen, and child
casualties are all too common. In recent months, armed
groups and Governments have continued to delay and
deny lifesaving aid to children. Sexual violence against
boys and girls is also widespread in many countries
currently experiencing conflict.

I firmly believe that every generation has its most
acute shame when it comes to armed conflict. For
example, the First World War witnessed the use of
gas on soldiers - one of the many disgraces of that
generation. What we have inflicted upon children in
war zones in recent years will be our disgrace. We must
take urgent action to address the use of children as
expendable commodities by warring parties.
In that regard, the recent announcement of
additional commitments to protect children by Member
States is a source of hope. In particular, I would like to
highlight the Paris Principles as an important initiative
that helps protect Victims of recruitment and use. There
are also a number of other steps that Member States
have taken, such as ratifying the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child or endorsing
the Safe Schools Declaration. I am very pleased that
Yemen endorsed the Declaration on 17 October, and I
hope that other Member States will follow suit.

Making those commitments is an important first
step, but we need to work together to ensure that
those political pledges make a practical difference
for children on the ground. We have seen that, when
there is political will, working together has resulted in
tangible progress. The report documents such advances
in diverse situations - ranging from Nigeria, with the
signing of an action plan by the Civilian Joint Task
Force, to the delisting of the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front in the Philippines. Colombia has also been a bright
spot, with the separation of children from the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo. And it would be remiss of me not to mention the
strong progress by the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which led to their delisting for
recruitment and use of children.

The Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen,
led by Saudi Arabia, also put in place several measures
aimed at better protection of children. Those efforts
were acknowledged in the annexes to Secretary-
General's annual report. A technical team from my
Office has just returned from Riyadh, where they
met the Force Commander and reviewed and helped
to strengthen those measures. Similar activities are
being prepared for the next few months with Yemeni
and Sudanese authorities, among others, to reinforce
existing mechanisms, open new child protection units
and provide additional training. I hope that these
examples of cooperation and political engagement can
be used as models by others.

We need to roll out such best practices in as many
situations as possible in order to better protect children.
The Security Council has a vital role to play in aiding
this endeavour. It can use the tools available to it to
ensure that as many parties as possible are open to
serious discussions with United Nations child protection
actors on reducing and, indeed ending, violations.

One particular issue highlighted in the report is
that of armed groups that utilize tactics of terror or are
considered Violent extremists. This is not necessarily
a new challenge, but it is significant nonetheless.
With so called Violent extremist groups, we have seen
an increase in violations year upon year across the
six grave violations. It is indeed a great challenge to
put a stop to these horrors, but while there may be a
temptation to adapt approaches to counter such armed
groups, we must ensure that all responses are in line
with international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. In particular, we must place precaution,
distinction and proportionality at the heart of our
military efforts.

It is also important to recall the key tenet of the Paris
Principles that all children allegedly associated with
armed groups and armed forces are primarily victims.
They must be treated as such, and I urge the adoption of
protocols for their handover to civilian child protection
actors. We must also avoid stigmatizing these children.
I am sure Mr. Shaikh will speak further on this issue.

In my short time in this role, I have seen that
the separation, demobilization and reintegration of
children are Vital interventions. They are much more
effective than mass detention at creating long-term
security. We must give these processes every chance of
success. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal
for adequate funding from Member States to implement
and sustain reintegration, reinsertion and reskilling
programmes. These programmes, led most notably by
UNICEF in collaboration with many other actors, have
helped release and reintegrate over 100,000 children
since we first reported to the Security Council.

I also encourage the Security Council to focus on
the detrimental impact on children of the widespread
screening of civilians in situations of armed conflict.
While some children are detained on the basis of their
association with an armed group, others are deprived
of their liberty for significant periods owing to the area
where they happen to live. Although Member States have
an obligation to ensure the security of their citizens, we
must not further Victimize children. It will only damage
the future generation and create grievances.

I would like to end by underlining some core efforts
we can make to improve our response to violations.

First, we cannot continue to allow impunity to
prevail. Member States must prioritize accountability
to break the cycles of Violence and aid prevention
efforts. We can all work to strengthen our support for
justice systems of Member States affected by armed
conflict. In particular, we should provide expertise on
investigating and prosecuting crimes against children.

As the Secretary-General has said, we must also
enhance partnerships. I welcome the leadership and
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
regarding the protection of children, but I feel we can do
much more together. Working with these organizations
will be one of the key tenets of my mandate tenure. I
truly believe that it will be a significant multiplier for
our efforts and I hope I can receive the resources to
engage in this task.

We also need resources within conflict settings. I
call upon the Security Council to continue to request
the deployment of dedicated child protection capacity
to United Nations peace operations. This is vitally
important, but something that is currently under
scrutiny. It is a great paradox that this capacity is being
reduced at the very time we need it the most. Without
sufficient resources, we will not be able to deliver on
the mandate given to the United Nations by the Security
Council. These actors make a real difference in the lives
of children and tangibly support senior civilian and
military leadership in their efforts to protect children.

Lastly, we need peace. While it might seem trite
to say, it is the most effective way to prevent Violations
against children. Politically, we must look at conflict
prevention and resolution efforts in a different manner.
We must recognize that children are at the heart of, and
not at the periphery of, contemporary armed conflict.
The children and armed conflict mandate has a vital
contribution to make to the prevention cycle. In this
regard, when peace is in its fledgling stages, child
protection provisions must be included in ceasefires
and peace agreements.

