Mr. Al-Mahmoud (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me pleasure to begin by congratulating you,
Madam, on the great competence and statesmanship
with which your delegation has conducted the work of
the Council in order to realize the purposes and
objectives of the United Nations Charter. The initiative
to convene this ministerial meeting of the Security
Council to discuss the question of peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region of Africa is
undoubtedly a step in that direction. It indeed reaffirms
the importance you attach to the African continent,
which has suffered terribly from the scourges of war,
conflict and marginalization that have negatively
influenced the development of a great continent
distinguished by its time-honoured history, great
peoples and resources.

We would also like to extend our thanks to
Secretary-General Kofi Annan for his efforts to
highlight the suffering and marginalization of the
majority of the people of that continent, including
those living in the Great Lakes region. We value his
search for appropriate solutions that will preserve the
dignity of the African people, realize peace and
achieve development.

This meeting is important because it is convened
to support the initiatives of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General to address issues related to
African conflicts, primarily those highlighted in
resolution 1625 (2005) on the prevention of armed
conflict, especially in Africa. The Security Council
adopted that resolution at the summit it held on the
margins of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
General Assembly in September 2005. In that context,
we cannot dismiss the sheer determination of the
African States in establishing the African Union's
Peace and Security Council and entrusting it with the
tasks of conflict prevention, resolution and
peacekeeping in Africa. That achievement has allowed
the African Union to develop a genuine partnership
with the Security Council towards achieving a better
understanding of the region's difficulties and
consequently addressing, in a comprehensive manner,
the root causes of conflicts in Africa.

We have little doubt that the memory of the
violent conflicts and crimes of genocide that raged in
the Great Lakes region will remain vivid in our minds
for a long time to come. For that reason alone, we
should redouble our efforts and work tirelessly to
prevent the outbreak of new conflicts and to resolve
those that are still festering. We are all aware of the
extremely complicated demographic and geopolitical
realities of that subregion of the continent, which can
affect the region as a whole. It is therefore incumbent
upon us to search for innovative solutions based on a
regional approach, as called for at the first
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, held in Tanzania in 2004.

In View of what I have said, one question remains
to be answered is how and to what extent the United
Nations and the international community can assist the
countries of the Great Lakes region in the
implementation of the Dar es-Salaam vision. It is true
that the United Nations has achieved great success in
bringing about stability in the region, but the remaining
challenges are equally great. We must therefore
approach that question more realistically, work to
consolidate the gains that have been achieved so far,
and explore which avenues could be pursued in order
to face future challenges, even if that means a more
robust United Nations field presence, including
peacekeeping forces.

As we speak of United Nations staff in the field,
allow me to extend my country's condolences to the
families and the Governments of fallen peacekeepers
who have lost their lives in the line of duty while
discharging the noble tasks entrusted to them.

Although we are currently focused on questions
of peace, security, democracy and good governance, as
well as on social and humanitarian questions, we believe
that there are other issues of equal importance included
in the vision of the Dar es-Salaam Declaration. These
pertain to economic development and regional
integration, which, in our View, are two basic pillars of
lasting stability in the region. Regrettably, those issues
have not received the attention they deserve from the
Security Council. It is not that the Council has no
interest in such questions, but those two issues fall
outside the Council's purview and involve other
stakeholders, such as international financial institutions
and donor countries, who must assist the countries of
the region in translating their aspirations into reality.

We in the State of Qatar are convinced that the
countries of the South can shoulder their share of the
responsibility for the development of the South. For
that reason, His Royal Highness Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, took the
initiative of establishing the South Development Fund
which we hope, when it becomes operational, will
contribute to the economic development and regional
integration of the Great Lakes region.

The Peacebuilding Commission, established by
Security Council resolution 1645 (2005) and General
Assembly resolution 60/181, fulfils a cherished
aspiration; it represents a suitable mechanism to assist
countries emerging from conflict in preserving peace
and achieving sustainable development. It can also
prevent such countries from regressing to a state of
conflict. We cannot fail to praise the efforts that led to
the adoption of the wise decision to establish the
Commission, which we hope will play the role
expected of it, as articulated in the relevant
agreements.

In conclusion, let me affirm that we support the
draft resolution before the Council on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region, and we
call for its adoption.

