Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): First of all, I would
like to commend the French presidency for initiating
the public format of today's discussion. I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General's Representative in the
Central African Republic and Head of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA), General Lamine Cisse,
and the Country Director of the World Bank, Mr.
Robert Calderisi.

We entirely share General Cisse's analysis of the
specific nature of the situation in the country, which
has been gravely affected by the attempted coup d'etat.
The absence of political dialogue, social tensions,
economic decline, insecurity within the regional
context, refugee problems - all these characteristics of
the current situation in the Central African Republic
raise serious concerns. The alarming rate of the spread
of HIV/AIDS in the Central African Republic adds to
these concerns.

Under these circumstances, the situation in the
Central African Republic requires an immediate
concerted response aimed at finding long-lasting
solutions to the numerous challenges facing post-
conflict peace-building in the country. In our view, it
also represents a test case for the United Nations
system and the international community with regard to
the implementation of a comprehensive and integrated
peace-building strategy.

There are a number of challenges before the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
international community to reduce potential risks of
instability, particularly in the spheres of economic and
social recovery, improvement of political environment,
public administration and finances and the protection
and promotion of human rights. The importance of
completing the restructuring of the defence and
security forces and the collection of weapons remains
high on the peace-building agenda in the country.

Another area of which the Security Council
should be extremely vigilant is the situation's
subregional dimension and the links between the
resumption of conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and stability in the Central African
Republic. We commend the Secretary-General's
attention to the importance of continued close
coordination between the representatives in the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Given the specificity and the complexity of the
peace-building strategy for the country, we highly
commend the comprehensive action plan proposed by
the Secretary-General, to be implemented by the
United Nations and the international community in
support of the Government's efforts towards
consolidation of peace and economic recovery. Taking
into account that some of the Secretary-General's
recommendations are directly linked to development
aspects, we believe it would be useful if those
recommendations were brought to the attention of other
relevant bodies of the United Nations family for
consideration.

We highly appreciate the activities of BONUCA
aimed at strengthening the capacity of national
institutions for the promotion and protection of human
rights, reform of the armed forces, consolidation of
peace and the democratic process and facilitating
mobilization of international political support and
resources for national reconstruction and economic
recovery. We believe that strengthened activities of
BONUCA, in cooperation with the national authorities,
in coordination with the agencies of the United Nations
system present in the country and in interaction with
international financial institutions and development
partners will further contribute to the successful
implementation of the peace-building strategy in the
Central African Republic.

While noting an urgent need for external
assistance to the country, we also believe that the key
to long-term stability in the country lies with the
Central Africans themselves. At the same time, we
strongly maintain that the international community
should remain effectively engaged in the country if we
are to achieve sustainable peace, stability and
development in the Central African Republic. Today
we have a clear plan, and we need to proceed with real
action.

Finally, we hope that today's discussion will
provide a significant impetus to mobilizing
international, political and financial commitments in
support of post-conflict peace-building in the Central
African Republic.

