Mr. Ajawin (South Sudan): At the outset, please
allow my delegation to express our sincere gratitude
to the members of the Security Council for having
afforded us this opportunity to come to this important
meeting to discuss the Sudan and South Sudan and to
say a few words with regard to the issues. As this is the
first time that I take the floor, I would also like to wish
you, Madam President, a successful presidency of the
Council.

My Government would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate its commitment to working towards
improving relations with the Republic of the Sudan in
the promotion of two Viable States. Furthermore, the
Government is indeed pleased with the current progress
being made with the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan on the implementation of the cooperation
agreements of 27 September, in compliance with the
African Union road map on resolution 2046 (2012).
We believe that this conducive environment will no
doubt provide fertile ground for tangible progress
in the bilateral relations between our two States. It
has always been my Government's contention that,
given our historical links and our geographic borders
of almost 2,000 kilometres - one of the biggest in
Africa - the relationship between our two countries
can be maintained only through peaceful coexistence
in all spheres - economic, social and political. We
therefore hope that the signs of good relations that we
are witnessing so far will continue.

On the issue of Abyei, it is our belief that the people
of Abyei have suffered long enough and that the time
has come for them to exercise their inalienable rights
within the time frame set out in the Abyei Protocol. We
call on the members of the Security Council to continue
to exert efforts to ensure that the two countries hold
a referendum on Abyei in a timely manner, as well as
perhaps to facilitate the necessary logistics required for
carrying out the referendum.

My delegation would like to conclude with that, but
will be willing to take the floor later to intervene on
other remaining issues to which we want to draw the
Council's attention.

