Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation,
sincerely to thank you for giving us the opportunity to
address the Council. We wish also to thank you for
convening this important meeting, at which Member
States can express their views on the very serious Iraqi
situation, which has greatly deteriorated. The tension
prevailing in the world because of the question of Iraq
is indeed a matter of concern and a threat to
international peace and security.

Qatar has always believed in the important role of
the United Nations, the Security Council in particular,
in maintaining international peace and security. That is
why the State of Qatar has always expressed its full
support for all resolutions of international legitimacy
aimed at the achievement of peace and security in the
world. Following the terrorist attack against the World
Trade Center in New York, Qatar clearly and
unequivocally expressed its condemnation of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. We shall
always work in conjunction with all States to combat
terrorism in all its forms. My delegation would like to
express its condemnation of the terrorist attack that
took place in Bali on Saturday and to convey sympathy
and condolences to the families of the victims and to
the friendly people and Government of Indonesia.

A few months ago, many political complications
emerged on the international scene, and they should be
resolved through recourse to international law.
International law should be fully respected. The
political situation is changing on a daily basis, giving
rise to new and contradictory tendencies.

We are grateful to the Non-Aligned Movement
for requesting the convening of this meeting. There has
been a rapid development in events that may lead to the
outbreak of a war whose consequences would extend to
all the States of the region and beyond.

We have welcomed the outcome of the Beirut
Arab Summit held last March, as well as the decisions
and resolutions adopted there, including the final
declaration concerning the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait. It called, inter alia, for full cooperation to
resolve the problem of Kuwaiti prisoners and detainees
and third country nationals and the return of Kuwaiti
property to Kuwait. We consider that to be a step in the
right direction.

We are very optimistic about the decision of Iraq
to accept the return of the international inspectors and
to comply with Security Council resolutions, as well as
about the resumption of the dialogue between Iraq and
the United Nations. We also welcome Iraq's declaration
that it has no weapons of mass destruction. We had
hoped that those developments would lead to
international detente and that the United Nations and
the great Powers in the Security Council would
immediately allow the return of the inspectors in order
to assess the situation. That is what the situation calls
for, and it would be fully in keeping with the principles
of the Charter and of international law.

We all know what led to the fall of the League of
Nations: the unilateral decision by the world Powers at
that time to take decisions outside the context of
international law and legitimacy. That led to a
destructive war that claimed millions of lives. The
United Nations was established in 1945 to prevent the
repetition of such a war. Its Charter was drafted very
carefully to make it incumbent on all States, and the
founding States in particular, to respect the Charter and
accept the rule of international law in international
relations.

We would not like any State to act outside
international law as enshrined in the Charter or refuse
to respect international law. That is why we are calling
for full respect for resolutions of international
legitimacy. We consider the Security Council to be the
only body mandated to decide what necessary steps
should be taken in order to enforce compliance by any
State with international law, without discrimination.

The current situation is extremely dangerous. It
may lead to the destruction of an entire region and even
have consequences for States outside the region, to say
nothing of its negative impact on the current alliance to
combat terrorism. We believe that such a conflict
would lead to an increase in and spread of terrorism.
Given the current situation, we must find a peaceful
solution and refrain from the use of force. It is the duty
of all the States Members of the Organization to work
together to put an end to the crisis and to resolve it
politically on the basis of United Nations resolutions
and respect for international law.

We should give up selectivity and double
standards when dealing with the issue of weapons of
mass destruction and respect for international law. The
Council must be transparent in its working methods;
the United Nations does not deal with all States in the
same way. Security Council resolutions relating to
Israel must be applied with the same seriousness and
insistence. Israel has an arsenal of weapons of mass
destruction and refuses to accede to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call upon
international law to be applied so that Israeli
installations can be placed under comprehensive
safeguards.

