The President: In accordance with the understanding
reached in the Council's prior consultations, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga,
President of the International Committee of the Red Cross.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of any
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Ms. Carol Bellamy and invite her to take
a seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for children and armed conflict.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Otunnu and invite him to take a seat
at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross; Ms. Carol
Bellamy, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Olara
Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for children and armed conflict, regarding the protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

I give the floor to the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Cornelio Sommaruga.

