Mr. Weisleder (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to start by thanking the President for having
convened this important meeting. I would like to state
that we are happy to see here today Judge Fausto
Pocar, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and Judge Dennis
Byron, President of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR). We would also like to welcome
Mr. Serge Brammertz, who is reporting to the Council
for the first time in his new post, and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, both of whom are Prosecutors of these
Tribunals.

Costa Rica commends the highly informative and
detailed substance of the briefings on the status of
progress with respect to the completion strategies, in
accordance with resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534
(2004). We were glad to hear from the representatives
of the two Tribunals that the strategies are on track to
meet the deadlines. That being said, we also noted the
elements that, in the opinion of the Presidents, may
have delayed some of the trials.

At this time, as we get closer to the deadlines
established by the Council, my delegation would like
to point out that it is absolutely imperative that the
residual mechanisms which the Security Council
identifies respect the fundamental rights of the
accused, for example, the provisions on the review of
sentences and a system that allows for the monitoring
of the Victim and witness protection programmes; and
it is vital that the justice system continue to be fair,
expeditious and effective.

Costa Rica calls on the States concerned to
facilitate the work of the Tribunals. We would urge the
international community to step up its cooperation with
the International Tribunals. That means, in particular,
providing information to identify the whereabouts of
fugitives, in accordance with the reports. In the case of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, there are still four fugitives, including
Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. With regard to
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
presumed, there are still 13 persons who are sought,
among them Felicien Kabuga.

The most cruel and inhuman of crimes, such as
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
should not go unpunished. Costa Rica urges the
international community to provide all the information
at their disposal in order to gather enough data to
locate the fugitives from both Tribunals and bring them
before international justice as soon as possible.

We are, of course, committed to working within
the Council and the United Nations as a whole in order
to improve the structural and institutional conditions
that have been mentioned as factors that contribute to
creating the climate of violence and intolerance in
which those crimes, which are unjustified from any
point of View, take place.

Costa Rica would like to conclude by recalling
that in July the International Criminal Court will be
celebrating the tenth anniversary of the Rome Statute,
which established it. For that reason, my delegation
would once again like to call for efforts to strengthen
our shared sense ofjustice, and we urge States to ratify
the Rome Statute and join the 106 States that have
already done so. Through the universal ratification of
the Statute and acceptance of complementary
jurisdiction, we will continue to ensure that individual
perpetrators of genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes will never again enjoy impunity.

