Mr. Nsengimana (Rwanda): Mr. President, as
this is the first time we take the floor at the Security
Council in the month of December, we wish to begin
by congratulating you and your distinguished
delegation on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council, and also to thank you for convening
this important meeting to discuss the reports of the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the two Tribunals.

We wish to focus our remarks on the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We thank ICTR
President Judge Erik Mose and Prosecutor Hassan
Bubacar J allow for their presentations.

We wish to commend the members of the
Tribunal Chambers, the Office of the Prosecutor and
the Registry for their continued work and commitment
to the successful implementation of the completion
strategy in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Rwanda renews its commitment to
continuing to cooperate with the Tribunal, and to
working together to ensure that the completion strategy
is implemented in accordance with the specified
timelines.

We wish to reiterate that Rwanda stands ready to
take on the trials of the most serious perpetrators of the
genocide once the Tribunal has completed its work in
2008. We acknowledge that there is still work to be
done as far as capacity-building is concerned. But we
also recognize that it is time for Rwanda to regain full
national ownership of the process of administration of
justice for crimes committed during the genocide. The
international community has been generous in its
support for the international Tribunal, and we are very
grateful for this support. But in 2008, 14 years will
have elapsed since the genocide. It will be time for
Rwanda to assume full responsibility and national
ownership for the trials, with support from the
international community.

There are three particular areas where Rwanda
believes significant progress is most urgent in 2007
and 2008. The first such area relates to the transfer of
cases and convicts. Trials should take place as close as
possible to where the crimes were committed. Not only
does this contribute to the justice process, it also
contributes to reconciliation. Transferring trials to
Rwanda would also contribute to our own efforts to
eradicate the culture of impunity and promote
reconciliation, as our people would be first-hand
witnesses to justice being done. We have therefore
welcomed assurances by the Tribunal that Rwanda
continues to be the major focus for referrals.

In this connection, it is our view that all trials
targeted for transfer should take place in Rwanda. The
Government of Rwanda has been working with the
Tribunal, particularly the Office of the Prosecutor, to
prepare for these transfers, including by addressing
several legal and procedural issues. We are also in the
process of repealing the death penalty from our statutes
through our national parliament.

On the issue of the capacity of the Rwandan
judiciary, the Government of Rwanda continues to
make significant progress, despite its modest means, in
developing the human and infrastructural capacity of
the judiciary. This effort has been intensified in
anticipation of the transfer of cases to Rwanda.

With respect to administration of sentences, the
Government of Rwanda has consistently stated that all
ICTR convicts should serve sentences in Rwanda,
where the crimes were committed. This principle is in
line with the provisions of article 26 of the ICTR
statute. Once again, we believe that this approach is
essential for the justice and reconciliation processes in
Rwanda, which were the main reasons why the ICTR
was established in the first place.

The initial concern about the administration of
sentences in Rwanda was the lack of a detention
facility that meets international standards. However, a
detention facility was built more than two and-a-half
years ago and was inspected by ICTR officials, who
certified that it meets these international standards and
who signed a memorandum of understanding to that
effect. Subsequently, in November 2004, an agreement
for service of sentences in Rwanda was jointly
prepared between ICTR and the Government of
Rwanda, and sent to United Nations Headquarters for
endorsement.

Despite this step forward, there continues to be
delay in effecting these transfers. It is unclear to us
why that is the case. We therefore appeal for this
agreement to be urgently signed and for the transfers to
be carried out expeditiously.

Secondly, with regard to fugitives still at-large,
the most serious perpetrators of the genocide, its
planners and authors, should not be allowed to evade
justice. The Tribunal's completion strategy should not
be regarded as an exit strategy for the international
community's obligation to bring all suspects of the
crime of genocide to trial at the ICTR or in Rwanda
after 2008. We would welcome appropriate measures
that would ensure that all accused are brought to
justice, even after the Tribunal's mandate has expired.

My delegation has repeatedly expressed
Rwanda's commitment, which I repeat here today, to
work with Governments around the world to bring
these suspects to justice. We must not allow notorious
suspects such as Felicien Kabuga and Augustine
Ngirabatware to evade justice. Those fugitives must
not continue to be sheltered or to enjoy protection from
some States Members of the United Nations. If they do,
it would be an extremely sad indictment of the
international community. We call upon all States to
cooperate with the Tribunal to track down, apprehend
and transfer all indictees still at large.

Thirdly, I should like to discuss the transfer of
documents and materials. Given the legacy of the
Tribunal and its effect on Rwanda, we believe that the
completion strategy should incorporate the transfer of
all court documents and materials to Rwanda. As the
ICTR completes its work, the Government of Rwanda
would welcome working with the United Nations. The
international community should establish a genocide
prevention and educational centre. Such a centre would
serve not only as a memorial to the more than 1 million
victims of the genocide, but also as a centre of research
and education about lessons learned from the Rwanda
genocide; it would also promote justice, reconciliation
and human rights. The Government of Rwanda is open
to discussions with the United Nations and Member
States on how best to take that proposal forward.
However, we should be cognizant of the need to act
quickly, given the limited time remaining before the
Tribunal completes its work.

Finally, we would like to conclude by expressing
our profound appreciation to the Security Council and
the entire international community for their continued
support for the Tribunal, both politically and through
assessed and voluntary financial contributions. The
successful and timely completion of the Tribunal's
work will have a positive impact on justice, the rule of
law and reconciliation in Rwanda. We also wish once
again to thank the President of the Tribunal and the
Prosecutor and their respective teams for their work to
ensure the timely implementation of the completion
strategy.

