Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We join other
delegations in expressing our sincerest sympathies to
the people of Palestine on the death of their leader,
President Yasser Arafat. We hope that his death will
unite the people of Palestine and his successor in the
search for a durable and lasting peace in the Middle
East that will lead to an independent and sovereign
Palestine existing side by side in peace with Israel.

We thank Lord Ashdown for his report
(S/2004/807, enclosure). His briefing this morning
accorded us a better appreciation of how far the
international community and the Government and the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have gone in their
journey towards statehood and European integration.

We also welcome the presence this morning of
His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Mladen Ivanie.

Last March we listened to a briefing by the High
Representative on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, almost a decade after the international
community stepped in to put an end to the senseless
bloodshed that had torn that country and the Balkans
apart. The Philippines is encouraged to hear that much
has been accomplished since then, particularly in the
consolidation of the rule of law, as well as in the
successful implementation of defence, legislative and
economic reforms. My delegation is pleased to know
that those accomplishments have brought Bosnia and
Herzegovina within the reach of NATO's Partnership
for Peace programme and of negotiations on the
conclusion of a stabilization and association agreement
with the European Union.

Eight months ago the Philippines expressed its
grave concern over the fact that a number of those who
were behind the slaughter of men, women and children
during the crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina more than
a decade ago continued to evade justice. Five months
ago, my delegation again raised that concern and
expressed its hope that Serb authorities in Republika
Srpska would help to correct that grave injustice by
finally cooperating with the international
community - that, after several authorities
acknowledged for the first time that their forces were
responsible for the massacre of 7,800 Bosnian men and
boys in Srebrenica in 1995.

This week, the final report of the massacre in
Srebrenica was presented to the Bosnian Serb
government. The report, we understand, contains a list
of those involved in what has been described as the
worst atrocity carried out against civilians in Europe
since the end of the Second World War. Today, the
Philippines once again reiterates its concerns and
expresses its hope that the Bosnian Serb authorities
will make the right decision and take the proper action
so that the country can emerge from this tragic and
bloody chapter in its history. In particular, we would
like to reiterate our desire to see indicted war
criminals, especially Radovan Karadzic and Radko
Mladic and others involved in those crimes, stand
before the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and face trial for war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We also expect the relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, starting in
January 2005, to investigate and prosecute other war
crimes. Moreover, we expect similar action to be
undertaken against those identified in the final report
on the massacre in Srebrenica.

We note with concern in the report of the High
Representative that most major crimes committed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina have an international
dimension and that the current police system is ill-
equipped to address the increasingly sophisticated
challenges posed by organized crime, terrorists, drug
trafficking and money-laundering. We welcome,
therefore, efforts by the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to give priority to those sensitive and
important sectors. We also look forward to the end-of-
the-year report of the Police Restructuring
Commission.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way
from where it was almost a decade ago. Slowly but
surely it is evolving into a peaceful and viable State, on
course for its goal of integration with the rest of
Europe. My delegation is optimistic that the relevant
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina will realize soon
enough that that the best and only way forward for
them is to extend their full trust, support and
cooperation to the international community. There is no
other way.

