The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Singapore for his kind words
addressed to my delegation and to Bangladesh,
Jamaica, Tunisia and Ukraine.

I now wish to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Mali.

This wrap-up meeting marks a threefold occasion
for Mali. It is the conclusion of the month of December
2001, in which Mali assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for the second time in two years. It is
the end of the year 2001, and also of the biennium
2000-2001, during which Mali has taken part in the
work of the Council as a non-permanent member,
alongside Bangladesh, Jamaica, Tunisia and Ukraine.

This gives me an opportunity to highlight some of
the salient facts and major developments of the last two
years, perhaps giving pride of place to the point of
view of Africa, for which Mali has striven to be the
faithful spokesperson in the Council, without, however,
neglecting other continents.

From the Mali delegation's standpoint, three
salient events have marked the biennium during which
Mali has participated in the work of the Security
Council. The first is without question the holding, on
the initiative of Mali, and for the second time in the
Security Council's history, a meeting at the level of the
heads of State and Government, at the margins of the
Millennium Summit. Under the presidency of
Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, President of the Republic of
Mali, that Summit, I wish to recall, sought to give the
Security Council an effective role in the maintenance
of peace and security, particularly in Africa.

Resolution 1318 (2001), adopted as an outcome
of the Summit, enabled us to identify new approaches
and guidelines for the future on the question of the
maintenance of peace in all its aspects, with respect to
which the Security Council has during the past decade
experienced some successes and for which it has at
times been criticized. Mali will give particular
attention to the implementation of that resolution.

A second notable aspect of the Council's activity
during the past biennium lies in the positive
acknowledgement that it has settled certain conflicts
and begun to liquidate some operations. In this regard,
I would like to refer to the operation in East Timor.

But the biennium 2000-2001 has also
witnessed- and this is the third salient point - new
conflicts and the resurgence of old conflicts. This is the
case with Afghanistan and the Middle East.

I would now like to focus on the main
developments and changes that my delegation has
noted in the course of its participation in work of the
Council for the past two years. The demands for
transparency in the Council's work represented one of
the objectives we shared with other delegations. In this
respect, the qualitative change that has been introduced
in the work of the Security Council should be
highlighted. This trend is visible first and foremost in
the Council's endeavours to become better acquainted
with the conflicts of which it is seized.

In this regard, my delegation welcomes the
increasingly frequent dispatch of Council missions to
conflict regions. Thus, during the period under
consideration, the Council sent missions to the Great
Lakes region and to Sierra Leone, in which Mali is
pleased to have participated, and also to Kosovo. These
missions enabled the Council to properly gauge the
conflicts concerned and were thus instructive in the
subsequent debates of the Council. As a result, they
improved the decision-making process of this body.
This development is particularly useful before the
mandates of peacekeeping operations are worked out or
changed. That is why, in my delegation's view, the
Security Council should continue this kind of action in
the future.

It is also gratifying to note the development of
direct contacts with parties to conflicts and regional
actors through, inter alia, the holding of so-called
private meetings of the Security Council. Such
meetings have allowed a frank and interactive
exchange of views between the members of the
Council and regional actors and organizations, which,
moreover, is not always assured in the setting of a
public meeting. For example, on 29 September 2000,
the Malian presidency of the Council organized a
fruitful exchange of views with President Nelson
Mandela on the Burundi peace process and questions
related to the implementation of the peace Agreement.

In the same vein, the growing cooperation with
the Economic Community of West African States
represents a striking and encouraging development. In
this particular case, the Council has recognized the
need to support, in the context of genuine partnership,
the efforts of that regional organization in managing
the conflicts and crises besetting the West African
subregion. The presidential statement adopted at the
end of the public meeting on 19 December 2001 clearly
reflected that support. It would also be valuable to
strengthen the dialogue between the Security Council
and the Political Committee of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Remarkable progress has also been made in the
area of the enhanced efficiency and improved targeting
of certain sanctions regimes. In this regard, we
welcome the Council's new approach of imposing
limited-term and better-targeted sanctions.

Furthermore, over the past two years the Security
Council has devoted considerable time and attention to
problems that transcend the maintenance of peace
stricto sensu. Thus, the Council's consideration of and
thematic debates on conflict prevention, post-conflict
peace-building, children in armed conflict, women,
HIV/AIDS and West Africa are innovations to be
welcomed. This trend should be further pursued.

In conclusion, I wish on behalf of the delegation
of Mali to stress the confirmed relevance of the
Security Council. However, we would express the hope
that current developments will continue and that the
long-awaited reform of the Security Council will be
accomplished in order to adapt it to the twenty-first-
century demands of democratic representativeness and
effectiveness.

I also wish to convey my personal gratitude and
the thanks of the delegation of Mali to our colleagues
in the Security Council, the Secretariat and all those
who have helped our delegation throughout these past
two years to justify the trust placed in it by those who
elected Mali to the Council in 1999. Our task has been
greatly eased by the assistance provided by the
Secretariat. I wish in particular to thank
Mr. Stephanides and his team for their reliability and
constant availability. Lastly, I wish to thank the
interpreters and translators who have worked with skill
in support of the members of the Council.

As we stand on the threshold of the year 2002, I
wish to offer all the members of the Council my best
wishes for health, happiness and prosperity. I bid a
hearty welcome to the new members to join in 2002:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian
Arab Republic. I am certain that I speak for my
colleagues from Bangladesh, Jamaica, Tunisia and
Ukraine in paying tribute to Ambassadors Anwarul
Chowdhury, Ben Mustapha, Neewoor and Yel'chenko,
who left us in mid-term and to whom we offer our best
wishes.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
