Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First of all, I would like
to compliment you, Mr. President, for convening this
important wrap-up meeting.

There is no disagreement that the United Nations
has an important responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In upholding that
responsibility, the United Nations is equipped under the
Charter with a wide variety of means - including the
pacific settlement of disputes, peacemaking and
peacekeeping - to address potential or actual conflict
situations. At times, the responsibility of the United
Nations goes even beyond traditional peacemaking and
peacekeeping to ensuring that the peace that emerges at
the end of a conflict is sustained and not reversed.

In many conflict situations, in recent times
especially, the challenge has been not only to secure
peace, but also to make it endure. It is for that reason
that the United Nations has placed great emphasis on
peace-building in post-conflict situations, both in terms
of carrying the peace process forward to its logical
conclusion and of ensuring the institutional and socio-
economic reconstruction of war-torn countries. Many
of the more active issues currently on the Council's
agenda have strong post-conflict elements tied to the
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts already in
place, especially in Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Sierra Leone
and Afghanistan.

One prime example showing the importance of
post-conflict peace-building is Afghanistan, where
winning the peace still remains a significant challenge
for the United Nations, and especially for the Security
Council. Pakistan, as an immediate neighbour of
Afghanistan, attaches the utmost importance to the
restoration of peace and stability in that country. To
succeed in Afghanistan, the United Nations not only
has to ensure that the peace process initiated at Bonn
reaches a successful culmination; it must also remain
engaged in the country's socio-economic
reconstruction and recovery in the short, medium and
long term. At the same time, the issue of security,
which underpins both processes, needs to be addressed.
Unless all three of those issues are simultaneously and
comprehensively addressed, and until the international
community fulfils its obligations in that regard, peace
in Afghanistan will remain elusive.

The current situation in Iraq presents yet a
different challenge. Pakistan has consistently
advocated an approach inspired by the need to take
immediate measures for the security, rehabilitation and
reconstruction of Iraq and its people. After years of
war, death and destruction, the international
community must assist in healing the wounds of the
Iraqi people and in pushing the process of peace-
building forward. The international community's
engagement through the United Nations will be the best
guarantee for the observance of Iraqi rights and for
credible reconstruction and durable stability. That
would enhance the confidence of the international
community in the international system that was
established to take care of those in need and distress.

Post-conflict peace-building has also become an
important element in ongoing United Nations
peacekeeping missions in zones of intra-State conflict.
Pakistan is participating in several such missions. In
those missions, as well as in similar past peacekeeping
operations, Pakistani troops have made their
contribution to help local communities emerge from
the trauma of conflict. For example, in Sierra Leone
the Pakistani contingent has repaired places of worship,
schools, hospitals and roads. It has also built sports and
community centres and recreational facilities and
extended medical facilities. These are some of the steps
that our peacekeepers, and no doubt others as well,
have taken within their own means as part of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to help restore
normalcy to communities torn apart by conflict. The
healing of society is part and parcel of restoring and
sustaining peace in such cases.

The question is often raised of where the
involvement of the United Nations in a post-conflict
situation begins and where it must end. In the past, we
have seen that the premature withdrawal of the United
Nations from a conflict zone has led to disastrous
consequences. The United Nations and its Member
States must therefore have both the political and the
financial will to sustain a peace effort once it has
started, regardless of whether it is a case of a post-
conflict situation or whether it is in the context of
conflict prevention. Peace simply cannot be built
without the active and sustained effort of the United
Nations. The United Nations therefore has an
obligation to address each dispute or conflict situation
without any selectivity. Once the process of
peacemaking begins it needs to be taken to its logical
conclusion.

A classic example of that in our own region is the
situation in Jammu and Kashmir. This is both a post-
conflict situation over which three wars have been
fought and a situation that, if not addressed, could lead
to another conflict with potentially horrendous
consequences. It is the obligation of the United Nations
to ensure the establishment of peace in the region by
enabling the people of J ammu and Kashmir to exercise
their right to self-determination in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations. I will
conclude by citing an old quotation: "Any peace built
on the compromise of principles is no peace at all."

