Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): May I, too, begin
by remembering Richard Holbrooke. The House of
Commons foreign affairs session yesterday was led by
Foreign Secretary William Hague, who offered a warm
and heartfelt tribute to Ambassador Holbrooke for
those who had worked so closely with him. His
lifetime of effort on behalf of humankind is honoured
and respected in Westminster and will not be forgotten.

It is an honour to be here and to address the
Security Council today. I am grateful to Vice-President
Biden for chairing this meeting, and for his continuing
determination to support Iraq. The United Kingdom
also commends the sustained efforts and support shown
by the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
for Iraq and the High-Level Coordinator for Kuwait
and their teams.

This is, as has been said, a momentous day for
Iraq and all Iraqis. As we speak, Iraq's leaders are
working hard to complete the formation of a new
Government. This will shape Iraq's future. They will
face many challenges once they take up office. But
these challenges should be viewed by Iraq's elected
leaders as an opportunity, after decades of turmoil, to
chart the right path for Iraq domestically, in the region
and internationally. They should be confident that the
international community will continue to support
efforts to institutionalize the rule of law and to achieve
a successful and peaceful transition to a democratic,
inclusive and prosperous State that meets the needs of
all Iraqis.

I was in Iraq earlier this month and saw for
myself the visible steps Iraq has taken towards
stability, security and prosperity. The successful
elections in March confirmed the political progress that
Iraq had made over the past seven years, and
highlighted the powerful desire of the Iraqi people for
a Government that is accountable, inclusive and
representative.

As you are aware, Mr. President, since March
progress in forming the new Government has been
difficult. But we are pleased that the end of this
process is in sight. We commend our colleagues there
for sticking to their task, continuing to talk and
working to reduce ongoing difficulties. We urge Iraq's
leaders to sustain the efforts they have made to ensure
that all Iraqis will have a stake in how their country is
run. The new Government will continue to face the
serious challenges of economic reconstruction, energy
policy, the normalization and regularization of security,
and establishing the place of Iraq in the region.
National reconciliation and building a common
purpose among Iraq's political groupings will be an
essential part of that, and I urge all of Iraq's leaders to
come together in a spirit of national solidarity to repair
the bonds between communities that have been so
severely strained. Clearly, the United Nations will
continue to play an important role in bringing that
about, and Britain stands in full support of that work.

But we must also look at the other internal
challenges that the new Iraqi Government will face and
will need to prioritize. Although the long delay in
Government formation has put those efforts on hold, I
praise the United Nations for facilitating Arab-Kurdish
dialogue aimed at discussing revenue sharing, a new
hydrocarbons law and disputed internal boundaries and
areas. I urge, with some confidence, the new
Government of Iraq to address those internal
challenges, as a matter of priority and with United
Nations support where appropriate.

As I saw at first hand during my recent visit,
security in Iraq continues to improve but we are
concerned by the continuing activities of those terrorist
groups who target and threaten innocent civilians,
including vulnerable minorities. The new Iraqi
Government has a responsibility to uphold the values
of justice, equality and tolerance in all cases of
violence against minorities or abuse of human rights.
We welcome Prime Minister Al-Maliki's call to Iraq's
armed and security forces to secure mosques, churches
and other places of worship. All of Iraq's vulnerable
minorities have the right to live, work and worship in
peace and security. We also welcome the investigations
by Iraqi authorities, including a committee in
parliament, into recent attacks, particularly those on
Iraqi Christians, who are a uniquely vulnerable group.
So there have been, and will continue to be, security
challenges, but I believe that progress in the overall
security situation in Iraq is clearly positive.

Each of Iraq's neighbours also has a vital role to
play in ensuring that Iraq is a stable and prosperous
country. Support for the new Government of Iraq from
its neighbours will bring mutual benefits, as Iraq
becomes a key partner with friends in the region. Iraq
has much to offer commercially and can be an
important political ally, as long as it continues to act as
a responsible neighbour. In that vein, we welcome the
normalization of the relationship between Syria and
Iraq earlier this year.

As I said at the outset, today is a momentous day
for Iraq and all Iraqis. We are gathered here primarily
to recognize how different the Iraq of today is from the
one of 1990. We are all keenly aware that Iraq has a
long history with the United Nations and the Security
Council. Happily, today we see the progress that can be
made through hard work, determination and
negotiation, to fulfil the longstanding obligations of the
resolutions adopted by the Council. With that in mind,
however, the international community will now expect
to see concrete progress in Iraq over the coming year,
and to see the Iraqis normalize their relations with
Kuwait, including by taking steps to resolve
outstanding bilateral issues, especially those relating to
the land and maritime border. That will not only allow
the two countries concerned to reap huge benefits, but
will also bring about greater stability for the entire
region.

I conclude by offering our congratulations to the
Government of Iraq and my friend, His Excellency the
Foreign Minister, as well as all Iraqis, on their courage
and commitment to define a new future based on
peace, stability and cooperation. We welcome Iraq's
return to the international fold. Today, we know that
Iraq is taking significant steps in the right direction in
the face of many considerable challenges. We urge all
of the main political blocs in Iraq to work together to
provide stability for the Iraqi people.

At the beginning of your remarks, Sir, you
referred to a positive future for the people of Iraq,
which they richly deserve. We agree. The United
Kingdom has a historic and enduring relationship with
the people of Iraq, and we remain a steadfast partner
and friend, ready to help build a brighter future for Iraq
as a respected member of the international community.

