Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I join others
in welcoming Mr. Nikola Spiric, Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
our Council today, and thank him for his remarks. I
should like also to join others in welcoming the new
High Representative, Mr. Inzko, to the Security
Council for the first time, and thank him for his report
and briefing on the latest developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which, if I may say so, were admirably
clear.

We note from the High Representative's report
that there has been some progress against the five
objectives and two conditions set by the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) that, of
course, have to be met ahead of the closure of the
Office of the High Representative. The resolution of
the Brcko Final Award, the adoption of the National
War Crimes Strategy and the implementation of the
National Justice Sector Reform Strategy are all
welcome developments.

But overall, despite this, progress is slow. I am
afraid it is too slow. Despite the signing of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement last year, we
remain concerned about the serious nature of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. There have been
a few signs of flexibility and compromise from some
of the Bosnian leaders, notably developments in the
Prud process. However, overall progress on reform has
been disappointing. There are several areas where
progress is badly needed and could easily be achieved
if there were the necessary political will. I am thinking
of such areas as visa liberalization, banking
supervision, public procurement and State and defence

property.

At this pace and in this atmosphere, it seems
unlikely that the five objectives and two conditions can
be met in time for a positive decision at next month's

meeting of the Steering Board of the PIC. I hope that
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina understand that
we are not going to negotiate on the five plus two
conditionality. As the PIC Steering Board agreed in
March, it is vital that all the five objectives be met and
that the two conditions be fulfilled before we move to
close the Office of the High Representative, and we
would like to achieve that as soon as possible.

We appreciate the High Representative's efforts
on facilitating progress against the remaining two
objectives, and we are encouraged that the issues of
State and defence property have seen some movement.
We would ask the High Representative to continue his
efforts. Mr. Inzko is representing the entire
international community, and he has our backing even
when he is making difficult decisions. Recent
dynamics in Bosnia and Herzegovina, marked by
unhelpful nationalist rhetoric, are making it an even
more difficult context for his work.

The United Kingdom strongly supports Bosnia
and Herzegovina's European perspective. We are
determined to work with Bosnia and Herzegovina as
partners, wherever possible, so that it can take its
rightful place in Europe, along with other countries of
the region. But if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to make
decisive progress down the path to integration with the
European Union (EU) and NATO - goals that
Mr. Spirie set out again today - the political culture in
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs to change. The
country's leaders must take opportunities to seek
common ground and recognize that ethnic maximalism
only leads to deadlock and the failure to achieve
collective aspirations.

Lastly, I wish to say just a word on the European
Union. We are continuing to plan carefully for the EU
presence after the Office of the High Representative is
brought to an end. We shall need a robust mandate for
that so that we are in the best possible position when
the moment for transition arrives. I am encouraged by
the progress that we have seen so far on the draft
mandate. It is worth noting that the EU Special
Representative will be the central point for the
international community's engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but I would also note that the continued
participation of non-EU partners would help to
strengthen its role.

