Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): We thank Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his update on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We would also like to thank him for accommodating his schedule with the Security Council's on such short notice. The grim information that he just shared with us is indeed troubling. The deteriorating humanitarian condition as a result of increased violence in north-west Syria would have been prevented, had all the relevant parties remained committed to their obligations in protecting civilians and civilian infrastructure in accordance with international humanitarian law. My delegation believes that it is imperative for all parties with influence on the ground to ensure that the Syrian people are well protected. During the Council's briefing on the situation in the north-west in June 2019 (see S/PV.8553), my delegation emphasized that the Council needed to give the right answer when asked what would happen to the people in north-west Syria shouldthe violence to continue to escalate. It is frustrating to actually know the real answer to this question. Since the resumption of hostilities, from April 2019 to 15 January this year, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights reported approximately 1,500 civilian casualties in the Idlib de-escalation zone, including 293 women and 433 children. The number of people displaced, many of whom have been displaced multiple times, is also alarming. With camps overcrowded and the humanitarian response overstretched, concrete and sustainable actions are urgently needed. In that regard, my delegation wishes to underline the following three main points. First, immediate humanitarian assistance - such as food, health-care services, shelter, water and sanitation, as well as winterization items - is urgently needed, not only by the people in north-west Syria but also in the north-east of the country. Many internally displaced persons in the overcrowded camps in those areas are in need of food in order to survive. Many displaced families are in need of sleeping bags and blankets to ensure that their children can survive another day during the extreme winter weather. We commend the tireless efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian partners in addressing the urgent needs of millions of people in Syria. Secondly, we note that the cross-border operations have continued to scale up during Decemberand January, with more than 1,000 truckloads of humanitarian deliveries. The Council's decision to renew the cross- border mechanism with two crossing borders needs to be reviewed and assessed comprehensively, based on the actual information on the ground. Most important, it must be based on the needs of the Syrian people. We look forward to receiving by the end of February the report of the Secretary-General on the feasibility of using alternative modalities for the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing. Lastly, safe, unimpeded and sustained access needs to be provided to the United Nations and its humanitarian partners to all requested areas, according to the United Nations comprehensive assessment of need. Some have said that people are tired of hoping for peace in Syria. Obviously, there are reasons behind that. However, Indonesia fully believes that we should not tire of helping the Syrian people in need, and we should not tire of increasing our efforts to alleviate their suffering.
