Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Since the Alpbach retreat, Mr. President, we have been
aware of how meticulously you have prepared today's
discussion on an issue that is central to the
responsibilities of the international community and, in
particular, the Security Council. We wish to commend
you for that, in the belief that we will not hold just
another discussion but will bring a new vision for a
better understanding and a more appropriate treatment
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999)
10 years ago and of the Geneva Conventions 60 years
ago, the Security Council has on many occasions
addressed this issue, which has become more complex
as various conflicts of different natures have broken
out. In addition to classic warfare, today we are seeing
tribal and interethnic wars leading to pogroms against
civilians. The massacres in Sierra Leone and in Liberia
during their civil wars and, closer to us, the atrocities
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Sri
Lanka and Gaza, show the extent to which, despite the
goodwill and efforts of people and the powerful means
deployed, the protection of civilians in conflict remains
a challenge, and one that is far from being successfully
met. However, the Security Council's regular
examination of this problem demonstrates its resolve to
find fitting solutions.

Here, the legal arsenal to address the matter has
grown over time. Resolution 1674 (2006) has the merit
of having included the concept of impunity with that of
the protection of civilians. Six other resolutions
pertaining to specific aspects of the protection of
civilians have made it possible to draw attention to the
situation of women and children, as well as sexual
violence. In parallel, the Council has adopted eight
presidential statements and the updated aide-memoire
of January 2009 (S/PRST/2009/l, annex), and it has set
up sanctions committees and tribunals. So, the
framework does exist, and it is very clear.

Unfortunately, despite such notable progress,
much remains to be done because of the persistence of
grave violations of international humanitarian law and
in spite of all the relevant Security Council resolutions.
In fact, we witness, sadly, that civilians continue to be
the first targets and victims of the same atrocities:
sexual violence, fires, destructions of homes and
infrastructure, forced recruitment of children, sexual
slavery, denial of access to humanitarian aid, forced
displacement and others. In the face of those failures it
is only right to remind all actors, and first and foremost
combatants, of their duties and obligations.

States have the primary responsibility to protect
their populations from all grave abuses. They therefore
must facilitate the access of victims to redress, which
requires putting in place and strengthening credible
independent judicial mechanisms that are open to
victims, and the firm enforcement of court decisions to
put an end to impunity. Also required are such
measures as the strengthening of military justice, the
establishment of boards of inquiry and truth and
reconciliation commissions. To those we must add the
bolstering of the rule of law in peacetime by protecting
and promoting human rights, good government,
socio-economic development and the consolidation of
social cohesion and national unity. Those are all things
that can prevent the outbreak of violence.

Just like States, armed groups also have
obligations under the Geneva Conventions.
Unfortunately, in some cases, we see a complete
ignorance of those basic texts, particularly on the part
of non-State armed groups. It is therefore absolutely
necessary to establish dialogue with them, within the
framework of cooperation with States, in order to
inform them of the content of those fundamental texts.
Such an approach, which has already shown
convincing results in the realm of children in armed
conflict, should not however be perceived as
legitimating their existence. Moreover, armed groups
must establish internal disciplinary sanctions and
implement them with due stringency, or, if they fail to
do so, group leaders must be made to answer for the
acts of their members.

One of the major challenges to the protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict is humanitarian
access, given the obstacles and climate of insecurity
and violence. We urge all parties to respect
international humanitarian law and, as a matter of
priority, to guarantee the security of humanitarian
personnel and ensure conditions for the rapid delivery
of aid to civilians, including to refugee and internally
displaced person camps, through humanitarian
corridors.

The role of peacekeeping operations in the
protection of civilians is, by now, well established. It is
therefore now necessary to equip them with clear,
credible and realistic mandates supported by the
necessary logistic and financial resources, including
predeployment training on relevant legal norms for
contingents. These mandates must also be flexible, so
that they can be carefully reoriented to respond to the
situation on the ground and to protection needs.

Given the multisectoral nature of the protection
of civilians, it is imperative to improve coordination
between the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative on sexual violence to be
appointed and all other partners on the ground, in order
to meet the urgent needs of civilians.

Other complementary actions must be
undertaken. For example, there is a need to improve
the synergy of actions by means of an inclusive and
participatory mechanism of communication and
information-sharing among the United Nations, States
and civil society. Moreover, a structured analysis of the
problems would make it easier to examine the issue in
a comprehensive and coherent way, drawing on the
relevant elements in the aide-memoire.

Given the intrinsic responsibility that falls to the
Security Council, this body must ensure that its
resolutions and international humanitarian law are
observed and must speak with a united voice in all
instances of serious violations. It must emphasize
mediation by calling protagonists to a frank dialogue
that can be carried out in a climate of security and
mutual trust. It must establish independent
commissions of inquiry to establish the facts in cases
of serious Violations and prosecute perpetrators before
the appropriate international judicial body. It must
intervene systematically from the first signs of armed
conflict, deploying peacekeeping operations as soon as
possible so as to limit damage. The prevarications
throughout the Rwandan genocide must serve as an
example for us here.

In conclusion, we wish to express our satisfaction
with the United Nations system, as well as with
regional and subregional organizations, for their
efforts. We welcome the adoption on 23 October 2009
of the African Union Convention on the Protection of
and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons in
Africa. This unique convention is a binding legal and
institutional framework requiring States to take
appropriate measures to prevent and eliminate the
deep-rooted causes of forced displacement. The
Kampala Declaration of principles on this issue
specifically commits States to fight impunity by
ensuring individual responsibility for arbitrary
displacement, pursuant to domestic and international
criminal law. We wish also to thank the personnel of
peacekeeping operations and the humanitarian
community, who work on a daily basis side by side
with the civilian population, sometimes paying with
their lives.

The resolution that we have just adopted will
enable all parties concerned better to understand the
consequences of this human tragedy and to assume
their responsibilities to protect human rights in periods
of armed conflict.

