Mrs. Nguyen Phuong Nga (Viet Nam): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the 10 member States of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,
the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and my
own country, Viet Nam.

I congratulate you, Madam President, on
Malaysia's assumption of the Council presidency and
its chairmanship of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. It is indeed a pleasure to see a
fellow ASEAN member steering the work of the
Council. We also commend Malaysia's initiative to
hold this important debate on children and armed
conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and the other briefers for their
comprehensive statements and briefings.

Last year saw unprecedented challenges to the
protection of tens of millions of children in countries
affected by conflicts. Children continue to suffer the
most, especially given the unparalleled rise of violent
extremism. As the Secretary-General states in his
report (S/2015/409), it is an affront to our humanity.

ASEAN is particularly alarmed by the rise in
abduction as a tactic ofwar. In conflicts across regions,
major armed terrorist groups are now increasingly
employing the abduction of children as a means to
terrorize and indoctrinate and, most worryingly,
to sustain themselves. We therefore commend the
Malaysian presidency for its efforts towards the
Council's adoption of resolution 2225 (2015) today, to
strengthen measures for protecting children in armed
conflict, including steps to address the issue of the
abduction of children. The resolution also stresses
the importance of strengthening national capacities in
providing protection and relief to all children affected
by armed conflict.

ASEAN shares the view that a comprehensive
approach is needed to protect children in armed conflict,
particularly in addressing the issue of abduction.

While stressing the primary responsibility and
authority of States, ASEAN once again emphasizes the
need to address the root causes of the hardships that
children must bear in situations of armed conflict.
It is also equally important that the Council and the
international community continue their efforts to
address the impacts of armed conflict on children.

ASEAN believes that the inclusion of abduction
as an additional criterion for listing in the annexes of
the Secretary-General's report could help strengthen
mechanisms for monitoring violations against children.

ASEAN also believes that prudence must be
exercised so as to avoid unnecessarily complicating
issues on the ground, especially in situations not on
the agenda of the Council. All listing efforts should be
objective and comprehensive. They should be based on
credible and impartial information, take into account
the efforts made by Member States, and be in line with
the responsibility and authority of States.

Furthermore, in implementing the mechanism and
action plans already in place, it is important that all the
relevant actors are properly informed and coordinated.
Children's alleged associations with extremist groups
should not be reason to deprive them of liberty. Parties
concerned should also refrain from military actions if
risks to children are associated with such actions.

The Council should also continue to take a
cooperative approach and provide necessary assistance
to relevant parties that are cooperating with the United
Nations through the implementation of action plans to
end grave violation against children in armed conflicts.

In our region, ASEAN has been stepping up
efforts to tackle issues that children are faced with,
at both the national and the regional levels, as well as
in institutional and practical areas. In 2015, ASEAN's
priority is to strengthen its regional mechanism in order
to give effect to the high-level commitment to make
progress on this issue. The ASEAN Commission for
the Protection and Promotion of the Rights of Women
and Children is now developing a regional plan of
action for the implementation of the Declaration on the
Elimination of Violence against Children, as adopted
at the twenty-third ASEAN Summit in 2014, including
through regional outreach activities. ASEAN has also
consulted and cooperated closely with United Nations
agencies and mechanisms, including UNICEF and the
Secretary-General's Special Representatives on related
issues.

Much remains to be done, yet there are grounds
for optimism. It goes without saying that since the first
time the Council substantively addressed the issue of
children and armed conflict (see S/PRST/1998/18),
the international community has made great strides
in reducing the suffering that children have to bear in
conflict situations. Awareness on this acute issue has
been raised; institutions have been established; criteria
put forth and initiatives launched and implemented.

ASEAN remains strongly committed to addressing
issues that children are facing, especially in conflict
situations. Let us work closely together to ensure a
better future for children, to make sure that children are
not soldiers and not among those who suffer, because
children are our common future.

