Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I want to thank Secretary-
General Anto'nio Guterres for his informative and
timely briefing. I would also like to acknowledge
China's initiative in convening today's open debate
on strengthening multilateralism and the role of the
United Nations. Allow me to congratulate Ambassador
Al-Thani, Ambassador King and Judge Yusuf for their
contributions to our discussion.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
to be delivered later by the observer of the European
Union

Let me concentrate on three issues that Poland
finds as particularly vital for strengthening
multilateralism - the global rules-based order, the
role of regional organizations and adjusting the current
challenges to the global system by addressing new
threats to peace and security.

Poland seeks partnerships with all actors interested
in building a multipolar world. Strengthening effective
multilateralism and promoting a global rules-based
order have been and remain our priorities. Our input
to supporting multilateralism is embodied in our
membership of the Security Council.

This year for the third time, Poland will host
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP). We
will host the COP24 in Katowice, where we will gather
to ensure the effective implementation of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The full and effective
implementation of the Paris Agreement is inextricably
linked to the implementation of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals. For that reason, global
climate action should comprise the economic, social
and ecological dimensions.

Cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations is critical in ensuring that the multilateral
world order works and can be beneficial for all. From
our perspective, the European Union remains as one of

the best examples of a successful multilateral project.
After centuries of with bloody conflicts, the European
community enjoys a peaceful and most prosperous
period in its history. Year after year, generations of
young people from the 28 countries of the European
Union can now study abroad and learn about new
cultures, thereby fostering understanding and respect.

Poland is a strong supporter of the strategic
partnership between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular in Africa.
Therefore, we welcome the progress made in the United
Nations-African Union partnership over the past couple
of years. During that time, the African Union has taken
on important responsibilities and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. We appreciate
the ownership that it has constantly showed not only in
tackling crises, but also in bringing together subregional
organizations in ajoint effort to ensure peace, stability
and the development of the African continent.

Words of support for multilateralism are welcomed
and much-needed, but it is through our collective action
that we can really make a difference. A world order
based on law is a pillar of effective multilateralism.
The same rules must apply equally everywhere and
to everyone. Everyone should have equal rights and
equally proportional duties. The reform of the Security
Council, which we support and in which we want to
participate, should be about increasing the area of equal
rights and competencies of all members of the Council.
It is important that multilateralism serve a certain
system of values and not be only a part of political
technology and the game of interests. That system of
values is enshrined in the Charter ofthe United Nations.

Multilateralism should be a commitment to the
observance of values, such as respect for dignity and
human life. It is about values that go beyond the political
order and are not subject to a political definition, because
they are the foundation of the political order in the
world. Wherever basic human rights and fundamental
freedoms are being systematically and widely violated
and abuse, and whenever international crimes are
being committed or weapons of mass destruction are
used, the Security Council cannot remain idle. It is
our responsibility to respond quickly and decisively.
We should never forget about the triad constituting the
foundation of the United Nations, which are interlinked
and equally important - peace and security, human
rights and development.

There are significant new threats and challenges to
international peace and security that were unknown to,
or underestimated by, the founders of the United Nations
in 1945. Terrorism, foreign fighters, violent extremism,
cyberattacks, refugees flows, uncontrolled migration
and information warfare, as well as transnational
organized crime, have all undermined global stability.
Moreover, we see powerful and determined non-State
actors who have no respect for the norms of international
law and human rights. The world has become more
interrelated in terms of communication, trade and
economic interdependence. There is no way to tackle
all of those issues in an effective way unilaterally and
achieve a sustainable outcome. No single State can go it
alone. Only together can we make a difference.

We continue to strongly support the Secretary-
General's initiatives to make the United Nations
delivery more effective and efficient on the ground,
as well as his constant push to promote prevention and
mediation. Conflict prevention and crisis management
through mediation are one of the founding principles of
the United Nations, and we cannot overemphasize its
significance to multilateral diplomacy.

