Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya attaches great
importance to the issue of non-proliferation, the subject
that we are considering today. As all members of the
Council know, Libya has voluntarily renounced its
facilities and programmes related to weapons of mass
destruction. We are certain that the only guarantee of
non-use of these weapons is their total elimination.

In this context, we are in favour of the creation of
nuclear-weapon-free zones throughout the world,
including in the Middle East region. We have
supported all relevant resolutions adopted in this area,
including the resolutions of the 1995 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) adopted with
respect to the Middle East, as well as pertinent
resolutions of the General Assembly, including
resolution 62/18 of 2007.
08-25749
Non-proliferation and disarmament together form
a single comprehensive issue which should be dealt
with without selectivity. All States without exception
must submit their nuclear facilities to the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards regime. We
deplore the fact that the Security Council has not
attached adequate importance to the issue of Israel's
nuclear weapons, in spite of the fact that the Israelis
are refusing to accede to the NPT or to submit their
facilities to the IAEA safeguards regime.

Moreover, Israel has declared that it possesses
nuclear weapons but has not respected repeated
international calls to disarm. This attitude could have
terrible effects on the region and on the world,
especially since it, together with the massacres that are
being committed in the occupied Palestinian territories
right now, demonstrates that the Israeli regime is
terrorist and irresponsible and does not take into
consideration international law or ethics.

Libya believes that it is extremely important that
the Security Council address this subject in a
comprehensive way in order to convince all States in
the region to accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty. That could enhance the Security Council's
legitimacy, especially with regard to the procedures it
can adopt. The Council's selectivity has given rise to
questions about the Council's true objectives.

Our commitment to nuclear non-proliferation
must not make us forget the right of all States parties to
the NPT - including the Islamic Republic of Iran -
to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and to
acquire and develop related technology. The
22 February 2008 report of the IAEA Director General
shows that essential progress has been made on the
Iranian nuclear issue and that the majority of pending
issues have been resolved. It also shows that there is
now greater clarity with regard to Iran's declared
nuclear programme. It was our hope that those positive
developments would be taken into account and that
negotiations and diplomatic contacts would be
continuing with a view to resolving contentious issues
and with a view to reinforcing the status of the IAEA
as the appropriate body to deal with this problem.

For our part, we did not agree with other Council
members about the usefulness of a resolution imposing
additional sanctions on Iran, or that this would help us
achieve a solution; it might instead cause the situation
to deteriorate. We had asked that the text reflect the
content of the latest report of the IAEA Director
General and that the draft resolution address the
Iranian nuclear programme in the context of concerns
related to the Middle East in general.

Because the countries that formulated the text of
the draft resolution before us have taken into
consideration some of the concerns we share with other
members - and while, although the majority of
Council members consider that it is useful to adopt a
draft resolution of this kind, we do not share that
view - we have decided to join the unanimous
opinion in the Council and to vote in favour of the
draft resolution, so that the Security Council can speak
with a single voice.

