Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ijoin our colleagues in
expressing our solidarity with Egypt and mourning all
those who were senselessly killed in recent barbaric
terrorist acts. It is indeed sad that we so often have
to start our statements in the Chamber by expressing
condolences, but we do have to stand together in
addressing this evil.

I would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), for her briefing on the situation in
the country.

Ukraine welcomes the fact that the long period
of institutional instability in Haiti is finally over.
We commend the Haitian authorities, in particular
the Haitian Provisional Electoral Council and the
Haitian National Police (HNP), on the positive
steps taken to restore democratic institutions. We
welcome the renewal of the National Assembly, the
formation of a new Government and the adoption of
a governmental programme built around priorities in
security, justice, energy, education, health, agriculture
and decentralization.

We congratulate the Haitian people who, while
facing many political, economic and social challenges,
have managed to bring the country back to constitutional
order. The full restoration of Haiti's democratic
institutions will help the country to move forward and
to build one Haiti for all Haitians, as President Moise
stated in his inaugural speech.

We underline that the efforts of all political
stakeholders should be focused on ensuring stability
and security as a crucial elements of democratic
consolidation. All political forces and all sectors of
Haitian society should be actively engaged in this
important endeavour. Broader unity is indispensable
to achieving such goals as strengthening national
human rights institutions and respect for human rights,
combating criminality and sexual and gender-based
violence, ending impunity and ensuring accountability.
The return to constitutional order should enable Haiti,
with the help of the international community, to
address the urgent socioeconomic and humanitarian
needs that have been aggravated by cholera and
Hurricane Matthew.

Ukraine commends the important role MINUSTAH
played in ensuring stability and security in Haiti.
Its contribution to strengthening the capacity of the
Haitian National Police is particularly important. We
recognize that the recent Haitian elections passed
with few incidents, thanks largely to MINUSTAH, the
Haitian National Police and the Provisional Electoral
Council. While the security situation in that Caribbean
country is not perfect, solid progress has been made
over the past few years.

That is why Ukraine welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendations concerning the
MINUSTAH mandate. We share the opinion that the
time has come to end MINUSTAH's mission and to
replace it with a reduced presence that will focus on
strengthening rule-of-law institutions, supporting and
developing the National Police and engaging in human
rights monitoring and reporting. However, we should
approach this decision with the necessary responsibility
and a well-thought out strategy of transition in order to
avoid the repetition of past failures and missteps.

We consider it essential to continue the work
of strengthening the Haitian police. The Secretary-
General's recent report (S/2017/223) highlights the
gains made over the years in developing the capacity
of the HNP. At the same time, further consolidation of
this achievement is vital. In that context, we welcome
the position of the new Government on making the
formation of a professional national defence force a top
priority. On the other hand, we would like to underline
the necessity of continued efforts of the United Nations,
other multilateral agencies, international and regional
partners and individual States Members of the United
Nations in supporting the long-term security and
development of Haiti.

