Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010). The
Council adopted it by a large majority, with the votes
of countries of Africa, Asia, Europe and America,
countries with or without a nuclear industry and
countries with or without trade relations with Iran.

This unity has a clear reason, and all members
know it. For 18 years, Iran has been developing a
clandestine nuclear programme. Once that programme
was discovered, Iran has unceasingly impeded the
efforts of the International Atomic Energy Agency to
uncover its objective. Iran continues to enrich uranium
despite five Security Council resolutions and the lack
ofa credible nuclear power programme on its soil.

The facts are overwhelming; there is no room for
doubt. It is sufficient to recall them. Iran has developed
a programme for missiles capable of carrying nuclear
warheads. Iran has worked on advanced military
studies that are the missing link between enrichment
and the ballistic missile programme, in particular on
building a delivery vehicle in which a nuclear warhead
can be placed, while rejecting all cooperation on that
issue with the Agency.

More recently, Iran has built a clandestine
enrichment facility at Qom, adapted to military use but
far too small for civilian use. That facility would have
to function 24 hours a day for 45 years to provide fuel
for a civilian reactor. Finally, in February Iran started
to enrich its uranium to 20 per cent, which brings it
even closer to a military threshold.

It is no surprise, therefore, that the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has concluded in its
Director General's report of 31 May that it was
impossible for it to confirm that all nuclear material in
Iran is in peaceful activities.

This, however, was not for lack of increased
efforts to lead Iran, through dialogue, to prove its
openness. Since 2003, the three European States - the
Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and
France - have been seeking to start a dialogue with
Iran. That approach resulted in the first European
cooperation proposal of August 2005, then the E3+3
proposal of 2006 and a new proposal of June 2008.
Significant incentives have been offered to Iran in
the nuclear, security, commercial, agricultural and
medical fields. A high-level delegation went to Tehran
in June 2008 with a letter signed by the six Ministers,
including the United States Secretary of State of that
time. Countless meetings, ministerial exchanges and
direct, indirect, multilateral and bilateral contacts took
place with the Iranians. No effort was spared.
However, those offers did not succeed, owing to the
refusal of the Iranians to start negotiations, and for
seven months Iran has refused to meet the European
Union representative, Baroness Ashton, despite the
commitment that it undertook last October.

In that context, my country gratefully welcomes
the initiative of Turkey and Brazil on the Tehran
Research Reactor as a confidence-building measure,
and French authorities have indicated this at the
highest level. We welcome the commitment of the two
eminent leaders and wish them success. However, we
note that Iran has already spared no effort to strip the
agreement of its substance by continuing to enrich its
uranium to 20 per cent and reaffirming its intention to
continue to do so, which negates the main purpose of
the agreement, and by playing for time to ensure that it
would have to export only a fraction of its stockpile of
uranium to enable it to rapidly rebuild the necessary
quantity for a military device.

We have also noted Iran's biased reading of the
agreement, choosing to view it as a justification for
unlimited enrichment, a definitive rejection of
sanctions and IAEA inspections, and an alibi to avoid
discussing its nuclear programme with the E3+3.

Finally and most importantly, a satisfactory
agreement on the Tehran Research Reactor, which we
sincerely hope to achieve, could be a useful
confidence-building measure although it would not
address the heart of the problem. The heart of the
problem is the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme, the discovery of the clandestine facility in
Qom, enrichment to 20 per cent and Iran's obstruction
of the IAEA's efforts. This problem remains
unchanged, and Iran's refusal to resolve it forces us to
be firm today.

For these reasons, the sanctions resolution that
we have just adopted is an appropriate response. The
resolution is robust, yet specific and targeted. It is not
aimed at the Iranian people. Its measures will increase
the cost to Iran of its proliferation policy. They will

slow down the progress of the nuclear programme and
thereby give us more time for diplomacy. In fact, it was
the very least we could do following the discovery of
the clandestine facility in Qom and the beginning of
enrichment to 20 per cent. It is our duty to protect the
non-proliferation Treaty - a vessel that Iran believes it
can board without a ticket.

If we did not react to such developments, the
message we would send to potential followers of Iran
would be: Go ahead. It is also our duty to prevent a
regional arms race, which could be provoked by mere
doubt concerning the aims of the Iranian programme. It
is our duty, finally, to prevent a conflict leading to
disastrous consequences in an unstable region.

That being said, the door of dialogue remains
open. This includes discussions on the Tehran Research
Reactor. Fully mindful of Brazil and Turkey's efforts,
France, the United States and Russia have written to
the IAEA Director General to share with him the
problematic issues raised by the Tehran agreement. We
will propose an experts meeting with Iran as soon as
possible to reach agreement on these issues. We are
also ready to consider other confidence-building
measures, as spelled out in the resolution that we have
just adopted.

However, this is a decision that we cannot take
alone. It is now up to Iranian leaders to take the hand
offered to them, as we have urged them to do for nearly
seven years. It is up to them to consider the interests of
their people, rather than to pursue a dangerous dream
of power at the cost of regional stability. It is up to
them to choose integration into international society,
reaping its dividends rather than the growing isolation
to which they are condemning themselves. If they are
ready for this, we will be there to help them.

