The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Spain.

Spain believes that the resolution we have just
adopted, which my delegation joined in sponsoring,
serves the purposes the Council has always held
foremost throughout the crisis before us, in particular
relieving the suffering of the civilian population in the
Darfur region, ending the conflict in that area and
putting an end to impunity for grave violations of
international humanitarian law.

The resolution's text is balanced. While
acknowledging the positive steps taken by the
Sudanese authorities since the adoption of resolution
1556 (2004), in particular with regard to access for
humanitarian assistance, it also clearly notes that much
remains to be done in order fully to comply with the
Council's demands and to fulfil the commitments made
by the Government of Sudan. In particular, there is as
yet no adequate indication that the Government of the
Sudan has taken effective measures to disarm and
neutralize the armed militias, in particular the
Janjaweed. Nor has it ended the attacks against the
civilian population.

In spite of the progress made compared to the
situation prevailing just a month and a half ago,
regrettably, the Darfur region remains the scene of
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. For that reason, the Security Council
cannot neglect its responsibilities; it must act
accordingly.

In order to find a reasonable solution to this
situation, the Government of Sudan must not only
continue but also enhance its cooperation with the
African Union. In that regard, the resolution just
adopted strengthens the leadership role of the African
Union, which was already recognized in resolution
1556 (2004) and which, in our view, must by supported
by Member States and by other international
organizations if the African Union itself requests such
support. We hope that promises to cooperate with the
African Union will soon be fulfilled by means of
sufficient and well-defined steps.

This is undoubtedly a conflict that has
repercussions, especially regional ones, but the threat it
also poses to international peace and security requires
the participation of the entire international community
in order to assist in finding the solution.

I wish to underline the resolution's request for the
Secretary-General rapidly to establish an international
commission of inquiry to investigate the facts
impartially and independently and take the first steps to
prevent impunity for those responsible for committing
atrocities, no matter what group they belong to.

Echoing the conclusions adopted on 13
September by the General Affairs and External
Relations Council of the European Union, Spain fully
supports the African Union's action in the Abuja talks
under the auspices of President Obasanjo, whom we
hope to hear in the Security Council at a special
meeting on 24 September. In that regard, I underline
the fact that the resolution we have just adopted
pressures both the Government of the Sudan and the
rebel groups the Sudan Liberation Movement Army
and the Justice and Equality Movement to negotiate in
good faith and with urgency in order to find a lasting
solution to the conflict.

We also believe that nothing that occurs in the
Abuja negotiations or on the ground in the Darfur
region should hinder a quick resumption of the
Naivasha process dialogue on the north-south conflict,
which also must be urgently concluded.

My Government trusts that the Government of the
Sudan, as testified to by its letters addressed to the
President of the Security Council, will comply with the
Council's requests and fully cooperate with the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, with
the African Union in all aspects of its action in this
crisis and with the international commission of inquiry
once it is established and undertakes its tasks.

The Council must maintain all these questions
under consideration in order in the future to be able to
take the right measures without any kind of
automaticity or prejudice.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Sudan.

