The President (spoke in French): I warmly thank
Mr. Nzita for his briefing and for his moving testimony.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

I thank the Secretary-General for his presence here
today.
I would like, at the outset, to convey my warmest
appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and
the Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF for their
briefings and their commitment. I also express my
heartfelt appreciation to Ms. Bodin and Mr. Nzita
for their poignant testimonies, which have enabled
us to better grasp the tragic reality and extreme
complexity of the situation of child victims of armed
groups and non-State actors. Their testimony is also a
powerful message of hope that confers on all of us the
responsibilty to act.

The scenes of violence depicted in Mr. Junior
Nzita's book, IfMy Life as a Child Soldier Could Be
Told, is unfortunately the daily reality of thousands
of children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Syria, Iraq
and other countries. Among those serious Violations,
I would like today to stress the role of abductions,
80 per cent of which are committed by non-State armed
groups and have become a systematic terror tactic used
by extremist groups such as Boko Haram and Daesh.
The situation is especially difficult for girls, who are
subjected to sexual Violence and forced into slavery,
marriage and pregnancies, which make it all the more
difficult to separate them from armed groups. It is
important to forcefully condemn the barbaric violence
of armed groups, but that is not enough. The time has
come for us to act more effectively on the ground, as we
have heard today.

In that regard, the work being overseen by
Ms. Zerroughi is remarkable. Today, 14 non-State
armed groups have signed action plans that commit
them to cease violations with regard to children; seven
ofthem have been removed from the lists annexed to the
Secretary-General's annual reports. By the same token,
UNICEF has also made considerable progress. In the
Central African Republic, 1,623 children associated
with non-State armed groups were demobilized
and reintegrated in 2014, thanks to a programmed
supported and financed by France. But the Security
Council's efforts with local authorities and civil society
during its trip to the Central African Republic 10 days
ago showed that the challenges remain immense. Given
the scale of the task we face, we need to be prepared,
proactive and concrete. In that regard, I would like to
propose three new modes and levels of action as a blue
print for action plans.

First of all, we must act at the diplomatic and
political levels. States are the key actors for establishing
the necessary climate of trust for the United Nations,
the Special Representative and actors on the ground to
be able to promote action plans. Such efforts produced
results in the Philippines, for example, where the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front reaffirmed in 2014 its
adherence to the action plan signed in 2009 to prevent
the recruitment of children. Mediators and special
envoys need to more systematically integrate activities
related to child protection in their projects. The
protection of children must be a concern and a priority
not only within the framework of peace accords, as in
the case of Mali or the Central African Republic, or in
ceasefire agreements, but also in the absence or even
the failure of peace negotiations, as is often the case.
France therefore proposes the development of United
Nations guidelines for mediators on the protection and
liberation of children. Negotiators are able to wield
greater weight when they can apply pressure through
mechanisms such as sanctions and the Secretary-
General's black list. It is time to update resolution
1612 (2005) to include abduction as a serious violation
capable of triggering the addition of the guilty parties
to that list of infamy. We fully support the efforts by
Malaysia in that regard.

Secondly, we must act at the operational level,
throughout all the phases of a conflict. In a world in
which preventive action is essential, particularly in
the realm of education, we might look to Pakistan, for
example, where terrorist groups are fighting against the
education of girls and are targeting schools. Elsewhere,
for example in Central African Republic, in Boali and
Yaloke, some children who were already attending
school before the conflict ended up leaving their
classrooms to join the anti-Balaka forces. Preventive
measures must also therefore include information
campaigns about armed groups in schools and on the
radio or via other forms of communication in order
to discourage children from joining such groups.
And in the midst of conflict, tools adapted to those
already involved in combat must be provided. Military
personnel, peacekeepers and regional security forces
must be provided with clear strategies or operational
concepts as well as with regular training to enable them
to act with caution when they find themselves faced
with child soldiers, often on the front lines, whom they
seek to separate from armed non-State groups and hand
over to Child protection services. In that context, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has a clear
role to play in maintaining its strategies and proposing
specific, targeted training. The document recently
adopted by NATO on the protection of children in
armed conflict is also an interesting example.

Finally, once a child has been freed from the clutches
of an armed group we must facilitate and, above all, as
has been rightly emphasized, ensure his reintegration
into his family and community. States are responsible
for implementing strategies for demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration specifically designed
for children, with special attention to the situation of
girls. The situation of girls needs to be the subject of
a more granular and methodical statistical follow-up
as part of the follow-up reporting mechanism; only
that will make it possible to implement solutions more
adequately adapted to their protection and reintegration.

My third and last proposal concerns the need to
deepen our actions with respect to the law. The fight
against impunity, which has also been mentioned,
remains indispensable for discouraging and preventing
serious violations by new actors. I would like to
highlight the message from the International Criminal
Court (ICC) whose first judgement, upheld on appeal,
found Thomas Lubanga guilty of the crimes of
enlisting and conscripting children under the age of
15. The ICC is currently developing a comprehensive
strategy on the protection of children, an initiative that
we fully encourage and commend. States must take
responsibility by ratifying international instruments
such as the Additional Protocols to the Geneva
Convention of 1977 and the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child of 2000 and
2011. France also calls on all countries to adhere to the
Paris Principles and Paris Commitments of 2007 as an
essential point. For non-State armed groups, the signing
of action plans or acts of engagement is essential. Such
tools usefully guide our action against violations of the
rights of children in armed conflict.

This year marks 10 years since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). It is our collective duty to
be more visibly active and more committed, more
responsive and more effective with respect to the
protection of children in armed conflict. The fight to
protect children in armed conflict involves each and
every one of us. The community of nations must join
together to condemn it and, above all, to take action. As
Mr. Junior Nzita's testimony has taught us, we should
and we can win the battle together.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

