Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the pleasure of
speaking on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia, the
European Free Trade Association (EFTA) country
Iceland, member of the European Economic Area, as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.

As this is the first time that I am taking the floor
under your presidency of the Security Council, please
allow me, Sir, to congratulate you on the assumption of
your duties.

Let me start by thanking the High Representative
and European Union (EU) Special Representative Mr.
Christian Schwarz-Schilling for his briefing on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would
also like warmly to welcome the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr.
Nikola Spirie.

Since the last time Mr. Schwarz-Schilling briefed
the Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina has seen positive
developments in some areas. In others, progress has
been scarce. The October 2006 elections have led to
the formation of a new Government. The European
Union welcomed the formation of a new Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina in February. In
November 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina was invited
to join NATO's Partnership for Peace Programme. In
May 2007, the city of Sarajevo was selected as the seat
for the new Regional Cooperation Council Secretariat.

There was also progress on the issue of police
certification. On 30 April, the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council issued a letter to
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are grateful that that
brought this long-standing issue to a resolution. Both
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling and his predecessor have been
strongly engaged on this matter. The Office of the High
Representative and EU Special Representative
contributed to this particular solution through close
cooperation with members of the Security Council and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Cooperation was also close with the Council of
Europe and with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Implementation of this solution will
require a continued engagement on the part of the
Office of the High Representative and EU Special
Representative and the EU Police Mission.

On 3 May 2007, the EU member States approved
the text of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. The conclusion of that
agreement could bring Bosnia and Herzegovina a step
closer to the EU. However, the conclusion of an
agreement depends on progress in four key areas:
building up the country's public administration,
implementing police reform, implementing public
broadcasting legislation, and full cooperation with the
ICTY. Unfortunately, progress in those areas is still
lacking.

We therefore call upon all parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to work together constructively to
overcome the remaining obstacles as soon as possible.
To that end, the political leadership in Bosnia and
Herzegovina must assume its responsibility in a clear,
immediate and determined way and must overcome the
current lack of progress.

However, the deterioration of the political climate
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the return of
nationalistic rhetoric are causes for concern. Let me
remind members that Bosnia and Herzegovina has a
clear European perspective. The endorsement of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement and the
initialling of the visa facilitation and readmission
agreements are clear indications that all 27 member
States remain committed to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European future. Moreover, the European Commission
is continuing to support Bosnia and Herzegovina's
efforts. Progress towards the European Union,
however, depends to a large extent on Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its own efforts.

I should also like to say a word on constitutional
reform. Although it is not a precondition for
concluding the Stabilization and Association
Agreement, constitutional reform is essential for the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Functional and
sustainable State structures are necessary to be better
prepared for EU integration. Bosnian ownership in that
process is indispensable. We are also grateful for the
contribution of the High Representative and EU
Special Representative in helping to bring this
important issue forward.

In February, the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council decided against confirming
closure of the Office of the High Representative in
2007. The decision was based on an assessment of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the wider
region on the basis of the analysis presented by the
High Representative. The aim is now to close the
Office by 30 June 2008. The Steering Board agreed to
review the situation at its meetings to be held in
October 2007 and February 2008. Transition remains
the goal; the policy of ownership remains the guiding
principle. Extending the mandate of the Office of the
High Representative is intended to ensure that the
transition is completed in the shortest possible time.
The European Union will continue to help Bosnia and
Herzegovina make the final steps from peace
implementation to European integration.

As this was the last opportunity for the High
Representative and EU Special Representative to brief
the Council, allow me to conclude by thanking
Mr. Schwarz-Schilling on behalf of the European
Union, but also in my national capacity, for his hard
work and efforts in bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina
closer to European structures. During his mandate,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has indeed made considerable
progress. I ask him to accept our gratitude for his part
in that important project and best wishes for the future.

