Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Turkey is fully committed
to its responsibilities in the field of non-proliferation,
and as such is a party to all major international
non-proliferation instruments and regimes. We do not
want any country in our region to possess nuclear
weapons. Such a development would make even more
difficult the attainment of the goal of establishing a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East, to which Turkey attaches great importance.

Turkey would like to see the restoration of
confidence within the international community
concerning the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme. To that end, we see no viable
alternative to a diplomatic and peaceful solution. It is
in that understanding that, together with Brazil, we
signed the Tehran declaration, which aims to
implement the swap formula elaborated by the
International Atomic Energy Agency in October last
10-39596
year with a view to providing nuclear fuel to the
Tehran Research Reactor.

The Tehran declaration has created a new reality
with respect to Iran's nuclear programme. The
declaration, which was designed as a confidence-
building measure, would, if implemented, contribute to
the resolution of the substantive issues relating to
Iran's nuclear programme in a positive and
constructive atmosphere. The declaration in essence
provides a first step in a broader road map that could
lead to a comprehensive settlement of the problem. In
other words, the Tehran declaration provides a new and
important window of opportunity for diplomacy.
Sufficient time and space should be allowed for its
implementation. We are deeply concerned that the
adoption of sanctions would negatively affect the
momentum created by the declaration and the overall
diplomatic process.

On the other hand, it was rather unhelpful that the
response of the Vienna Group was received only a few
hours ago. The fact that the response was of a negative
nature and that it was sent on the day of the adoption of
the draft resolution on sanctions had a determining
effect on our position. Our position demonstrates our
commitment to the Tehran declaration and to
diplomatic efforts.

That said, our vote against the draft resolution
today should not be construed as reflecting indifference
to the problems emanating from Iran's nuclear
programme. There are serious questions within the
international community regarding the purpose and
nature of Iran's nuclear programme, and those need to
be clarified. We take this opportunity to call upon Iran
to show absolute transparency about its nuclear
programme and to demonstrate full cooperation with
the International Atomic Energy Agency in order to
restore confidence.

Turkey attaches great importance to the
resolution of this problem through peaceful means and
negotiations. The draft resolution on sanctions will be
adopted today despite our active and unrelenting
efforts in that direction. However, the adoption of the
draft resolution should not be seen as representing an
end to diplomatic efforts. We are of the firm opinion
that, after the adoption of the draft resolution, efforts to
find a peaceful solution to this problem will have to be
continued even more resolutely.
3

On the other hand, we take note of the concerns
of the international community regarding the uranium
enriched by Iran at 20 per cent. We expect the Iranian
authorities to take steps to dispel the concerns of the
international community, which reflect certain question
marks regarding the peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. We now expect Iran to work towards the
implementation of the Tehran declaration. The
declaration must stay on the table. Iran should come to
the negotiating table with the permanent five members
of the Security Council plus Germany to take up its
nuclear programme, including the suspension of
enrichment. We will contribute to that process.

With those considerations, the Republic of
Turkey shall thus vote against the draft resolution
today.

