Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in English): I
extend our warmest congratulations to the Dominican
Republic on its able presidency of the Security Council
from the very outset of its tenure. I also thank United
Nations Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing on the current situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem.

Today, we extend sincere congratulations to the
other Security Council members that also began their
terms on 1 January - Belgium, Germany, Indonesia
and South Africa. We wish them all success, along with
the rest of Council members, in upholding their lofty
responsibilities for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In that connection, I would like to convey to
my friend, Ambassador Matjila, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, and through him to
the people and the Government of South Africa, my
deepest condolences for the death of a dear friend,
the late Permanent Representative of South Africa,
Ambassador Kumalo. May his soul rest in peace.

We also welcome among us today Mrs. Marsudi,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, and thank
her for her presence and for Indonesia's strong support
for and solidarity with Palestine.

Ofcourse, we must also renew our deep appreciation
to the countries and delegations of Bolivia, Ethiopia,
Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden upon
completion of their terms, during which they served
with consummate commitment, skill and wisdom.

While there are many serious challenges before us,
as humans tend to have, we begin the year with high
hopes - hopeful that the better sides of humankind
will prevail, that our common values will be upheld,
that our obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and international law will be respected and
that our commitments will be fulfilled so as to ensure a
more just, peaceful and secure world for all, including
the people of Palestine.

Although the past year tragically witnessed deep
human suffering and loss as Israel's illegal occupation
became more entrenched, brutal and extreme, and as
the political process remained deadlocked - not only
without prospects on the horizon, but with marked
setbacks - there were some glimmers of hope.
Alongside inspiring stories of Palestinian resilience
and achievement, the following international events
and trends have been critical to preserving our faith
in international law and the international system, and
even in the inevitability ofjustice.

Despite the unprecedented funding crisis faced
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the
international community rallied, with generosity and
compassion, to close an immense shortfall. Led by the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner General, and
supported by many traditional and new donor countries,
those efforts helped ensure the continuity of operations
for the provision of crucial humanitarian, development
and emergency assistance to 5.4 million Palestinian
refugees across the region, pursuant to UNRWA's
General Assembly mandate pending ajust solution.

The meaning of that collective mobilization cannot

be underestimated. It has helped alleviate the refugees'
plight amid widespread worries, fears and rising needs.
It has ensured relative stability in their communities
and host countries against a backdrop of volatility and
conflict in the region. And it has served as a model
of multilateralism at work and of tangible respect
for humanitarian principles and political and legal
responsibilities - all decisive factors in our collective
ability to address the crises we face at a time when
multilateralism is under such intense pressure.

The year 2018 also served to highlight a shared
determination by the Palestinian people and their
leadership, as well as by the international community,
to preserve the foundations of a just and peaceful
solution and protect Palestinian rights. That has
included a near-consensus rejection of actions aimed at
legitimizing illegal Israeli measures in occupied East
Jerusalem, deeming such actions null and void and
flagrant violations of resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016).

At repeated junctures - whether in this Chamber
by nearly every Security Council member month after
month or by other Member States at every debate or
in the 18 December joint statement by present and
outgoing European Union Council members and/or
in the vast support for General Assembly resolutions
on the Palestine question, including the 6 December
resolution 73/89, entitled "Comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East" - important efforts
have been made to reinforce the long-standing terms
of parameters for a just solution, based on two-States,
Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and
security along the pre-l967 borders, and for all final
status issues, including Jerusalem, in accordance with
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.

The international community must continue to
reject attempts to erode this consensus and must match
words and commitments with practical measures to
ensure accountability for all violations. Only that can
make impunity costly, bring it to a halt and truly make
a difference in our collective search for peace. That
must include serious efforts to implement the relevant
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016) and the
clear obligations therein, including of non-recognition
and distinction. As often stressed by the Secretary-
General, there is no viable plan B to the two-State
solution. I repeat, there is no plan B to the two-State
solution, as he often tells us. Immediate action to
advance its realization is required before it is too late.

A final recent, positive event was the endorsement
of the State of Palestine as Chair of the Group of 77
for the year 2019, tasking us with leading the Group's
efforts to address issues of universal concern towards
ensuring development, stability and prosperity for all
humankind. We are humbled at being conferred that
responsibility and pledge to uphold our collective
principles and goals, in the true spirit of multilateralism,
on behalf ofthe Group's 134 member States and with the
rest of our partners and the international community.

Those have been the more hopeful developments.
Unfortunately, as Special Coordinator Mladenov
pointed out, the situation on the ground has been far
less positive. The reality remains one of recurrent
crises, cycles of violence and imminent dangers, as
Israel, the occupying Power, exploiting the international
paralysis, persists with its illegal policies and practices,
inflicting more suffering on our people and relentlessly
colonizing our land, pushing peace prospects further
and further away.

Day by day, the occupation is destroying the
two-State solution and sowing deep despair among
our people. That despair is especially acute among
our youth, who have known only the oppression and
dehumanization of foreign occupation and blockade all
their lives and who are losing hope for a better future
and losing trust in the promises of peace and justice
made to them by their leadership and the international
community. That reality has been confirmed in briefing
after briefing, including in the context of the Secretary-
General's quarterly reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), which should be presented
in written format, as we and the majority of Council
members have repeatedly called for.

Israel, the occupying Power, is flagrantly carrying
on with its illegal settlement campaign, making a
mockery of international law and of the Security
Council's credibility. In blatant contempt of the
Council's authority and global demands, Israel has
persisted in confiscating and colonizing our land
with settlements, the wall, checkpoints, Israeli-only
roads and other occupation infrastructure, as well as
demolishing Palestinian homes and forcibly transferring
Palestinians, including vulnerable Bedouins, with
nearly 500 people, among them 216 children and 127
women, displaced and made homeless in 2018.
Israel has deliberately advanced the illegal
construction of more than 5,600 settlement units in
the past year, thereby facilitating the illegal transfer
of thousands more Israeli settlers to our land. The
majority of those settlement activities are taking place
in areas deep inside the West Bank, and in particular in
and around East Jerusalem. The obvious aim is to alter
the demography, character and status of the occupied
territory and de facto annex it, in grave breach of
international law, and to obstruct the contiguity of our
State and thereby the Viability of the two-State solution.

Israeli Government officials and extremist settlers
have also persisted with provocations and incitement
against Palestinian Muslim and Christian communities
and against our holy sites, particularly Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, undermining the historic status quo, Jordan's
custodianship and inflaming religious tensions. Most
recently, that has involved dangerous rhetoric by
an Israeli politician who called for the demolition of
parts of the historic wall of the Old City of Jerusalem.
Such provocations must be explicitly condemned, and
Israel must be demanded to comply with all relevant
resolutions, including for the protection and preservation
of the city's historic, cultural and religious heritage.

The human toll also continues to mount as
Palestinian civilians continue to be denied their
fundamental human rights and the international
protection that the Security Council and General
Assembly have periodically called for across the five
decades of this illegal occupation. Acts of violence and
hatred against Palestinian children, women and men
continue unabated, including by extremist settlers.
Incited by a barrage of inflammatory rhetoric, even
from the highest levels of the Israeli Government and
military, violent raids and lethal attacks by occupying
forces, including against unarmed civilian protesters in
the Great March of Return in Gaza, continue to cause
harm to civilians, take innocent lives and devastate
Palestinian families, and Palestinian civilians continue
to be arrested, detained and imprisoned by the occupying
Power, which is fiercely targeting our male youth.

We will not forget the 295 Palestinians killed by the
occupying forces in 2018, among them many children,
or the 29,000 injured - the highest casualty toll since
Israel's war on Gaza in 2014 - among them hundreds
left disabled, including many amputees. We will not
relent in our calls for the perpetrators of those crimes
against our people to be held accountable and forjustice
for the victims.

Human misery is also intensifying, with the
poverty and dependence on aid borne of that injustice
mounting daily. The situation is especially grave in
the Israeli-blockaded Gaza Strip, where the depth of
the humanitarian crisis defies description. Hearing the
shocking figures reported monthly by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNRWA, the
Office of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process and others may seem to have become the
norm after all this time, but there is nothing normal about
the calculated infliction of such human deprivation
and indignity. The longer the international community
tolerates this deplorable man-made crisis - whereby
2 million people are being forced to live in an open-air
prison, in total isolation and desperation - the closer it
will come to losing its sense of humanity.

We urge the Security Council to heed the cautions
and appeals presented to it over and over and to give
that matter urgent attention. We call for serious action,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and the Council's own resolutions, to bring to a halt
Israel's impunity, with a view to not only saving the
possibility of a just peace, but actually promoting its
achievement. Each State also has a responsibility to
respect and ensure respect for the law by not rendering
aid or assistance to illegal Israeli actions, including in
Jerusalem, and by advancing accountability and peace.

On our part, we will remain resolute in calling for
the application of international law and calling on the
international community to uphold its political, legal
and moral responsibilities to bring an end to the Israeli
occupation and achieve a just solution to the Palestine
question in all its aspects, including the fulfilment
of our people's inalienable rights, including to self-
determination and to return.

We reiterate our appeal to countries that have not
yet done so to recognize the State of Palestine and,
moreover, call for support for Palestine's request for
admission to United Nations membership, which has
been pending since 2011, to allow us our rightful place
among the community of nations. Such steps would
be in full conformity with the relevant resolutions,
the Palestinian people's right to self-determination
and independence and the two-State solution, which
the international community has insisted upon, yet
neglected, for decades. It would also be significant in
restoring hope and rebuilding trust, which is so vital
in creating peace. We will also remain insistent in our
pursuit of Palestinian reconciliation and unity, and once
more, we especially recognize Egypt's valuable efforts
in that regard and pledge our cooperation.

Moreover, despite the dismal situation on the
ground and severe political deadlock, we remain
committed to non-violence, dialogue and the objective
of peace, including through negotiations based on the
terms of reference enshrined in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. It is on
that basis that all final-status issues must be resolved
and that a just, lasting and comprehensive peace can
be guaranteed.

We call for the mobilization of regional and
international efforts to help overcome the impasse
and contribute to the realization of a just solution as a
matter of urgency, in line with the Security Council's
calls in resolution 2334 (2016). We urge all States to
step up their efforts to uphold their commitments and
obligations to bring a peaceful end to the Palestinian-
Israeli tragedy. Peace cannot be achieved by dismissing
international law and human rights; rather, upholding
the law is the only path to peace.

