It is an honour and a privilege to have Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and His Excellency Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalves presiding over this important meeting this morning. As a fellow archipelagic islander country, we wish Saint Vincent and the Grenadines all the best in this month's historical presidency, as it is the first time in history that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has sat on the Council. I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, our sister Ms. Amina Mohammed, and the briefers for their comprehensive briefings. Mr. Ibrahim Mayaki, Sir Hilary Beckles and our brother, Ambassador Munir Akram, have provided us with ample information for a lively discussion. As we have witnessed, the current pandemic has exacerbated fragility in many conflict-affected countries and may reverse peacebuilding efforts. As members may recall, that was also one of the key takeaways from the open debate on the topic of pandemics and the challenges of sustaining peace held during Indonesia's presidency in August (S/2020/799). Indeed, the challenges to peace and security are multifaceted and contemporary issues such as the pandemic, environmental and development issues, protectionism, terrorism and extremism may compound that challenge. It is now more important than ever to strengthen the multilateral system in order to address the root causes of conflict. During many discussions in the Security Council, we often hear about the need for a comprehensive approach to ensure peace and stability that encompasses security, human rights and humanitarian aspects, as well as sustainable development. To that end, the Security Council, as the organ with the principal mandate of maintaining international peace and security, should continue to mainstream such a coherent approach. Having said that, allow me to highlight three points. First, it is necessary to strengthen national capacities. Ensuring an effective State presence and the protection and provision of basic needs of populations, as well as combatting poverty and inequality, are key in order to sustainably break the roe ' conflict cycle.'stpilt is imperative to build and strengthen the institutional capacities of conflict-affected countries to create environments conducive to peace and security so that national stakeholders can take a holistic approach to addressing the root causes of conflicts. That must include investing in national capacities for conflict prevention. That should continue to be one of the priority mandates of United Nations special political missions and peacekeeping operations. We must also ensure that the United Nations missions mandated by the Council provide a strong foundation for long-term and sustained socioeconomic development. For that to succeed, we need strong national ownership and the inclusive participation of all local stakeholders, as they have a better understanding of the conflict risks to be addressed. We also need partnership, resources and the sharing of experiences from international stakeholders. Secondly, we must enhance synergies throughout the work of the entire United Nations system. The United Nations must respond in coherent manner, harnessing the strengths of its different organs. The division of labour and coordination with a clear road map are key. We have witnessed how current contemporary security challenges are interlinked, from climate change to food security. Addressing the root causes of conflict and instability requires concerted efforts, including the exchange of information and mobilizing expertise and capacity. United Nations missions on the ground have the capacity to monitor and identify drivers of conflicts, serving as part of early warning system. Meanwhile, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have technical capacities to address specific conflict drivers. The Council needs to work in tandem with all relevant United Nations bodies, as well as specialized agencies, in order to find solutions to those new challenges. The Peacebuilding Commission also plays a vital role in coordinating responses across the principal organs of the United Nations and beyond, including by mobilizing regional organizations, international financial institutions and private sectors. Thirdly, I wish to highlight the role of regional and subregional organizations. Countries in one region often face similar challenges. Such challenges are sometimes also transboundary and interconnected in nature and require strong cooperation among countries in the region. Regional and subregional organizations have deep knowledge, unique perspectives and strong local connections that are crucial for supporting countries in building lasting peace. That potential should be leveraged to prevent, manage and resolve conflict, as well as to collectively address the drivers of conflict and instability. As we have often reiterated, we believe that neighbours know best. There should also be a sharing of responsibility and experiences between regional and subregional organizations. The Security Council must continue to support efforts by regional and subregional organizations in that regard. In conclusion, to quote an old proverb that is known all over the world, including in the Caribbean: "A harvest of peace grows from seeds of contentment." Peace does not come without hard work. No single actor alone can thoroughly address the drivers of conflicts and insecurity. But in order to be able to work together, we have to acknowledge that there are clear links between peace and sustainable development and that, without development - from local community to State level to international cooperation - our efforts will be in vain, and peace will be harder to attain.
