Poland would like to congratulate the Dominican Republic on assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of April. We would like to thank Dominican Republic for organizing this important open debate on youth, peace and security and for allowing all Member States to take part, despite the challenging circumstances. We are very grateful for the leadership of the Secretary-General and his Envoy on Youth, Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake. We would also like to thank the briefers for their presentations and inspiring messages. This year is a year of many important anniversaries for multilateral diplomacy. It marks five years since the introduction of the youth, peace and security agenda, and 20 years since that of the women and peace and security agenda. It also marks 10 years since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It therefore represents a great opportunity to reflect on the role of youth in these challenging times as an equal partner and an important stakeholder, and to look at the youth, peace and security agenda as a critical component of discussions in the Council and beyond. We turn now to challenges for youth in the context of peace and security. As the Secretary-General's first report on youth, peace and security (S/2020/167) indicates, there are 1.85 billion young women and men - from the ages of 10 to 24 - in the world, 90 per cent of whom live in developing countries. Conflicts take a toll on young people in various ways. Young women and men with disabilities, who are often ostracized or marginalized within their immediate families and communities and find themselves at an increased risk of violence and abuse, are particularly affected. Young people today face many obstacles, ranging from exclusion from political processes to suffering from the effects of underdevelopment, lack of access to services and education, and high levels of unemployment. As UNICEF reports, the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has long-term and destructive consequences on access to education. According to UNICEF, almost 1.6 billion children do not currently attend school, and it is estimated that more than half of the children from poor and developing countries will not be going back to school once they have reopened. At the same time, all the foregoing factors constitute important drivers for violence among youth, some of whom simply feel that they do not have options, if they even wish to survive, as they do not believe in a happy future for themselves. That is why education represents a principal tool in shaping the future opportunities of young people. The report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security rightly mentions that young people around the world are striving for peace, justice, inclusion, gender equality and human rights. Their aspirations, views and demands not only have to be heard, but need to be listened to. It is time for youth to be a part of peace processes, including negotiating peace agreements. Dire conflict situations have deplorable impacts on girls. Every day, millions of young women are exposed to gender-based violence, early and forced child marriage, sex trafficking, sexual harassment, rape and abuse. They are in critical need of humanitarian assistance and access to medical services. Now more than ever, young women should be free to live without prejudice or limited chances and with equal opportunity. Moreover, we need to remember that men are also victims of patriarchal mindsets and toxic masculinity. We need to take up the challenge of changing the stereotypes, norms and the roles assigned to each sex because we want to live in a world where the equality of women and men is a reality and nobody is marginalized on the basis of sex or origin. Young people are also victims of violence based on religion and belief; we must therefore reassure them of our unwavering support. The frustration of young people and the lack of trust towards authorities, Governments and leaders are growing. Young people do not want meaningless assurances; they want to see concrete action and they want to be a legitimate part of peace processes. Young people are increasingly aware of their rights and the opportunities available to them. They are able to exchange views and engage in meaningful discussions through the Internet and social media. They no longer want to keep quiet, and our obligation is to incorporate their voices in our national policies. With regard to initiatives my country is taking, Poland is especially concerned about the increase in violence against educational facilities, students and teachers. We welcome and support initiatives aimed at putting an end to the use of schools and universities for military purposes. The 2014 Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict is a good example in this regard. To confirm our commitment to effective implementation of the Lucens Guidelines, we signed the Safe Schools Declaration. We believe that initiatives such as these constitute an important step towards protection and promotion of the rights of the child, especially in the conflict situations. It is particularly relevant that the Warsaw Process, which is a joint initiative by Poland and the United States inaugurated last year to tackle security problems in the Middle East, is also discussing humanitarian and refugee issues, with a particular emphasis on vulnerable groups, including children and youth. The refugee crises and forced displacements in the Middle East are among the most pressing issues to be addressed by the international community. Protecting all young people, in particular young refugees and internally displaced persons in such countries as Syria, Iraq and Yemen, has to be a priority for all actors. These ongoing conflicts deprive children and youth of one of their basic needs and rights - safety. They are being maimed, abducted and attacked, recruited to fight, sexually abused, and denied access to education and humanitarian aid. Such traumas deprive them of dignity and leave permanent marks on their adult lives. Violations of their rights not only endanger their lives, but also undermine overall stability and welfare in our societies. Those issues were further developed during the Warsaw Process Humanitarian Issues and Refugees Working Group meeting that took place this February in Brasilia. The main purpose of the meeting was to foster political solutions, better coordination and structural interventions leading to the reduction of the impact of the humanitarian crises on children and youth in the Middle East. Protection of vulnerable and fragile groups, with a special focus on children and youth, remains the top priority for Polish development cooperation. Although Poland is a relatively new donor of development assistance, including humanitarian aid, my country has already managed to develop areas in which we can share our knowledge and experience, for example in providing protection in situations of conflict to persons with disabilities and other groups at risk of exclusion. A specific example of Polish Aid's actions is its involvement in development activities aimed at providing psychological support for young people affected by the conflict in Ukraine. Together with Polish Humanitarian Action, we are improving the functioning of the social services system by expanding the capacities of social and psychological services personnel working in the settlements along the contact line. With regard to the role of youth in the context of peace and security, Poland fully adheres to the view set forth in the preamble of the resolution 2250 (2015), namely, that "youth should actively be engaged in shaping lasting peace and contributing to justice and reconciliation". The passion and commitment of young people, who, as Polish experience shows, are deeply committed to working in all sorts of non-governmental organizations, contribute significantly to the culture of peace on different levels and in different areas. We wish to acknowledge the unique contributions of many young peacebuilders, activists and volunteers in conflict prevention, in the justice system, and in building and sustaining peace. Youth and student organizations are increasingly active in delivering aid and humanitarian assistance to people in the most dangerous places. We also see it in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic - young people and their organizations are engaged on delivering aid to those most in need. It is crucial to engage in dialogue with young people with a view to working together to achieve sustainable peace and development. We must do everything in our power to ensure that young people grow up in a world in which they will have economic opportunity, social justice, access to political participation and a sense of security. Only with the substantial engagement of youth will we be able to advocate more effectively to achieve sustainable peace and security conditions, human rights and our development goals. In this context, the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015) in 2015 and resolution 2419 (2018) in 2018 were groundbreaking achievements, demonstrating that the younger generations are ready to take centre stage in peace and security initiatives and become agents of change. In conclusion, let me again express our appreciation to the Dominican Republic for putting this important matter high on the agenda of Security Council. We hope to see more significant progress in terms of including youth in the debate. A more systematic approach to implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) is urgently needed. Young people have enormous power, dedication and a strong voice, and we must provide them with platform to be heard and taken into account.
