Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me commence by
thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate on the
situation in the Middle East. I also thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Feltman,
for his briefing and the representatives of Palestine and
Israel for their statements.

Discussions on the situation in the Middle East
bring the whole set of pressing issues to the fore, the
solution of which urges long-term dedication and the
proper coordination of efforts by the international
community. Although the Middle East peace process
is definitely among such issues, the long-awaited
breakthrough has so far been elusive. It is clear, however,
that there is no alternative to peace and negotiations,
and the establishment of the groundwork necessary for
a credible peace process remains a core priority for the
international community.

The latest developments in the region give hope
that the situation may begin to move from its current
standstill. Azerbaijan commends and supports the
diplomatic efforts, particularly those currently
undertaken by the United States, to facilitate the
process, revive the negotiations and contribute to
greater stability in the region. We also underline
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which
provides the regional support for the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, all
those involved should work to breathe new life into the
peace process, create an environment conducive to the
resumption of negotiations, and establish a credible
political horizon for achieving a two-State solution. As
we have repeatedly stated, and I would like to stress
once again, among the necessary prerequisites for
success is the need to ensure that the process is guided
by the normative standards set by the Charter of the
United Nations and by the objective of achieving a
comprehensive settlement based on international law.

Needless to say, the achievement of tangible
outcomes will be impossible in the absence of strong
commitment and dedicated efforts on the part of the
parties. Settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory constitute a serious obstacle and threat to the
peace process and the prospects of achieving a two-State
solution. Azerbaijan has consistently condemned and
rejected settlement practices, which are illegal under
international law and which must cease immediately
and unconditionally. It is important that the parties
uphold their commitments to the 21 November 2012
ceasefire agreement and refrain from any action that
may undermine it.

It is also essential to fully utilize the advantage of
cultural diversity by promoting intercommunal dialogue
and reconciliation while categorically rejecting and
invalidating any manifestation of ethnic and religious
intolerance. We support the ongoing efforts to achieve
Palestinian reconciliation under the leadership of
President Abbas, and express our hope that Palestinian
unity will soon be achieved.

Economic and development support for Palestine
must be promoted. The humanitarian situation
also demands continued international attention
and assistance, particularly in order to ensure the
unimpeded provision of humanitarian aid throughout
the region. It is also critical to put an end to the suffering
of Palestinian prisoners and detainees.

The urgency for renewed peace efforts is
unarguable. The moment of opportunity must not be
missed. We would like once again to express our firm
conviction that peace, security and prosperity in the
Middle East are achievable with greater political will,
a stronger commitment and concerted efforts at the
regional and international levels.

