Mr. Parenti: The candidate countries Albania,
Montenegro and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union (EU) commends the
Dominican Republic for its initiative of holding an
open debate on the important issue of the impact of
climate-related disasters on international peace and
security. The presidency of the Dominican Republic,
which is a small island development State, adds a very
important perspective to our discussion.
As Mr. Steiner noted this morning, in its recently
published 2019 GlobalRisks Report, the World Economic
Forum asserted that environmental and climate-related
concerns account for three of the top five risks by
likelihood, and four by impact, which corroborates
the findings set forth in the most recent special report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
entitled Global Warming 0f1.5" C, on the magnitude of
the challenges the international community is facing.
The impacts of climate change and environmental
degradation on food security, ecosystems, livelihoods,
water supplies and key economic sectors such as
agriculture are grave in many parts of the world.
Climate change acts as a threat multiplier for conflicts
over access to increasingly scarce resources and for
instability and international and internal displacement,
which is particularly the case in vulnerable or fragile
countries and regions lacking the necessary capacity
for building resilience and coping with disasters during
and after they happen.

The diverse nature of the interlinkages between
climate change and security, together with the range of
measures required to prevent, reduce and address them
effectively, makes it essential to take an integrated
approach. The United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel, which combines governance, security and
resilience actions, is a good example. We welcome
the reflection of climate and environmental risks in
the latest report of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.

Assessing climate and environmental risks and
their potential impact on socioeconomic stability
should be done in all countries, but especially has to
become a priority in the most fragile situations. That
is essential for promoting resilience and preparedness,
thereby contributing to the implementation of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.

Further work is required to ensure that relevant
climate and environmental risks are appropriately
included in the risk assessments that form the basis of
the decisions of the Security Council, and they need
to be included in early-warning systems, thereby
reinforcing the Council's conflict-prevention role.
Inter-pillar cooperation is essential. In that regard,
we consider the growing advisory role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission vis-a-Vis the Security
Council as very important.

We should also remember the greater risks, burdens
and adverse impacts on women and girls during and
following disasters, including a heightened risk of
gender-based violence as they attempt to gain access
to food and other basic needs for family members and
themselves. Empowering women as one of the drivers
of economic growth strengthens societal resilience.
Climate change and disaster-risk-reduction measures
have to be gender responsive, sensitive to indigenous
knowledge systems and respect human rights.

Incorporating climate-security factors into
strategic-level policy frameworks and practical
guidance at national, regional and multilateral levels,
as well as in the national voluntary reviews of the
Sustainable Development Goals, is a first step. As a long-
term measure, the sustainable management of natural
resources and close cooperation between countries
where such resources are shared is essential for reducing
the risk of related internal or international conflicts.

Ambitious climate action under the Paris Agreement
and beyond - for example, at the 2019 climate summit
to be convened by the Secretary-General - must remain
the cornerstone of our joint commitment. The EU is
convinced that multilateral action and partnerships,
treating the causes and the symptoms and promoting
cooperation, are central in that regard. We work closely
with our partners around the globe to enhance our
joint capacity to mitigate and adapt to climate change,
confront environmental degradation, manage disasters
and address wider socioeconomic impacts.

With a wide range of programmes, the EU
supports measures to strengthen resilience in an
integrated manner in different regions of the world.
For example, under Euroclima Plus, we are promoting
climate-resilient development in 18 Latin American
countries, with a focus on the most vulnerable. Our
new Pacific initiative, which we launched with partners
at last year's One Planet Summit, aims at the same
time to address impacts of climate change and build
resilience in 19 countries and overseas territories. With
the Alliance for the Sahel, designed around six priority
sectors, including energy and climate, the aim is to
strengthen the coordination among donors to enhance
the stability and sustainable development of the region.
The EU's Copernicus satellite imaging has been used
for instant lifesaving response to extreme-weather-
event disasters, through, for example, house-to-house
guidance to find survivors after Hurricanes Harvey and
Irma in 2017. It also guides long-term preparations for
climate impacts that threaten the livelihoods and even
the existence of coastal communities.

We are convinced that, with committed and
targeted action at international, regional, national and
local levels, we can reduce the risk of climate-related
disasters and ensure that their impacts can be better
handled. By achieving that, we would remove a
significant risk for peace and security in many parts of
the world.

