Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic):1 would
like first of all to welcome you, Mr. President, to
the Security Council, and to thank you for giving us
this opportunity to discuss the important issue of the
protection of children in armed conflict. We also thank
the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Deputy Executive Director
of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and the representative
of Facilitation for Peace and Development, Ms. Eunice
Apio, for their very informative briefings.

There has been an unprecedented increase in the
number of crimes and violations committed against
children in armed conflicts, particularly in the Middle
East and Africa. Among those inhuman Violations
we would highlight the crime of child abduction. The
number of children abducted in armed conflicts since
2002 has exceeded 25,000, and 95 per cent ofthem were
abducted by non-State armed groups in an organized,
structured manner so that they could be recruited or
terrorized, or for the purposes of extortion.

The deficiencies in the protection of civilians at all
levels, particularly children in armed conflicts, result
from a failure to address the threat posed by armed
groups and the early-warning signs of armed conflicts
as soon as they appear, or to impose the necessary legal
limits. Those are the most important reasons for the
increase in the number of attacks on children in armed
conflicts, their abduction by armed groups and their
forced participation in criminal and terrorist acts.

We must make every effort to work together
to end the abduction of children and prevent it from
spreading or being used in a systematic way in many
armed conflicts. That will require efforts, first, at the
national level, because the protection of civilians, and
particularly children, is above all the responsibility
of the State; secondly, at the regional level, through
cooperation among States and common strategies
to combat cross-border armed groups with a view to
weakening them, containing them and limiting their
spread; and, thirdly, at the international level, through
the Security Council and the international legal bodies
that address the abduction of children in armed conflicts
in a broader context. In that regard, I would like to
highlight the steps it is essential to take if the problem
is to be solved or limited, and which should continue to
be improved in both the medium and long term.

At the national level, we should raise awareness
about the protection of children in armed conflict
through education and social networks, which can play
an important role in educating people from different
social groups in countering the media publicity
exploited by terrorist groups such as Daesh and Boko
Haram in order to attract young people and children
through their mistaken beliefs. The media constitute a
weapon every bit as dangerous as the arms that such
groups use, whether for terrorizing or killing civilians.
States should also institute the necessary judicial
and legislative reforms, including by enacting and
strengthening laws aimed at criminalizing any kind
of attack on children. We should strengthen policies
designed to deal with violations against children,
ensure access to the medical and psychiatric services
they will need and provide programmes for Victims'
rehabilitation and social reintegration.

Mrs. Adnin took the Chair.

At the regional level, we emphasize the importance
of States exchanging security and military intelligence,
as well as the necessity for inter-State coordination.
We are currently witnessing an increase in the flow
of foreign fighters across national borders, as if the
world had become an open space for them to carry
out their terrorist acts in. Reconciliation accords and
instruments agreed on regionally or among regional or
national parties can sometimes work to the detriment of
other essential components, particularly those relating
to accountability and criminal prosecution. In that
regard, we would like to underscore the importance
of a comprehensive political process that addresses all
types ofthreats and security situations. It is crucial that
the United Nations and the Security Council follow
up such agreements to ensure that they do not fail to
punish those responsible for crimes against civilians,
particularly children, and that such criminals are not
permitted impunity.

The international community must take measures
aimed at working, with States' cooperation, to halt this
phenomenon and at providing technical, logistical and
material assistance, particularly for fragile States that
do not have the capacity for protection and deterrence.
Measures for deterring the perpetrators of these
crimes include ensuring accountability and combating
impunity, especially for crimes against children,
whether through sexual violence or abduction, that are
prohibited and punishable as war crimes and crimes
against humanity under international law. Crimes
and abuses of children, including abduction, should
be included in the mandates of sanctions committees,
with the criminals' names added to the sanctions list
and included in the annex to the Secretary-General's
reports on children in armed conflict and those
published by the relevant international organizations.
Along with that, work must be done to document such
crimes and violations in cooperation with national
Governments and through the creation of investigative
and fact-finding commissions on crimes committed
against children from the beginning of each and every
armed conflict.

In order to ensure that these measures are
implemented as well as possible, it is Vital that we
promote cooperation between the Security Council
and the Secretariat. We can ensure the protection
of children, the most fragile members of society,
by establishing links between the tasks involved in
peacekeeping, increasing the numbers of specialized
experts and making sure that they have the resources
they need to ensure the best possible deployment of
their capacities and skills in that field.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/409)
paints a very grim picture of the violations committed
against children in armed conflict at the international
level. In our view, there is a great deal of work to be done
if we are to ensure that those children have protection
and support. While the report mentionw the Violations
committed by Israel against Palestinian children during
the most recent aggression against Gaza, we were
shocked to see that Israel's violations are not included in
the list contained in the annex to the report, despite the
fact that the report cites many other situations, entities
and countries. That runs contrary to the principles of
the Charter of the United Nations. Legal protection
should be guaranteed at the same level to all, regardless
of what side they are on. It is essential to be seen to be
objective and transparent when it comes to including
States and entities that commit crimes against children,
and to have a clear mechanism, based on criteria that
guarantee the protection of children in every region of
the world and ensure legal accountability for all those
who commit such crimes, without exception.

Jordan is working to offer Syrian refugee children
a second chance at a better future and to ensure that
they are protected and served as well as possible in the
wake of all that they have endured in Syria and after
the violations of their rights that they have suffered at
the hands of the regime and the terrorist armed groups.
In coordination with the specialized agencies of the
United Nations and non-government organizations,
Jordan has established a reception centre for the
children of refugees and a centre designed to promote
an educational and preventive environment for children,
along with the provision, with the help of UNICEF, of
psychological and social assistance. We have opened
the doors of our schools, public and private, to the
children of Syrian refugees, because education is the
best possible thing we can offer them so that they can
build a better future.

Finally, I would like to reiterate that Jordan supports
the protection of children in armed conflict, the item on
today's agenda. We also support the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougi, and
we encourage all the parties to conflicts whose names
are mentioned in the Secretary-General's report to
sign and implement action plans designed to deal with
the issue of flagrant violations against children and to
promote international peace and security.

