At a time when the world is celebrating the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, the focus on better implementation, full and equal participation and the political and economic empowerment of women is of paramount importance. Kenya acknowledges the tenacity of women peacebuilders, especially in the face of the coronavirus disease pandemic as front- line health responders, mediators and peacekeepers. particularly among internally displaced persons and in refugee camps. The various briefings, discussions and outcomes this morning have further reminded us that there is a need for strengthened coherence and collaboration among Governments, civil society and the international community, in order to ensure that the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) on the ground fosters gender equality, the protection of women and girls and accountability when it comes to sexual and gender-based violence in both conflict and non-conflict situations. Although strides have been made in the quest to ensure women's participation and leadership before, more needs to be done during and after conflict to realize the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the following relevant points. First, inclusiveness needs to be sustained through purposeful national policies and strategies that prioritize women's rights and enhance women's contribution to peace. Secondly, resolution 1325 (2000) needs to be localized and community-based, in order to address specific implementation contexts. Thirdly, an intergenerational approach that links the women and peace and security agenda, on the one hand, and the youth and peace and security agenda, on the other hand, is critical. These agendas must be aligned for a comprehensive and holistic response that leaves no one behind. Fourthly, the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is a whole-of-society endeavour that requires concerted and consistent action from both the Government and its citizens. Therefore, entrenched sociocultural stereotypes that constrain women's full and equal participation need to be addressed. Fifthly, issues relating to climate change and sustainable development should be included in peacebuilding strategies, as these crises aggravate marginalization, dislocate and weaken communities and exacerbate gender inequality, thereby becoming threat multipliers and bottlenecks to the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Sixthly, gender-sensitive initiatives and perspectives need to be woven into the design of peacebuilding and peacekeeping processes so as to meet women's specific needs and aspirations in the peace-conflict cycle. In terms of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Government of Kenya has achieved the following. First, we have developed a national action plan to catalyse the mainstreaming of resolution 1325 (2000) into development, conflict-prevention and -resolution, peace and security and reconciliation strategies. We are in the second phase of the implementation of the national action plan, as we also roll out the Decade of Action for the Sustainable Development Goals. Secondly, we have operationalized gender-based training for women peacebuilders at the grass-roots level and incorporated them into Government- supported peace and reconciliation committees. Thirdly, we have developed gender policies and strategies that advance the career progression of women to leadership and decision-making roles in such peace- and-security organs as the Kenya Defence Forces. Fourthly, we have increased the number of women engaged in peacekeeping missions to 19 per cent. Regional frameworks and mechanisms are also vital in reinforcing national peacebuilding policies and projects. For our region, these include the African Union (AU), the Network of African Women Mediators and the AU Continental Results Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the Implementation of the Women, Peace and Security Agenda in Africa (CFR). We validated the CFR in March 2018, as we see the importance of measuring value in implementation not only in quantitative terms, but in qualitative terms as well. As an incoming elected member of the Security Council, Kenya, in partnership with like-minded States, will advance the women and peace and security agenda with the aim of generating appropriate operational global action on the subject.
