Ms. Mansour (Palestine): I believe that Palestine's
statement today sufficiently refuted what was said
today by the representatives of Israel and that it
conveyed the stark, disturbing and bitter reality of life
for Palestinian children and their families under Israeli
occupation. The perpetration of those brutal and illegal
acts by the occupying Power is well documented, not
just by the children and people of Palestine, who have
had to endure the misery of living under the occupation
every day for nearly 50 years, but also by the various
organs, agencies and committees of the United Nations
system monitoring the situation in the occupied State
of Palestine, as well as by countless human-rights
organizations around the world, including several
Israeli organizations.
Israel makes absurd and unacceptable assertions
and claims that the Palestinian people incite their
children or send their children out to be in harm's
way. That is typical behaviour from an occupying
Power whose policy is to dehumanize the Palestinian
people - implying that they do not love their children
in the way that other people love their children. That is
typical racist behaviour from a belligerent occupier. It
is instead Israel that is harming our children in every
respect. If they are not killing or causing injury to
them, they are arresting them, demolishing their homes
and denying them their right to education, health, food,
clean water and development. They are putting them in
harm's way by using them as human shields, which has
been documented by Defence for Children International
Palestine.

That was the case this past summer during Israel's
aggression against the Gaza Strip. A story emerged of
a 16 year-old boy, Ahmad Abu Raida, who was used
as a human shield by Israeli occupying forces. For five
days, Israeli occupying forces forced him - at gun-
point - to repeatedly act as a human shield for them
in Gaza. That was in addition to his being unjustifiably
subjected to detention, interrogation, beatings, torture
and deprivation of food, water and sleep. There are
many other stories like that one.

We continue to condemn the killing and violence
against all children - Palestinian and Israeli - and
we call on the Israeli side to do the same. When all is
said and done, the only way to give both Palestinian
and Israeli children the security and lives they both
deserve is for Israel to end its occupation and to cease
all of its violations against the Palestinian people. It is
when both peoples live in freedom and security in their
own States that we will be on the road of real peace
and stability. We are still committed to the two-State
solution. The other side's commitment is in question.
We owe it to both Palestinian and Israeli children and
the generations to come.

