Mr. Canfin (spoke in French): Allow me, on behalf
of France, to warmly thank Secretary of State John
Kerry for having undertaken the initiative to convene
this high-level meeting on the situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. As others have said, this is a timely
meeting as the humanitarian situation continues to be
tragic, with more than 2.5 million displaced persons
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and 450,000
refugees in neighbouring countries.

Recent weeks have been characterized by a new
spike in hostilities carried out by the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and other armed groups against the
Congolese armed forces. This resumption of hostilities
is a test for the international community, for the M-23
and other armed groups are seeking simply to derail the
political process under way. It is a political process that
seeks to put an end to this tragedy, which has lasted for
far too long. It is a test because some players might be
tempted to renege on their commitments. Our message
is clear: neighbouring countries must stop providing
support to armed groups as they have committed to
do. The firm and united message being sent by the
international community today is a beneficial one,
as it will support the efforts of stakeholders sincerely
committed to the goal of sustainable peace in the Great
Lakes region.

We have made much progress over recent months.
We now have a consistent framework that allows us to
finally hope that the tragedy that has lasted more than
20 years in the Great Lakes region will be put to an
end. The framework is based on two pillars. The first
is the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
signed on 24 February by 11 countries ofthe region upon
the initiative of the Secretary-General. In that regard,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
efforts and determination. It is now the responsibility
of the signatories to implement their commitments.

We have also seen many encouraging signs in
recent weeks. The adoption by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo of a national
oversight mechanism is a step forward towards the
crucial reforms of the Congolese army and police. Full-
scale measures must now be quickly undertaken. It is
also important for the Congolese army to carry out its
activities on the ground in an exemplary manner, and
that the abuses committed by Congolese soldiers, which
are not excusable, be effectively and severely punished
by the country's justice system.

At the regional level, on 26 May, the first meeting
of the regional oversight mechanism brought together
the majority of the Heads of State of the region on the
margins of the African Union Summit. The mechanism
first and foremost must ensure that the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States of the region is upheld,
beginning with that of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It must also ensure that their security is not
threatened.

The actions taken by Ms. Mary Robinson, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, will be crucial for the coordination and
assessment of national and regional efforts to implement
the commitments undertaken. Madam President, you
can be assured of the firm support of France, which
remains at your side.

The second pillar of this new context is resolution
2098 (2013), adopted unanimously on 28 March
last. The heart of the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has not changed:
it remains the protection of civilians. However, so as to
contribute to that objective, the resolution authorizes,
in an unprecedented manner, the deployment of an
Intervention Brigade within MONUSCO. The Brigade's
mandate is to neutralize armed groups that engage in
violence and threaten civilians. France would like to see
the Brigade to become operational as soon as possible.

Another key aspect of resolution 2098 (2013) is that
of sexual violence, which continues to see widespread
use as a weapon of war, usually with total impunity.
Here we welcome the initiative of Ms. Mary Robinson
to convene, jointly with the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region, a conference devoted to the
role of women in the process of implementation of the
Framework agreement. We know that in that region the
bodies of women are all too often the battlefields of
men, and, as President Kim noted earlier, that is a blot
on our conscience.

Allow me, before concluding, to touch on the issue
of development. As Ms. Robinson noted, it is now time
to plan for peace dividends for the region as a whole.
Here I welcome the personal commitment of President
Kim in the context of resolving this crisis, as well as the
recent World Bank pledge for the implementation of the
commitments undertaken by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo during the signing of the Framework
agreement.

France and the European Union will also contribute
to the development of the region. The relaunching
of the economies of the region will also require
transparency in the exploitation of natural resources.
The lack of transparency in the exploitation of mining
resources must end. As the Council is aware, upon
the initiative of the United Kingdom and with the full
support of France, the countries of the Group of Eight
adopted at the beginning of the month an action plan for
transparency in the extractive industries. Moreover, we
intend to fully support, both politically and technically,
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
establish a certification mechanism for minerals from
the region. All of those tools will allow us to combat
bad practices and to increase the benefits reaped from
the exploitation of the region's natural resources for its
peoples.

At a time when the M-23 is once again carrying
out attacks around Goma, it is important to spare no
effort not only to vanquish those who threaten peace
but also to relaunch the political dynamic that began
with the Framework agreement. So as to allow for
the establishment of a lasting peace, all players in the
region must cooperate so as to defeat violence and
looting. Only then will the Framework agreement be
able to pave the way for a tangible improvement in the
security situation and living conditions in the Great
Lakes region.

Today, on behalf ofthe millions ofpeople who have
died and whom the region has mourned for so many
years, we have a collective obligation to succeed.

