Mr. Hassan (Sudan): Before begining my prepared
statement, I would first like to draw the attention of
the Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda to her statement on
the departure of my President from South Africa.
Her statement was nonsensical and preposterous.
His Excellency only left South Africa after he had
completed his pre-planned schedule, and not for the
reason she mentioned. Once again, I would like to draw
the attention of the Prosecutor to the fact that she is
talking about the elected President of a State, which
constitutes an attack on the authority of the Sudan
under the guise of international legitimacy. We reject
this attack. It underlines the fact that such allegations
by the Office of the Prosecutor indicate that it has
become an open enemy of the Sudan and the people
of the Sudan. Those statements, which runn counter
to all political and moral decorum, reveal the motives
behind the actions of the Office of the Prosecutor. The
people ofDarfur on whose behalfthe Prosecutor speaks
are those who elected His Excellency President Omar
Al-Bashir. The Secretary-General's report on Darfur
(S/2015/378) clearly states that when elections were
held in the five states of Darfur, no security incident
was recorded. The ICC Prosecutor has spoken falsely
on behalf of Darfurians.

I shall now return to my prepared statement. I
would like to state for the record that our participation
here today in no way indicates that we wish to add any
substance to the ICC's actions or to deal with the Court
at all directly or indirectly. That is because the Sudan,
as the Council knows, is not a party to the Rome Statute
and is therefore not at all concerned with the Court's
proceedings. In addition to the fact that the Court
has no competence in the Sudan, we have our own
independent, impartial and objective judiciary, with
a renowned historic heritage, that is able to dispense
justice. We are delivering this statement to the Security
Council under the umbrella of the United Nations. We
must correct significant misleading and erroneous
information that inaccurately reflects the situation in
Darfur, as well as the statements and reports made by
United Nations bodies, including the latest one just
mentioned.

The reports presented before the Council, as well as
the Prosecutor's prejudicial briefing, are part and parcel
of the Court's blatant politicization. In its briefings,
the Office of the Prosecutor has presented completely
incorrect information from unknown sources. What
is worse, the Prosecutor presents details against the
Government of the Sudan by padding her briefings with
many embellishmens concerning the humanitarian
situation, so-called violations of human rights and other
such designations that properly belong to the mandates
of other United Nations bodies. In one instance, her
briefing quoted negative aspects selectively culled from
the Secretary-General's reports on Darfur. On other
occasions, her briefings have cited negative paragraphs
with unverifiable information, such as reports of the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005), as well as information derived from the
mass media and non-governmental organizations.

This also raises the question of whether it is
possible for the Office of the Prosecutor to assume
competencies that properly pertain to other bodies of
the Organization. Its approach politicized the situation
and fabricated justifications in order to refer the case
of Darfur to the ICC. But that referral was based on
erroneous premises in the first place. An International
Commission of Inquiry on Darfur, established pursuant
to resolution 1564 (2004), conducted investigations and
presented reports that refuted the charge of genocide
in Darfur or any acts mentioned by the Prosecutor.
Nevertheless, the Security Council referred the case
to the ICC based on that lopsided, self-contradictory
report pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). This in itself
represents a blatant contradiction, because the report
contains a paragraph that excludes States not party
to the Rome Statute from accountability under such a
resolution. The same report was cited in the context of
Darfur. What kind ofjustice is based on exclusion and
politicization? In the light of the characterization of the
Darfur conflict as a threat to international peace and
security, pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, that remains an inappropriate, invalid
approach.

The Council was fully aware that the roots of
conflict in Darfur were not purely political grievances;
they concerned development and certain dimensions
exacerbated by natural causes, such as drought and
desertification, which affected most of the African
coast. Those factors made it necessary for the State
to assume its constitutional responsibilities to extend
its authority, security and law. The Government of the
Sudan has been willing and able to seek full justice,
particularly with regard to any crimes that have taken
place in Darfur, which is why the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur contains a lengthy chapter on justice,
accountability, settlement and reconciliation. The
Sudan is also signatory to a convention enshrining
those principles, so I wonder why the Prosecutor talks
about such matters as if we had no measures related to
them.

As we reported to the Council in November 2014
(see S/PV.7337), the Sudan appointed a Prosecutor
General for Darfur Crimes. Since the Doha Document
has been approved as an official document of the
Council, I refer to paragraph 295, which stipulates that
"immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of
their official status or functions shall not obstruct
the speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they
prevent the combating of impunity".

The Document paves the way for justice - real justice
and not the false justice we are hearing about. The
Document contains clear commitments to justice and
reconciliation as the two basic elements for achieving
peace in Darfur.

Any attempt to detract from the status of the
Sudanese judiciary is only a political ploy to invent
reasons orjustifications to target the Sudan through the
ICC. For example, the sentences issued by the Darfur
Court have in some cases included capital punishment;
indeed, the special Darfur Court, established by virtue
of the Doha Document, has issued capital punishment
sentences in selected cases. Therefore, in the light
of the Document's clear references to immunities,
nobody, including a Prosecutor, can impugn or attack
the professionalism, independence and competence of
the Sudanese judiciary and its ability to achieve justice
in accordance with our national laws, international
criminal law and humanitarian law. In this connection,
I reiterate our previous statements to the effect that
justice should be achieved through the Sudanese
judiciary and that the ICC has no role or competence
unless the national judiciary is unwilling or unable to
achieve justice. Therefore, there is no need to apply any
ICC mandate.

We would therefore like to talk about the unsound
approach espoused by the Office of the Prosecutor
in trying to bypass the role of the national African
judiciary organs in dealing with African cases. This
unsound approach has caused Africans to raise their
voices to reject the ICC approach and the frequent
decisions the ICC has taken against Africans, and to
call for African cases to be kept within the remit of the
African judiciary. I would like to refer to the resolutions
adopted by Addis Ababa and Johannesburg.

On this occasion, it is noteworthy that the report
of the Prosecutor has primarily criticized the States
visited by the President of the Republic. We would like
to state that the attempts of the Prosecutor's Office to
criticize those States constitute brazen interference
in their sovereignty and a blatant challenge to the
will of major regional organizations, which reject the
proceedings of the ICC on Darfur. Statements have
been issued by the African Union, at the level of Heads
of State or Government, and at the ministerial level that
reject the proceedings of the ICC on Darfur. On more
than one occasion, such statements - including the
resolutions adopted by the League of Arab States and the
Non-Aligned Movement - have called for that dossier
to be closed once and for all, as it is based on exclusively
political considerations. Those organizations represent
two-thirds of the international community. Other
credible organizations whose decisions carry weight
understand that the ICC has become a device to target
African leaders and not others.

We would like to state here before the Council that
all States Members ofthe Organization, all peace-loving
States, be they States parties to the Rome Statute or not,
should continue to welcome and receive His Excellency
the President of the Republic of the Sudan. It is enough
for him that history will record that he managed to put
an end to one of the longest conflicts in Africa - that
with South Sudan - by signing the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, which guaranteed self-determination
to the State of South Sudan. History will also show that
the Sudan was the first to recognize that a leader who
makes such sacrifices for peace deserves to be received,
welcomed and venerated, and not attacked on all sides.
All international forums should receive him, as is his
due, and welcome him. Any blame or criticism leveled
by the Office of the Prosecutor against the States
receiving the President is biaised and null and void. The
confusion fostered by the Office ofthe Prosecutor since
December 2014 proves that anything built on invalid
premises will remain invalid.

The ambiguous connection between the ICC and
the Security Council remains an unresolved question.
Efforts to establish a relationship between a judicial
entity and a political entity are beset by misgivings,
obstacles and legal challenges with regard to the
independence of the judiciary and the importance of
its distancing itself from the influence of political
authorities. That is exacerbated by the absence of a
framework governing the relationship between the two
organs and the referrals from the Council to the Court.

With regard to the statements made by the
representatives of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States to the efect that the situation in Darfur
has deteriorated since 2014, I wonder, is the Darfur
they are talking about the Darfur we know, or another
Darfur, outside the Sudan? Eighty per cent of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur has been implemented, as
mentioned by Mr. Al-Tijani Al-Sisi, who is a citizen of
Darfur. Could this be another of the ploys that continue
to arise in the Council to bring pressure to bear on the
citizens of Darfur? This should not happen.

As for the United States, which calls on us to abide
by the decisions of the ICC, I remind the representative
of that country of the statement made by Condoleezza
Rice, Secretary of State and former representative of
the United States in the Council, on page 188 of her
book, in which she states that President Bush objected
strongly to the ICC for a number of reasons, including
the fact that the Prosecutor was unable to hold any
Government responsible. For the United States, it was
a matter of sovereignty and the Court's authority was
being exaggerated, as if it were a national Government.
These are the words of one of the highest officials ofthe
United States, and now they are calling on us to abide
by the decisions of the ICC.

Sovereignty is sovereignty. We too are a sovereign
State, and we are not party to the Rome Statute and will
not be a party to it. Therefore, we do not abide by its
proceedings or rulings.

With respect to the absence of frameworks
governing the relationship between the two organs in
terms of referrals from the Council to the Court and the
contradiction between the obligations emanating from
international treaties and instruments, regional and
international conventions and the Rome Statute, I recall
the provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties with regard to the immunities ofHeads of State
or Government and that a State not party to a convention
is not concerned with it. The Sudan, as I stated, is not
a party to the Rome Statute and consequently need not
abide by its rulings.

I further recall the concerns and reservations
that have been raised concerning the competencies
of the Prosecutor since 1998. Entire books have been
published on the limitless authority of the Prosecutor.
That is what we are suffering from now. The stance
taken by States since that time has been that the
relationship between the Court and the Council, given
the competencies conferred by the Rome Statute on the
Prosecutor, would lead the Court into politicization
and confusion, since it applies its competencies only to
African countries. This has led to a loss of confidence
in its integrity, as embodied in the resolutions of major
regional organizations, foremost among which is the
African Union.

In conclusion, I appeal to the Council to not
consider the false information garnered from unknown
sources that has been presented by the Prosecutor.
Council members should instead consider the important
fact, noted by a number of States, that the current
priorities in Darfur are reconstruction, recovery and
development. Many people have returned to their lands
and are seeking to go about their normal daily activities.
They are not waiting for the reports of the Prosecutor
or anyone else, but are trying to achieve resolution
and reconciliation. They are looking to the Security
Council, which is not playing its role, to put pressure
on the rebel groups that reject the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. I have a question for the Prosecutor.
Where are those rebel movements in her report? She
makes no mention of the matter. Why?

