Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing this
afternoon.

The need to bring justice to the victims of atrocities
in Darfur is overwhelming. For over a decade, Darfur
has been synonymous with suffering and unchecked
impunity. In responding to a rebellion, the Government
launched what became a brutal campaign against the
Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa populations. As time went
on, the conflict in Darfur grew into a staggering crisis,
with thousands murdered, hundreds of thousands
deliberately deprived of the basic means of survival,
and millions displaced from their homes. Many of us
will never forget the first shocking reports of J anj aweed
militia on horses and camels storming into villages to
kill, rape, torture and burn.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
examined and charged a horrific list of crimes in
the Sudan: genocide by killing, genocide by causing
serious bodily or mental harm, genocide by deliberately
inflicting conditions of life calculated to bring about
the physical destruction of targeted groups, the crimes
against humanity of torture, murder and rape, and war
crimes, including pillaging and deliberate attacks on
peacekeepers. For years, the conflict continued even
expanding into other parts of the Sudan.
During that time, we have consistently supported
efforts to provide justice and accountability for crimes
committed in Darfur and to finally break the cycle of
impunity. At the same time, recognizing that the people
of Darfur yearned for fewer bombings, less bloodshed,
less conflict and greater stability and safety, we have
also focused on seeing an end to the conflict. Through
bilateral engagement, we identified concrete steps to
make tangible improvements in the lives of ordinary
Sudanese and have seen results. The Government of the
Sudan has taken meaningful positive steps with respect
to the conflict, including committing to a unilateral
cessation of hostilities, and while some violence
persists, we have not seen Government military
offensives in this period as we have in every other year
since these conflicts began.

The Government of the Sudan has also worked
closely with our own to begin to address regional
conflicts, improve humanitarian access, combat the
threat of terrorism and eliminate the threat of the Lord's
Resistance Army. There is certainly more progress
to be made on these fronts, but these are welcome
steps towards a better future. Indeed, we now see the
possibility of long-term progress that we hope will lead
to more respect for human rights, more accountability,
more rule of law and more justice for Sudanese victims.

But as we see encouraging signs ofa new approach
to addressing long-standing conflict and hope that
further engagement will spur additional progress, we
must also be clear: we must neither forget the victims
nor the perpetrators of the crimes in Darfur. We cannot
simply turn our backs on the victims of genocide who
were forced from their homes and left to die of thirst or
starvation or on the thousands of women and girls who
suffered acts of brutal sexual violence or on those who
were targeted on the basis of their ethnic identity. There
will be no stable and lasting peace in the Sudan without
justice for the many victims of crimes related to the
conflict. As Ambassador Nikki Haley has said here in
the Security Council,

"[i]n case after case, human rights violations and
abuses are not merely the incidental by-products
of conflict, but the trigger of conflict" (S/PV. 7926, 
p. 4).

If we do not address the victimization that has occurred

and the magnitude ofthe violations and abuses inflicted,

any peace will be hollow and easy to shatter by those
seeking revenge for themselves, their loved ones and
their communities.
In the years since the conflict in Darfur began, we
have seen inspiring examples of accountability across
the globe, where those leaders who targeted their own
citizens in order to maintain a stranglehold on power
have been forcedto facejustice. Former Ivorian president
Laurent Gbagbo is now in court in The Hague, while
Charles Taylor and Hissene Habre' are serving lengthy
prison sentences. Beyond Africa, senior former Khmer
Rouge officials in Cambodia have been sentenced for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and leaders
responsible for Dirty War era crimes in Latin America
and atrocity crimes in the former Yugoslavia have also
been held to account.

The Council should not let the Sudan be an
exception. Having referred the situation in Darfur to
the ICC over 10 years ago, we must continue to demand
the Sudan's compliance with the Council's decisions.
While victims have not yet seen justice and refugees and
internally displaced persons continue to struggle years
after the conflict began, it is unacceptable that President
Al-Bashir still travels and receives a warm welcome
from certain quarters of the world and unacceptable
that none of the Sudanese officials with outstanding
arrest warrants have been brought to justice.

Therefore, as we pursue more engagement with the
Sudan and greater relief and protection for the survivors
of the conflict, we must also recommit to supporting
accountability to bring a just and lasting peace to the
people of Darfur.

