The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

The situation in the Central African Republic is
a tragedy. The country's entire population - more
than 4.5 million people - is being affected by a
humanitarian crisis. The people are being terrorized by
militias engaging in the worst sorts of abuses. Murder,
rape and looting are the daily lot of thousands of men,
women and children. The State, which has collapsed,
is unable to protect its population, and the country is
now in danger of succumbing to interreligious violence
between Christians and Muslims.

History teaches us what can happen. It commits us
to avoid the worst, and it compels the Security Council
to act. The country risks descending into chaos, with
uncontrollable and unpredictable effects on the entire
region. The risk for mass atrocities exists, as has been
unambiguously pointed out by the Secretary-General
and the entire community of non-governmental
organizations.

Hitherto, the Central African Republic had been a
forgotten crisis of the sort in which the media were not
interested. Given the crisis itself, however, indifference
and inaction were not options. France felt it was our
collective duty to support action by the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States to prevent mass atrocities.

In his statement at the general debate in September,
the President of the French Republic was the first to
sound the alarm and call for resolute action by the
Security Council (see A/68/PV.5). And France's
Minister for Foreign Affairs, along with the European
Union and the United Nations, held a high-level
meeting to highlight the humanitarian emergency. The
interreligious incidents that occurred this morning in
Bangui, with dozens of civilian deaths, only serve to
underscore that it is high time to act.

The adoption of resolution 2127 (2013) finally
makes it possible to take the awaited steps to support the
African Union. The African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA) is
endowed with a robust mandate under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations that will allow it to
take all necessary measures to protect civilians and
neutralize armed groups that refuse to comply with
instructions for cantonment and disarmament.

In accordance with the request made by the African
Union and the transition authorities, the French forces
also have a Chapter VII mandate from the Security
Council to support MISCA. To that end, the number
of French forces will be strengthened in the very near
future. France wishes to thank all partners, particularly
in Europe, that will support the operation to be carried
out in the context of this resolution.

The United Nations will be responsible for
supporting the financial mobilization in favour of the
African Union. I note that the European Union, which
is contributing €50 million, will be, as in Somalia, the
top contributor to African Union operations. Other
contributions will be mobilized on the occasion of the
forthcoming donors conference.

Pursuant to the request of the African Union and
the recommendations of the Secretary-General, this
resolution lays the groundwork for the future. It calls on
the Secretariat to undertake the preparations necessary
for the eventual deployment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation and to prepare a concept of
operations within a maximum period of three months.

Although restoring security is the priority,
the resolution also steps up efforts with regard to
elements that are key to the future of the Central
African Republic. First, with regard to support for the
transition process, the Council explicitly recalls the
prohibition against the current transitional authorities
participating in the elections, which are to be held by
February 2015 at the latest. It also indicates its intention
to adopt individual sanctions against individuals who
threaten the transition process and thus fuel violence.
Secondly, on the fight against human rights violations,
at Rwanda's initiative, an international commission of
inquiry based on the Darfur model will be created. It
will report its findings within six months.

The Security Council has finally shaken off its
indifference. It is shouldering its responsibilities to
support the African countries and organizations that
had the courage to be the first to come to the aid of the
long-neglected Central African Republic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

