Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): Iwould like to thank
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, forjoining us in the Council today.
I would also like tojoin others in our appreciation of his
work and his latest report. His detailed and objective
analysis of the worsening political situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina makes for sobering reading. I wish
to convey the United Kingdom's support for the High
Representative and his continued commitment to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement in that
context.

The United Kingdom shares the High
Representative's frustration and concern at the
continuing lack of political will to deliver crucial
reforms in Bosnia and Herzegovina since his last
appearance before the Council (see S/PV.6860). We
deeply regret that Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders
were unable to seize an important opportunity this year
to make tangible progress towardsjoining the European
Union (EU) and NATO. The United Kingdom has been
a consistent supporter of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Euro-Atlantic ambitions and continues to believe that
EU and NATO membership remain the strongest way
to ensure the security, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In July, one of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
neighbours, Croatia, will join the European Union.
There is a lesson here that determined and strategic
commitment to the accession process and to related
reforms yields results. Reform progress carries aspirant
countries forward on the path of European integration.
Journeys that seem long and distant in their early stages
can end up being completed. But that happens only

when politicians act decisively and strategically, when
they commit themselves to the goal of European Union
membership, and when they make sustained efforts to
implement the necessary reforms. What we have seen
in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the reporting period is
that yet again personal and political interests have been
prioritized over the needs and ambitions of ordinary
citizens, leaving the country to fall farther behind its
neighbours on the EU track.

We still hope that Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be able to make progress towards the European Union
this year and to bring its Stabilization and Association
Agreement into force. But the ball is in its court. As the
High Representative notes in his report (S/2013/263*),
the European Union has already provided generous
support to help facilitate a solution to the European
Court of Human Rights Sejdie-Finci ruling, which
remains the sole obstacle to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
Stabilization and Association Agreement. That the
political parties were unable to agree to a deal in
spite of that support was deeply disappointing. Unless
Bosnia and Herzegovina's governing institutions act
quickly and decisively to remedy the situation and
find a solution, that has all but ended their chances of
submitting a credible membership application this year.

We are disappointed also by the failure to complete
the registration of defence property that continues to
hamper implementation of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
NATO membership action plan, in spite of assurances
made by party leaders to NATO Secretary-General
Rasmussen during his visit in February. We urge
them to fullfil their commitment to the March 2012
agreement. We share the High Representative's concern
and condemnation of those in Republika Srpska who
continue to advocate the dissolution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There can be no redrawing of the map
or any prospects of Bosnia and Herzegovina joining
the European Union as anything other than a single
sovereign State.

We are also gravely concerned by the sustained
political crisis in the Federation and the continued
impasse in Mostar. The ongoing disputes and associated
institutional gridlock deeply discredit the political
parties in the Federation entity. As the Steering Board
of the Peace Implementation Council has pointed
out, ensuring the functioning of institutions is not a
choice. It is an obligation. We fully support the High
Representative's efforts to find a local solution to these
issues, and welcome his continued cooperation with
the EU Special Representative in pushing for their
resolution.

There have been rare occasions this year where
agreement has been found among Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders. As the High Representative's
report makes clear, the successful reshuffling of the
Council of Ministers has led to regular meetings this
year. The passing of the State budget on time is also to
be welcomed. These incidents show that political will
can be found to act in the national interest, and we must
continue to actively encourage the behaviour.

But those are regrettably rare examples. Meanwhile,
the social, political and economic impacts of inaction
are already apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We share the High Representative's concern at the
deteriorating economic situation and call on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders to ensure that the country is well
prepared to weather the economic impact of Croatian
accession to the EU in July. Here again, the state of
near gridlock that we have witnessed in recent months
is very damaging, not just because of the signal it sends
to potential investors, but also because it contributes
to delay in dispersing international financial assistance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The negative trends that the High Representative
illustrates in his report reinforce our assessment
that international safeguards and a strengthened EU
presence continue to play an important role in ensuring
security and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As such, the United Kingdom supports the High
Representative's recommendation that the European
Union Force-Operation Althea and its executive
mandate be retained this year. We look forward to
discussions on that matter at the October meeting of the
EU Foreign Affairs Council and at the United Nations
Security Council in November.

