Mr. Zenna (Ethiopia): At the outset, I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and to thank Germany for discharging its
responsibilities with efficiency during its presidency of
the Council during the month of February. I should like
also to express our appreciation to you for having
convened this open debate on an issue that has
continued to engage the entire world community.

Let me also join preceding speakers in thanking
and expressing our appreciation to the chief weapons
inspector of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC),
Mr. Hans Blix, and to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
ElBaradei, for their briefings on 7 March on the
progress of inspections since their last report to the
Council.

It is clear from the reports of Mr. Blix and of Mr.
ElBaradei that some progress has been achieved.
However, much remains to be done. We have yet to
witness that Iraq no longer possesses weapons of mass
destruction. Iraq should demonstrate without delay that
it is complying fully with its disarmament obligation.

It is imperative that our focus at this stage should
be on the need to secure, as much as possible, the
disarmament of Iraq without resorting to the use of
force. This obviously requires the full, active and
immediate compliance of Iraq with resolution 1441
(2002) and other relevant resolutions.

It should be underlined, however, that a strong
unity of purpose on the part of the Security Council is
indispensable. It should be emphasized also that the
progress achieved thus far is, to a great extent, the
result of a credible military presence in the region.

Ethiopia, in principle, stands for the peaceful
resolution of the Iraqi issue. We are conscious of the
incalculable human and material costs that a war would
impose on the region and beyond. In order to avoid
this, we call on Iraq to comply fully, without any
precondition, with its obligations under various
Security Council resolutions, particularly resolution
1441 (2002).

Force should be resorted to only as the very last
option. Ethiopia, as a country that, as a then-member of
the Security Council, voted for the very first resolution
on Iraq during the Kuwait crisis 12 years ago, remains
convinced that it is only immediate Iraqi compliance
that stands between war and peace.

