The President: Are there any further comments?
I will attempt to sum up the very rich discussion that
we have had this afternoon.

I think that the first general point is that we are
all agreed that we cannot look at the situation in Sierra
Leone in isolation and that we need to address the
instability that exists in the region as a whole.

Several key themes emerged. The first is the need
to encourage regional efforts at reconciliation within
Liberia and between Liberia and its neighbours.
Absolutely critical to that is coordination between
initiatives and that the Mano River Union, supported
by ECOWAS, should continue its efforts to promote
greater security and confidence-building measures
between the three countries.

The importance of the new United Nations Office
for West Africa was recognized in terms of it being a
focal point for United Nations support for regional
efforts and indeed efforts within Liberia itself. I think
that the strong feeling was that the physical presence of
the United Nations on the ground was absolutely
critical.

A third theme that emerged was the need to
reinforce efforts to control the flow of small arms and
to stop illegal exploitation of economic resources,
which was also a theme that came out ofthis morning's
discussion. It was recognized that sanctions have
played a key role in bringing peace to Sierra Leone and
that they must be applied, but, at the same time, that we
need to reconcile possible differences that could open
up between the Security Council and others on the
future of sanctions, particularly in relation to Liberia.

It is important to strengthen the capacity of
ECOWAS in terms of mediation and conflict
prevention. There is a possible role for the European
Union with respect to this.

The wider question arose on how it is best for the
United Nations to mobilize resources for peace-
building, as well as for peacekeeping. In that context,
we had a discussion about development issues and how
to create the right kind of environment to promote
investment, which is very much the long-term strategy
for the region.

There was a general view that despite the obvious
difficulties, it is important for the international
community to engage with Liberia. A policy of
constructive engagement was discussed, as was the
need to facilitate dialogue between the parties in
Liberia and to look at other possibilities for dialogue. It
is clear that we need some kind of comprehensive
conflict-resolution strategy for Liberia. I think that that
was agreed by everyone around the table.

I have three final points. One is the importance
that we all attach to there being a sustained effort. We
had two different analogies. We had our sprinkler/
bucket system from our colleague from Singapore, and,
from Sir Kieran, we had his antibiotic analogy. I am
not sure which one I prefer. But I think we understand
exactly what they both had in mind.

The issue of refugees was central to our
discussion this morning, and has also come up this
afternoon. In particular, it is not just a matter of
looking at refugee flows, but looking at refugee flows
at a very early stage as a possible indicator of problems
in terms of different regions on the continent.

A final point, which I think is a very important
point, is that the Security Council is good place to
bring key players together - not just those within the
Council but from the international financial
institutions, other countries and other organizations, all
of which have an important role to play, not just with
respect to the Mano River Union, but in other areas of
conflict throughout the world.

The United Kingdom delegation will produce a
written summary of the conclusions of our discussions
today based on the comments which have been made
around the table, and these will then be made available
for all of you.

All that remains is for me to thank all the
participants very much indeed, in particular Ministers
Fall and Koroma for being with us today, and to thank
our speakers this morning and this afternoon and
everyone around the table for your very active
participation. I would also like to thank you for your
very kind comments about the role that the United
Kingdom has played in Sierra Leone and my own role
in chairing this meeting today. I have to say that you all
made it very easy indeed. It has been a very good
meeting. I think there has been much food for thought
and many good ideas, which really leave us with a kind
of comprehensive action plan for a way forward which
we can all take away.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration ofthe item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.
