Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I, too, thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kang for her briefing.

New Zealand is pleased that, since the Council met
on Monday, a second series of aid convoys were able to
enter Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya yesterday and that a
third series of convoys is planned in the next few days.
However, as others have said, that is just scratching the
surface: that gets aid through to about 62,000 people.
Humanitarian workers need safe, unimpeded and
sustained access to the nearly 400,000 people trapped
in besieged areas throughout Syria. It has now been
confirmed that many of those people are suffering
through conditions as horrific as we have seen recently
in Madaya and elsewhere.

The Syrian Government is responsible for besieging
some areas, but others, such as various opposition
groups and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), are also using siege tactics. We demand that
all those using siege tactics immediately meet their
international legal obligation to allow humanitarian
access. Tit-for-tat granting of humanitarian access is
unacceptable. Civilians should not be used as pawns,
as has been happening in Madaya, Fu'ah and Kafraya.
Only 25 kilometres outside of Damascus, people in
Madaya have been waiting since Monday to be evacuated
so they can receive the medical care they urgently need.
It is a complex situation and the facts are still becoming
clear. What is clear enough is that the need is urgent.
While we are pleased that humanitarian agencies
have received approval for the entry of mobile clinics
and medical teams to support treatment, we cannot
understand the Syrian Government's unwillingness to
grant permission for people to be evacuated. We call on
the Syrian authorities to immediately grant requests for
medical evacuations of the sick.

New Zealand and many others, including the
Secretary-General, have emphasized numerous times
that the Syrian Government must approve, without
delay, requests for inter-agency convoys. As my
colleague from Spain has just said, in resolution 2258
(2015), adopted only last month, the Council expressed
its concern at the decline in convoy approvals by the
Syrian authorities and requested that they respond
expeditiously and positively to all requests for cross-
line deliveries. We cannot accept that administrative
delays continue to block humanitarian assistance from
reaching those in need. As Ms. Kang said, the approval
procedures must be simplified and carried out more
quickly. Delivering aid in Syria is extremely complex
and dangerous for the people delivering the aid. It would
be unsafe to try to deliver aid without Government
consent and risk attacks. Over 80 humanitarian workers
have lost their lives since the conflict began. We do not
want to see that number rise.

Intentionally starving civilians as a method of
warfare has happened repeatedly during the Syrian
conflict. What we are seeing today in Madaya is an
alarming echo of the siege and starvation of civilians
in Homs in 2014. The deliberate starving of civilians
is not a natural, collateral effect of conflict. It is a
conscious decision made by the besieging parties. It
violates international humanitarian law. It violates
Council resolutions. It may constitute a war crime.

New Zealand and Spain intend to invite the World
Food Programme to brief on access to food in besieged
areas at the next humanitarian consultations on Syria,
on 27 January. In the meantime, New Zealand demands
that the Syrian Government and other parties to the
conflict immediately lift all sieges in Syria and allow
the free movement of civilians and lifesaving goods. We
also call on countries with influence with responsible
parties to use that influence to lift the sieges. If they
stand by and do nothing, they too are complicit.

The situation is so desperate that all forms of
aid delivery should be considered. In that respect,
we would be interested in the view of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the
feasibility of delivering assistance via airdrops. Lifting
the sieges and parties abiding by their obligations
under international humanitarian law would help build
trust and momentum ahead of the upcoming talks in
Geneva. We look forward to discussing such matters in
more depth with Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura on
Monday. We all know that only a political solution will
end the suffering of the Syrian people.

Let me conclude by commending the bravery and
tireless work of the humanitarian workers working
on the ground, including the United Nations, led
by Humanitarian Coordinator Yacoub El Hillo, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Syrian Red Crescent.

