Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): The authorization of the
deployment of a multinational force for the Great Lakes
region is probably the most important decision to be taken
by the Security Council on the situation in that area. The
draft resolution the Council is about to adopt strikes a
delicate balance between what is desirable and what is
achievable in the complex situation currently prevailing in
eastern Zaire. The most important and immediate action
is the need to gain access to the refugees and displaced
persons so that the international humanitarian community
can render them assistance. The deployment of the force
will certainly avert what was likely to become a human
tragedy of immense proportions. The international
community had to do something or its conscience would
for ever be troubled by the results of its inaction.

It is in view of this reality that Botswana commends
the Government and the people of Canada for their
decision to take the lead in establishing and commanding
a multinational force to respond to the humanitarian

 

situation in eastern Zaire. We have become accustomed to
Canada's exemplary leadership and outstanding courage in
peacekeeping operations, but we certainly do not take them
for granted.

Botswana is pleased that the Security Council is in a
position to take a decision on the deployment of a
multinational force within a week after it adopted resolution
1078 (1996). This action will hopefully save hundreds of
thousands of lives and give hope to many more who have
been crying out for help in the wilderness. We are happy to
join the consensus in support of the draft resolution.

Botswana welcomes the establishment of a trust fund
to help African States that are willing to contribute to the
humanitarian operation. It is important that African States,
especially the States neighbouring Zaire, should be involved
in the operation. The response of the countries of the region
as reflected in the communique of the summit meeting held
at Nairobi, Kenya, on 5 November 1996 drew the attention
of the international community to the unfortunate situation
that has been unfolding in eastern Zaire. It is significant
that the States affected by the situation in eastern Zaire
have called for the establishment of safe corridors and the
deployment of an international force to ensure access to
displaced persons and refugees by the international
humanitarian personnel. It is therefore our hope that the
international community will respond in a generous and
timely manner to enable African States to participate in the
humanitarian operation.

The situation in eastern Zaire is not simply a refugee
problem. It is in reality a political problem which requires
a political solution. The prolonged stay of the refugees in
camps in Zaire is a source of insecurity and instability to
the country of asylum; even worse, it is a serious threat to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zaire. The
refugee camps have become recruitment grounds for those
determined to train and equip an army to fight against the
Government of Rwanda. This can only lead to increased
tension along the Rwanda-Zaire border and transform what
began as an internal conflict into an inter-State
conflict with far-reaching regional ramifications. We are
convinced therefore that a long-term solution to the
prevailing situation lies in the return of the refugees to their
communes in Rwanda. We welcome the fact that some
refugees have spontaneously begun a journey to their
homeland. It is still essential to ensure that they have
immediate access to food, water and medicine and can
return in safety and dignity.

 

As far as we are concerned, the primary objective of
the international community should be the repatriation of
all the refugees to their country of origin. The
Government of Rwanda has declared its commitment to
welcome the refugees. The international community
should now work in close collaboration with Rwanda to
create conditions inside that country which would be
conducive to the voluntary return of the refugees. The
international community should be prepared to provide
financial and material resources to help Rwanda resettle
the returnees. Most of the difficulties experienced by the
returnees centre around property disputes. There is an
urgent need to help them build new homes. It must be
clear to the Government of Rwanda that the refugees will
judge the Government's public statements on the basis of
what happens on the ground. In this respect, the
international community has a role to play in assuring the
returnees of their safety and security. It is our hope that
the Government of Rwanda will be ready to welcome and
cooperate with an increased international presence.

It has been established beyond a reasonable doubt
that the former Rwandese Government forces and the
interahamwe are preventing the refugees from exercising
their right to return voluntarily. The international
community should not and cannot ignore this reality,
which goes against the fundamental legal principle of
voluntary repatriation. It would be wrong to insist on the
right of refugees to return on a voluntary basis while
ignoring or doing nothing about the actions of those who
obstruct the freedom of the refugees to exercise that
legitimate right.

Botswana strongly supports the mission of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to the Great
Lakes region. We look forward to his recommendations
on the modalities for convening an international
conference on peace, security and development. We
underscore the need for sound preparations to pave the
way for serious negotiations on concrete issues. The Great
Lakes region has experienced so much bloodshed that the
United Nations cannot afford to organize a conference
that would generate heat rather than light and offer no
solutions to the urgent problems facing the region. This
is not the time for endless debates on the merits or
demerits of convening such a conference. The time has
come for all people of goodwill to work towards
negotiations aimed at finding a permanent political
settlement to the problems of the Great Lakes region.

The international community should be ready to
guarantee a balanced outcome and the effective

 

implementation of the agreed commitments within a
specific time-frame. We encourage the countries of the
region to offer concrete proposals on the issues the
conference should address. Botswana is optimistic and has
confidence in the capacity of the region to rise to the
challenge of the moment. The leaders of the region have
demonstrated the political will to coordinate and harmonize
their positions in confronting the difficulties facing their
countries and peoples. And they have the unswerving
support of my delegation in this endeavour.

