Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Iwould
like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing this
debate during its presidency of the Security Council,
and you, Mr. Simmonds, for your presence here today.
My thanks also go to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his committed leadership
of the work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), and to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, who has rekindled the flame of hope during
her tenure. I am also grateful to Mr. Joao Manuel
Goncalves Lourenco, Minister of Defence of Angola,
for the regional perspective he has shared with us
today in his capacity as representative of the Angolan
chairmanship of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.

Luxembourg welcomes the progress made in
the security area since the military defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and in thejoint military
action undertaken since the beginning of the year by
MONUSCO and the the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), particularly
against the Allied Democratic Forces. The United
Nations Mission's robust action aimed at improving
the protection of civilians deserves to be emphasized.
It is important that progress now also be made in
restoring the State's authority in the eastern part of the
country, since that is vital to ensuring the provision
of basic services to the population and launching an
economic recovery that will enable it to offer tangible
opportunities, particularly for young Congolese people.

At the same time, we encourage the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to redouble
their efforts, in collaboration with Uganda and
Rwanda, to implement the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration for the members of
M-23. Not only will the success of the programme
prevent its members from resuming armed combat, it
will also encourage the members of other armed groups
to lay down their arms and reintegrate into civilian life.

The voluntary disarmament of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR),
which began on 30 May, must be completed without
preconditions and according to a specific timetable.
To that end, it is crucial that the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo maintain their
commitment, with MONUSCO's backing, and that the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
continue to support the process. If the desired results
do not materialize, the use of a military option for
neutralizing the FDLR should remain on the table. As
Special Representative Kobler said, it is time to bring
the FDLR to a definite close once and for all.

Women and children are still the chief victims of
the fighting that continues to convulse the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women are
still martyrs to intolerable levels of sexual violence.
Children are still recruited and used by the FARDC
and the armed groups. The Secretary-General's most
recent report on the situation of children in armed
conflict (S/2014/453) cites more than 4,000 cases of
recruitment and use of children between January 2010
and December 2013. Murders, mutilations, sexual
violations and abductions of children are numbered
in the hundreds. More than 180 schools have been
attacked and looted or used for military purposes,
putting schoolchildren in danger and depriving them of
their right to an education.

Given such violations, we must act. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
committed to that, and we welcome it. In 2012 it signed
an action plan to halt and prevent the recruitment and
use of children as well as sexual violence committed
by its armed forces. In general, we encourage the
Congolese authorities to make every effort to put an
end to impunity. In that context, the trial of military
personnel for the rapes, murders and looting committed
in November 2012 at Minova has left a bitter taste in
our mouths. The verdicts handed down illustrate the
importance of furthering judicial reform if impunity is
to be combated more effectively.

Neutralizing the armed groups in the eastern part
of the country is not enough. The root causes of the
conflict must also be addressed by implementing the
reforms that the Congolese authorities committed to
when they signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. More must be done in that regard, and
that applies in particular to reforming the army and
establishing a rapid-reaction force, which is an essential
element of MONUSCO's exit strategy.

We remain committed to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's democratic path and to the proper
management of the electoral cycle, which should
culminate in the holding of legislative and presidential
elections in 2016. It is up to the Congolese authorities
to prepare and establish an electoral schedule in
compliance with constitutional provisions. We welcome
the role in this area of the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
remains the cornerstone of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. It
is the responsibility of the Framework's signatories to
fully honour the commitments they have made both at
the national and regional levels, including deepening
economic integration so as to ensure that the people see
the benefits of the peace dividend quickly. We express
our support and best wishes to Mr. Said Djinnit as he
prepares to take up the torch from Mary Robinson in
order to keep this framework of hope alive.

