Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the convening oftoday's Security
Council timely and important meeting on suppressing
the financing of terrorism.

The consequences of the outbreak of terrorism
in the Middle East and North Africa are spreading
far beyond the region. The recent terrorist attacks
demonstrated that the world is facing a threat of global
nature and scale. At the same time, it is quite clear that
its breeding ground lies in the Iraqi and Syrian territory
that has been seized by the so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). There is a need to rebuff
ISIL decisively and in a coordinated manner, and to
that end to elaborate a clear mechanism for action by
the international community. We can eradicate that
absolute evil only by acting together, without double
standards, and by fully suppressing the channels used
to finance terrorism.

In February, at Russia's initiative, the Security
Council adopted resolution 2199 (2015), reaffirming
and creating new commitments for States in preventing
the financing of terrorism through the illicit trafficking
of oil, other natural resources, antiquities and other
sources. Unfortunately the obligations under the
resolution are not being shouldered by all or everywhere.
In that regard, it is clear that the special responsibility
for suppressing the channels for the financing of ISIL
unavoidably rests with the States bordering on Iraq
and Syria. We are forced to note that the sale of fossil
fuel from ISIL-controlled territory continues. It is
organized with the complicity of tenebrous economic
structures, whereby oil is acquired by smugglers for
cash in areas where it is extracted and refined. They
freely cross borders, entering in direct contact with the
heads ofISIL and conclude business deals with them.

It is estimated that the illicit export of fuel by ISIL
is reaching $1.5 million per day. The majority of oil
products move through Turkey. In the majority of cases,
oil is transported in trucks by road through the border
crossing points of Karkamis, Akcakale, Cilvegozu and
Onciipmar. The trucks number in the thousands, and
the shipments are carried out on behalf of ISIL by a
number of Turkish companies, including Serii in the
city of Konya and Sam Otomotiv in the city of Antakya.
The oil purchased in Turkey for ISIL is transported to
the Tupras Refinery in the city of Batman. However the
main flow goes through Turkish ports located on the
Mediterranean Sea, mainly Ceyhan.

As a result of air strikes by the Russian Federation's
aerospace forces, the volume of illicit oil exports has
been substantially reduced. On the other hand, it has
increased the importance for terrorists of alternative
sources of financing through other natural resources
and agricultural and industrial production. The total
value of that basket is already approaching $700 million
per year. For example, ISIL's income from the sale
of phosphates is close to $250 million; from the sale
of barley and rye, $200 million; and from cement,
$100 million. There is also trafficking in hostages and
cultural artefacts, and foreign donations continue to
flow in.

The proceeds are used by ISIL to purchase weapons
and ammunition. The supreme military council of ISIL
monthly allocates over $30 million for that purpose.
Purchases of weapons and ammunition for terrorists
take place through shell companies in a number of
Eastern European States. Only since September, under
the pretext of strengthening the Syrian opposition,
rocket missiles for Grad multiple rocket launcher
systems and grenades for hand-held portable anti-tank
grenade launchers, small arms and ammunition, as well
as spare parts for Gvozdika self-propelled howitzers
have all entered ISIL-controlled Syrian territory. What
is noteworthy is that most of the weapons consignments
are of Soviet design, manufactured in Eastern Europe
on expired Soviet licenses.

To eradicate ISIL's illicit economy, a quantitative
strengthening of the measures undertaken by States
and the international community as a whole is
needed. An important step was taken today. Upon the
initiative of Russia and the United States, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 2253 (2015), aimed at
combating ISIL and other terrorist organizations and
their financing. The key task of the resolution, in our
eyes, lies in strengthening the regime for tracking and
suppressing the channels used to illicitly finance ISIL
and associated groups. The United Nations monitoring
and sanctions mechanisms can now clearly focus on
eradicating any manifestation of terrorist financing.

Work will not be limited to the United Nations
alone. The potential of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF) to elaborate counter-financing and money-
laundering measures will be activated. Forty-five days
following the adoption of the resolution, the Secretary-
General will issue a report containing concrete and
frank assessments, including with respect to the sources
of the illicit financing of ISIL.

It is important that the resolution pinpoints ISIL as
the most dangerous independent terrorist threat. That is
why the sanctions list and special committee were both
renamed. The listing criteria have been made clearer,
which will allow for any natural or legal person who
has been complicit with that criminal organization to
be subject to sanctions. The resolution calls for full
coordination among States in their efforts to investigate
crimes related to the financing of ISIL, Al-Qaida and
associated organizations, including the extradition and
prosecution of those guilty of such actions. Special
stress is placed in that regard on cooperation with
States on whose territory or against whose citizens
such terrorist attacks have been carried out.

In the Russian Federation, we are working
consistently and systematically at the national level to
counter and suppress the financing of terrorism. On
18 November, by presidential decree, an inter-agency
committee to suppress the financing of terrorism was
created. An inter-agency plan has been elaborated,
in the framework of which financial intelligence and
law enforcement agencies have conducted close to
5,000 investigations, resulting in the initiation of 270
criminal cases. Over 1,600 natural and legal persons
are suspected of having provided material support to

ISIL. With the support of the legislative branch, work
to improve legislation to counter terrorism is ongoing.

Our country will continue to take decisive measures
to counter ISIL. We will defeat that evil only by
presenting a common front. As the President Vladimir
Putin of the Russian Federation has repeatedly said,
combating the threat of terrorism will require the
consolidation of the entire international community's
efforts, with respect for the norms of international law
and with a central role to be played by the Security
Council.

