I welcome the holding of this meeting devoted to the consideration of the twentieth semi-annual report on the activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya, and congratulate Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the Court, who, for the second time in 2020, has presented the Security Council with an accurate and comprehensive report. My delegation commends the Office for the considerable progress made in the investigations conducted during the field missions to Libya, welcomes the good cooperation with the Libyan authorities and other stakeholders and takes note of the status of the ongoing cases. We remain convinced that the fight against impunity must be an integral part of the process of national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Libya. I therefore reiterate my delegation's appeal to the Libyan authorities, to States parties and non-States parties to the Rome Statute, as well as to regional and international organizations, to comply with resolution 1970 (2011) by cooperating fully with the ICC. I would like to recall that, like the Office, Council members, including the Niger, welcomed the signing of the ceasefire agreement between the Libyan parties on 23 October in Geneva, under the auspices of the United Nations. I would like to express my hope that this agreement will lead to the establishment of peace and stability, which is essential for justice in Libya. It is also in that spirit that my delegation would like to raise two concerns regarding developments in the situation with regard to compliance with the arms embargo and international humanitarian law. First, it cannot be said often enough, peace in Libya depends entirely on observance of the arms embargo, which was accepted by all actors at the Berlin Conference. Libya does not need arms or mercenaries. Instead, it needs positive dynamics supported by neighbouring countries to be reinforced and encouraged. Secondly, the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic, in the context of crumbling infrastructure, including health infrastructure, deserves particular attention. The same attention should be paid to the situation of migrants, who are quite often used as human shields and whose unfortunate fate, even after having been rescued on the high seas, is to be sent back to Libya. Furthermore, my delegation remains concerned about the issue of the mass graves containing over 100 persons, recently discovered in Tarhouna and south of Tripoli, and welcomes in that regard the efforts made by the Libyan authorities in preserving evidence for future investigations. I now turn to the situation of refugees and migrants, which, as mentioned in the report, continues to be a source of concern in the latest period since the Prosecutor's previous briefing to the Council in May (see S/2020/371). In that regard, my delegation encourages continued active collaboration between the Office and the Libyan authorities in order to investigate and hold accountable persons and groups guilty of human trafficking and crimes against migrants. My delegation reiterates its support for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), welcomes the strengthening of the relationship between it and the Office and commends Ms. Stephanie Williams, Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of UNSMIL, for the support provided to the Office of the ICC. In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its congratulations and support to Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for their dedication in the fight against impunity, the establishment of the rule of law and the deterrence of new crimes in Libya. In that regard, we call on the United Nations, the Security Council, the African Union and all stakeholders to pool their efforts to enable the return of peace and stability to this country, too long exposed to indiscriminate violence and destruction.
