Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Last
February, the adoption of the cessation of hostilities
agreement provided a spark of hope for a reduction in
violence that would open the way to an emergence from
the crisis and to the negotiation ofa political transition in
Syria. Two months later, at the end of April, the regime,
supported by its allies, began its attack on Aleppo and
extinguished that hope. At that time, France, together
with the United Kingdom, took the initiative to bring
the Security Council together on 4 May (see S/PV.7687)
to denounce the tragic situation being faced by Aleppo
and the hundreds of thousands of inhabitants who were
still living there.

The regime, with the complicity ofits allies, hadjust
launched an offensive that sounded the death knell for a
cessation of hostilities. The agreement on the cessation
of hostilities, as we feared, was just a smoke screen to
hide with the utmost cynicism an exclusively military
strategy, which aimed, under the pretext of combating
the Al-Nusra Front, to encircle all the areas held by the
opposition. What the regime cannot control, it seeks
to destroy. Hospitals were destroyed just yesterday in
Aleppo, in total violation of international humanitarian
law and resolution 2286 (2016), which we adopted by
consensus a few weeks ago.

During this entire time, the regime has continued
to violate Security Council resolutions, international
humanitarian law and the most basic humanitarian
principles. It has continued to attack civilian populations
and non-terrorist armed groups. By observing and
supporting the regime's attitude, some members of the
Security Council are jeopardizing their responsibility
and their credibility.

The brutality has continued to worsen in Aleppo
city and province. After experiencing indiscriminate
attacks and daily barrel bomb attacks, the city of
Aleppo is now being besieged. The Castello road,
which was the last accessible route to provide it with
water, provisions and medicines, has been cut off by the
regime's allied forces. In many respects Aleppo is for
Syria what Sarajevo was for Bosnia. It is a crossroads
city, a martyred city. The symbolic crossroads city of
Aleppo, which is thousands of years old and is part of
humankind's heritage, is a place where many countries
have clashed and intermingled, leaving profound
and diverse imprints on the city - again, today is a
martyred town. This symbol of civilization is now
being subjected to a medieval type of siege. What a
downfall and, frankly, what a disgrace that is.

There are still about 300,000 people living in
besieged Aleppo, soon to be deprived of everything
and at the mercy of the cruelty of the regime's militia.
Therefore, I ask: Can the Security Council, 20 years
after the siege of Sarajevo, passively accept the reprise
of a war crime of such barbarous tactics? Those
responsible for those crimes must not go unpunished.

The calendar provided for by resolution 2254
(2015) sets 1 August as the deadline for establishing a
transitional authority with full executive powers. For
the Security Council, respecting that deadline is a test
of the real will of the regime and its supporters to reach
a political solution.

At our most recent consultations, Special Envoy
De Mistura collectively informed us of the fact that,
without any progress in the cessation of hostilities and
the humanitarian situation, no credible resumption of
the negotiations would be possible. As we now meet,
this tragic scenario is indeed emerging. Aleppo has
become Syria's martyred city. If it is besieged enough,
it could become the graveyard of the Vienna process,
as there will be no lasting political solution or effective
combating ofterrorism, while Syrian civilians continue
to be massacred.

As was stressed publicly by the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, France cannot
close its eyes to the tragedy taking place in Aleppo.
We cannot allow the Aleppo siege to continue without
responding. Therefore, France has three demands.

First of all, we formally call upon the allies of the
regime, the members of the Security Council and the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) to assume
their responsibilities so that the Syrian regime and its
allies immediately stop their attacks on Aleppo. The
lives of dozens of thousands of people and the future
of a negotiated political solution, as well as the shared
fundamental values of the Organization, are at stake.

Secondly, to relieve the suffering of the population,
we call upon for the immediate establishment of a
humanitarian ceasefire in Aleppo and Ghouta.

Thirdly, we call for an immediate lifting of all the
sieges and for rapid, safe and unhindered access to
all people in Syria, pursuant to the obligations under
resolutions 2139 (2015), 2185 (2014), 2254 (2015) and
2268 (2016). The Syrian authorities must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, and
they must also abide by Security Council resolutions.

The ISSG mechanism; the Geneva task force; the
efforts of Mr. De Mistura, which we support; and the
appeals for bringing together the opposition will all
achieve nothing because of the Aleppo siege. Let us be
clear: there will be no possible cooperation with those
who are responsible for this crime while it is being
committed and they bear a heavy responsibilty in the
face of history.

