At the outset, I would like to thank you for providing an opportunity for a young activist in the area of the environment and sustainable development to speak before the Security Council. It is with great pain that I address you today. For a broad swathe of the population, who are embroiled in the conflict and its harsh effects, environmental protection and the right to development and a good life have become a luxury, a secondary consideration. I am speaking from the shore of the Arabian sea, which has seen 10 tropical storms, including five hurricanes, in the last five years alone. Because of very limited capacities, the rain and floods, once rare, claimed dozens of innocent lives. Only in recent years have we seen climate events of such intensity. They are an alarming sign for a country whose crumbling infrastructure will not bear up if such severe disasters keep happening at the same rate. Everyone is aware that the conflict has taken a growing toll on the environment and human development in Yemen. The reports of United Nations bodies and agencies, including the United Nations Development Programme, indicate that if the war ends in 2022, development gains will have been scaled back by some 26 years - virtually a whole generation. If it lasts until 2030, four decades will have been wiped out. The organization Solutions for Sustainable Societies, which I lead, is staffed only by youths under the age of 30 who believe that, in view of the current conflict, the Sustainable Development Goals can be achieved only by making peace and improving the way we live by building a circular, green economy focused on sustainable consumption and production, in which young people should be empowered to play a pivotal role. There should be a move towards agricultural development and a coordinated use of clean energy products, and other solutions to develop the way we live and help local consumers to save time and money. Only a week ago, on 6 November, the world marked the International Day for Preventing the Exploitation of the Environment in War and Armed Conflict. Before this forum, I would like to take this opportunity to call once again on all parties to refrain from exploiting the Yemeni environment and biodiverse zones to fuel conflict. The environment is all too often an unintended casualty. This often happens in Yemen, where the ecosystem has faced numerous disruptions because of a conflict in which the parties have been mired for several years. Agricultural land has dried up, harvests have failed, sources of fresh water have been polluted, and rare wild animals have been driven to extinction owing to the conflict, in the absence of Government oversight. Ibex and rare gazelles are being hunted in growing numbers. The Arabian leopard, an endangered species, is being hunted indiscriminately; if the situation is not brought under control, it could very soon be driven to extinction. Continuing conflict and war have created an environment where indiscriminate hunting can thrive, and many rare species in Yemen are threatened with extinction. Yemen also faces a considerable threat from illegal logging. Firewood is used for cooking in the absence of household cooking gas, which has doubled in price and is now unaffordable for much of the population, especially in rural areas. In 2017, we put forward the Vital Gas for All initiative to empower local people to convert their organic waste, especially goat and cow dung and food scraps into organic that could be used for cooking, something that would take the pressure off the country's scarce green cover, reduce illegal logging and provide an alternative, clean source of energy to replace wood. We hope to receive support for that development effort and others like it, whose primary purpose is to protect the environment. No discussion of the environmental situation in Yemen would be complete without mentioning the abandoned oil tanker FSO SAFER, which is anchored in the Red Sea near the coast of Hudaydah governorate with a cargo of some 1,100,000 barrels of crude oil, or some 150,000 tons. The hull is decaying and corroding. A pipe has been pierced, causing seawater to leak into the engine room. The FSO SAFER can only be described as a ticking time bomb threatening marine life in wide area of the Red Sea. This is an alarming issue; the potential effects are incalculable, not only for fishing but for life along the nearby coast. As an environmental activist, and as a young person, I urge the members of the Security Council to use all their power to press for a lasting peace in Yemen, for the sake of humankind and the environment. The suffering of Yemenis and of the Yemeni environment will not end until the war does. The following urgent measures are also needed in order to protect the environment. Action should be taken to prevent the exploitation of the environment as a bargaining chip, as is happening with the FSO SAFER. The tanker needs to be emptied urgently before a disaster can happen, and comprehensive inspection and maintenance need to be undertaken. The humanitarian intervention in the area of green technology, including the conversion of waste to energy, should be expanded, and an investment should be made in solar energy, which has proved to be an effective source of sustainable energy for Yemenis in the current crisis. The Security Council still has an opportunity to protect this planet, put a stop to the bloodshed and safeguard nature and the environment, provided that it has the goodwill and the strength of resolve. What is possible today might not be possible tomorrow. We hope that you will move and act fast.
