Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
is a member of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency group and aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on
behalf of the group. We have been leading the Group's
efforts to make the Security Council more effective
in preventing or ending atrocity crimes. It is on that
subject that I wish to make the following brief remarks.

The people of the world expect the Council to
protect them from genocide, crimes against humanity
and war crimes - the worst crimes under international
law. Too often, the Council has failed to live up to
those expectations, such as in Rwanda and Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the 1990s and in Syria and other places
as we speak. Such well-known examples illustrate the
human and political cost of inaction, but there are many
others, including situations that never even made it on
to the Council's agenda.
It is for that reason that our group has come together
to prepare a code of conduct for States regarding
Security Council action against atrocity crimes. We
have done so in a process of detailed consultation with
States, the Secretariat and civil society. The product is
a text that reflects the political commitment of States
and that, over time, will help us create a culture of
political accountability, which is needed to make the
Council more effective and legitimate.

By committing to the code, States pledge that,
while serving as members of the Council, they will
support timely and decisive action by the Council to
prevent or end atrocity crimes. As part of that general
commitment, they also pledge more specifically not to
vote against a credible draft resolution submitted to that
end. Eighty-three States from all regions of the world
have already signed on to the code of conduct. That
includes seven members of the current Council and
three of the five States that were just elected to serve on
it starting in 2016. That is an impressive number, and
we are confident that many more States are to follow.

The code of conduct will be launched this Friday,
23 October, by our Foreign Minister at an event open to
everybody. The more States that join the initiative by
Friday, the stronger the call for change in the way the
Council addresses atrocity crimes will be. We therefore
urge all States Members of the United Nations that
have not yet done so to join the code of conduct within
the next few days, so that they can be reflected in the
original list of supporters.

The code of conduct is an important and serious
political commitment for any State that serves on the
Council. It also represents a minimum standard that
we expect any Council member to live up to, as they
are called upon to collectively exercise the primary
responsibility for international peace and security on
our behalf. We are confident that the code-of-conduct
initiative can bring about an essential change in the
decision-making of the Council.

