Mr. Williams: The Council is meeting today at a
time of crisis in the Middle East. The violent seizure of
de facto political authority in Gaza by Hamas, the end
of the Palestinian National Unity Government and the
declaration of a state of emergency by President Abbas
have created new political realities and worrying
conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory. In
Lebanon, renewed violence has again threatened the
nation's stability. Israel has been subject to rocket
attacks, on both its southern and northern borders. The
region as a whole is highly volatile and unstable,
overshadowing efforts to make political progress.

The figures of the past month tell a gloomy story:
218 Palestinians have been killed and 910 injured in
internal violence; 40 Palestinians have been killed and
159 injured by the Israel Defence Forces (IDF); one
Israeli, a 13-year old quadriplegic boy, has been killed
and 10 other Israelis have been injured, in attacks by
Palestinian militants. At least 166 rockets have been
fired by Palestinian militants from Gaza into Israel,
2

and 77 mortars have been launched at the Erez
crossing. There have been a total of 37 Israeli air
strikes, and some ground operations into the Gaza
Strip, as well as a total of 363 Israeli incursions into,
and 287 arrests in, the West Bank.

The events in Gaza must necessarily be the
central focus of this briefing. Since the February
Mecca agreement, it has been plain that the Palestinian
National Unity Government faced enormous obstacles.
The agreement did not lead to the integration of
common security and political structures. Nor did it
lead to a lifting of Israeli and international measures
against the Palestinian Authority Government in place
following the January 2006 elections.

On 27 May, Egypt brokered a factional truce after
bitter fighting in Gaza. That violence had also drawn in
Israel, which had responded with targeted air
operations to intense rocket attacks by Hamas militants
against its civilian population. President Abbas
proposed, and the National Unity Government
endorsed, a ceasefire plan designed to ensure calm with
Israel throughout Gaza and the West Bank. That plan
did not materialize.

Matters were swiftly overtaken by the events of
last week. Between 9 and 15 June, Hamas's military
wing and the Executive Force security organization
took control of the Gaza Strip in a violent insurrection
against the presidency and the Palestinian Authority
security forces. The Hamas operations were well
planned and executed, and Hamas fighters took over
key security and strategic sites. Presidential forces
were outperformed, as were Fatah militants. During the
fighting, there were many grave violations of
humanitarian and human rights law. The fighting
included summary executions, attacks on hospitals and,
at least in one case, the killing of an individual by
throwing him off a building to his death. Premises of
Palestinian Authority security forces and institutions
were burned or looted, including the presidential
compound. Additionally, three United Nations vehicles
were stolen at gunpoint by presidential forces, but
those vehicles have now been returned.

Inevitably, the fighting has created some
population movement, including hundreds of Fatah
militants and ordinary civilians who have sought to
flee the violence. About 3,500 Palestinians, including
some who were denied entry into Egypt, are reported to
be awaiting re-entry into Gaza through the Rafah
07-38897
crossing. Another 250 people, some of whom are
wounded or injured, are waiting at the Erez terminal
for permission to cross through Israel to the West
Bank. They are receiving assistance from the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and the IDF.

The situation at the Rafah and Erez crossings still
awaits resolution and raises increasing concerns about
protection, particularly as many children are involved.
We have, however, had reports today of several
seriously ill Palestinians being allowed entry into
Israel.

The fighting in Gaza inevitably had repercussions
in the West Bank. There were clashes in Nablus and in
Ramallah, and elsewhere Hamas supporters and
officials were detained. President Abbas called for a
halt to all such violent acts, including reprisals against
Hamas members.

On 14 June, President Abbas dismissed Prime
Minister Haniyeh, which led to the dissolution of the
Government. He declared a state of emergency for 30
days, in accordance with the Palestinian Basic Law,
and appointed Salam Fayyad to serve as Prime
Minister, and concurrently as Foreign Minister and
Finance Minister, leading an emergency Government
of 11 independents, mainly technocrats. President
Abbas said that he planned to consult the Palestinian
people at the appropriate time.

Meanwhile, within the Gaza Strip, the situation
remains tense. Today marks the hundredth day of
captivity for the BBC journalist Alan Johnston. Hamas
militants surrounded the compound of the Doghmush
clan on 18 June, where it is believed Mr. Johnston is
being held. There have been no reports of progress in
the efforts to secure the release of Israeli Corporal
Shalit, who in five days time will have been captive for
one year. We are troubled by reports of harassment of
Gaza's small Christian minority. This morning, we
have also received reports of at least one rocket attack
into Israel.

At the height of the crisis, the Secretary-General
convened a teleconference of the Quartet principals on
15 June. In addition to sharing its great concern for the
welfare and security of all Palestinians, the Quartet
expressed understanding and support for President
Abbas's necessary and legitimate actions and noted its
continuing support for other legitimate Palestinian
institutions. Arab foreign ministers meeting in Cairo
07-38897
sent a strong message of support to President Abbas, as
did the Council of the European Union.

With the formation of the Government, the
United States and the European Union announced their
intention to renew direct assistance to the Palestinian
Authority. Those decisions signalled the legitimacy of
the new Government and the fact that President
Abbas's positions are consistent with those of the
Quartet. The Secretary-General telephoned President
Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad to convey his full
support to the new Government. In a welcome
development, in a meeting on 17 June, Prime Minister
Olmert of Israel assured the Secretary-General that
Israel was examining options for the resumption of
transfers of VAT and customs revenues, and was
planning to ease substantially movement restrictions in
the West Bank.

With the situation in Gaza stabilizing to some
extent, concerns about food and medical shortages are
mounting. Reopening the crossings for commercial and
humanitarian imports is the United Nations most
immediate humanitarian concern. Our estimates
indicate that commercial stocks of basic food items,
such as flour and rice, will begin to run out in three
weeks unless imports are resumed. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) and the World Food Programme,
the main humanitarian providers in Gaza, have
between seven and ten days' worth of food reserves for
distribution. Dairy and other fresh products are already
in short supply. Yesterday and again today, small
quantities of immediate food and medical relief were
provided by Israel, the United Nations and the ICRC
through the Kerem Shalom crossing for targeted
distribution to recipients and suppliers. A relief
shipment is scheduled to arrive from Jordan tomorrow.
Those are welcome steps, but I must emphasize that
overall food and essential commodity reserves are
declining by the day. That can be reversed only by a
resumption of imports through the Karni crossing.

All parties have expressed their desire to ensure
that basic supplies continue to reach the people of
Gaza. We welcome the fact that Israel has resumed fuel
shipments for the power plant and petrol stations.
Concrete steps by the parties must be taken now to
reopen the crossings. We are working to find the
arrangements that will enable the parties to make that
happen, as called for by the Secretary-General and the
Quartet.
3
Allow me now briefly to refer to other
developments. This has been an important month in
Israeli politics. On 13 June, the Knesset elected Deputy
Prime Minister Shimon Peres as Israel's ninth
president. He will assume his functions in a month.
Former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak was elected
as the Chairman of the Labour Party on 12 June and
assumed his duties as Israel's Defence Minister on
19 June.

Israeli settlement activity continued, including
new construction near the Dead Sea and in the northern
West Bank, in violation of the road map. Barrier
construction also continued in occupied territory,
notwithstanding the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice. Obstacles to movement
in the West Bank now number 553.

I visited Syria on 14 June and was received by
the Vice-President, the Foreign Minister and other
senior officials. The Syrian Government impressed on
me its desire to see the start of negotiations leading to
peace with Israel and expressing concern at increasing
regional stability. In conversations with both Israeli
and Syrian interlocutors, I was assured that there was
no interest in breaking the decades of calm which have
prevailed across the Israeli-Syrian armistice line.

I also joined the Secretary-General for his recent
meeting with Prime Minister Olmert, at which he
underscored his desire to address the humanitarian
situation in Gaza, work with President Abbas, and
pursue opportunities for peace in the region with all
Arab States in light of the Arab peace initiative.

I now turn to the situation in Lebanon, where the
security situation continues to be unstable and
deteriorated further during the reporting period. The
explosions in and around Beirut have continued. On 13
June, Walid Eido - a member of Parliament and of
Saad Hariri's Future Movement - his son, two
bodyguards and six other people were murdered in an
assassination reminiscent of the terrorist attacks
perpetrated in Lebanon throughout 2005. The
Secretary-General condemned the attack in the
strongest possible terms and called on the Lebanese
Government to bring to justice the perpetrators and
instigators of that crime. Following an exchange of
letters between the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council, and at the request of the
Lebanese Government, the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission
has started to extend its assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigation of that latest crime.

In the North of Lebanon, for more than five
weeks now the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) have
continued intense fighting against militants of the
Fatah al-Islam group in the Nahr al-Barid camp. To
date, 76 LAF soldiers have died in the fighting, while
the number of civilian fatalities is estimated to be
around 50. Humanitarian conditions in the
neighbouring Beddawi camp remain difficult.
However, UNRWA, supported by United Nations
agencies and relief organizations, reports that food and
non-food items, as well as medical supplies, are
sufficient to meet current needs.

I am pleased to report that the international
community has responded promptly and fully to the
recently launched UNRWA flash appeal for $12.7
million, which will help sustain humanitarian stocks. In
addition, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has approved a
$l2-million grant for cash assistance to displaced
families from Nahr al-Barid and families from the
Beddawi camp. Overcrowding, together with public
health issues, are now the main challenges.

Following the adoption by the Security Council
of resolution 1757 (2007) regarding the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon, and given that, as of 10 June, the
United Nations was not notified in writing by the
Government of Lebanon that the legal requirements for
entry into force had been complied with, the provisions
of the document annexed to the resolution have entered
into force. The Secretary-General has begun to
undertake steps and measures necessary to establish the
Special Tribunal in a timely manner, in coordination
with the Government of Lebanon whenever
appropriate.

On 17 June, two Katyusha rockets fired from
southern Lebanon landed in Kiryat Shmona, in
northern Israel, causing minor damage but claiming no
casualties. LAF and UNIFIL troops quickly deployed
to the area but found no suspects at the site. UNIFIL
was in immediate contact with senior interlocutors in
both the LAF and the IDF to contain the situation. The
attack is a most serious violation of resolution 1701
(2006).

The Secretary-General strongly deplored the
attack, which he characterized as an attempt to
destabilize Lebanon, and urged all involved parties to
exercise restraint. The offices of Prime Minister
07-38897
Siniora and Speaker Berri issued separate statements
condemning the attack and expressed support for
UNIFIL and the LAF. UNIFIL-led talks concerning the
marking of the Blue Line continued in the current
reporting period within the tripartite mechanism. At the
same time, there were an increased number of Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace.

The brutal violence in Gaza and the attacks on the
legitimate institutions of President Abbas and the
Palestinian Authority Government are totally
unacceptable and should be condemned. Those
developments have generated deep sadness and shock
among the vast majority of Palestinians. The Secretary-
General regrets the failure of the National Unity
Government and condemns the violence that brought
about its demise.

Despite what has happened, Gaza and the West
Bank remain one Palestinian territory, legally
administered by one Palestinian Authority, headed by
President Abbas, who has appointed an emergency
Government led by Prime Minister Fayyad.

It is now vital that political and financial support
from the international community and from Israel be
immediately delivered to President Abbas and the
Palestinian Government, starting with the release of all
withheld Palestinian VAT and customs receipts. What
is also needed is action on previous Israeli
commitments, including the evacuation of settlement
outposts, the removal of roadblocks and checkpoints,
and the release of prisoners. Equally, Fatah and the
Palestinian Authority should act on their previous
commitments not only to end violence, but also to
reform their institutions.

In Gaza, it is clear that the United Nations has a
key role to play in addressing a myriad of challenges,
none more pressing than the reopening of the
crossings. I call on all not to allow this vital
humanitarian issue to be overshadowed by political
considerations. The people of Gaza cannot be left
isolated, and all parties have indicated their desire to
07-38897
ensure that this issue is addressed. Concrete solutions
are now needed.

In addition to these immediate issues, two larger
political challenges remain: first, how to restore the
unity of the Palestinian Authority and people, and
prevent the de facto division between Gaza and the
West Bank; and, secondly, how to advance the political
process between Israel and the Palestinians and move
towards a comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It is the responsibility of all - the parties, the
regional States and the international community,
including the Quartet - to provide the kind of
leadership required to steer through this difficult period
towards a more hopeful future. The Secretary-General
is hoping that the Quartet will meet soon.

I wish to conclude this briefing by paying tribute
to the United Nations team on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territories and, above all, in Gaza.
Two United Nations staff, Abdel-Fatah Abu-Ghali and
Ahmad Al-Laham, were killed on 13 June, and others
were injured serving the people of Gaza. While
operations had to be curtailed, they never ceased
entirely. Even at the time of heaviest fighting, the
United Nations remained with the Palestinian people in
Gaza. I wish to salute in particular the dedication of the
Director of UNRWA in Gaza and the Chief Security
Adviser, as well as the international security officers
and national staff who remained at their posts
throughout the height of the fighting. The United
Nations will remain fully engaged in meeting its
mandated responsibilities in the occupied Palestinian
territory and in efforts to advance the cause of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace.

