Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to express its appreciation to Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Amos for their informative
briefings to the Security Council on the situation in
Haiti. We also thank our Haitian colleague for his
briefing.

Last week we in the United Nations family joined
with the people of Haiti when we commemorated the
one year anniversary of the devastating earthquake that
claimed the lives of nearly a quarter of a million people
and displaced over 1 million more. It was also a day
that saw the biggest single-day loss of life among the
men and women who serve the Organization through
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
South Africa again expresses its deepest condolences
and sympathy to all who were affected by that
devastating event. Human suffering was further
exacerbated in the aftermath of the earthquake by the
effects of hurricane Tomas and the outbreak of the
deadly cholera epidemic, further compounding the
humanitarian challenges in Haiti.

Our delegation remains concerned about the
political and humanitarian situation in Haiti. In that
regard, we reiterate our commitment to the ongoing
recovery and reconstruction efforts in the country. We
concur with the assessment that Haiti's recovery will
require a multi-year effort, and therefore that the
acceleration of recovery efforts for Haiti must be an
absolute priority for 2011.

We are concerned about the slow pace of
recovery. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts in supporting the Government of
Haiti in leading the recovery. In that regard, we have
noted the call in resolution 1944 (2010), adopted by the
Council in October, for the international community to
coordinate its efforts with the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission. It is also essential that the Government
lead all recovery efforts and that those efforts be
closely coordinated so as to ensure that they are

ll-21162
efficient and transparent and meet the needs of the
most vulnerable.

The cholera epidemic undermines the recovery
efforts further. We have taken note of the improved
manner in which the epidemic has been addressed and
of the decline in the mortality rate. But more needs to
be done. We are especially concerned about the impact
of the epidemic on the most vulnerable. We welcome
the appointment by the Secretary-General of a panel of
experts on the cholera outbreak.

South Africa, individually and as a partner in the
India-Brazil-South Africa (IBSA) trilateral mechanism,
will continue to contribute to the recovery efforts and
to the sustainable development of the country. We have
already provided humanitarian aid through the United
Nations humanitarian system, facilitated by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We are
committed to allocating more support in the near
future. We call on all Member States that made pledges
during the Haiti pledging conference to fulfil their
commitments.

We have noted with serious concern the stalemate
in Haiti over the elections held on 28 November 2010.
The current impasse will only further worsen the
already fragile political, socio-economic and
Government systems in Haiti. Credible elections are
essential for stability in Haiti, which in turn will
contribute to the recovery process and the achievement
of development. We are also concerned about the
recurrent violence. We call on all parties to be cautious
in their actions, so as to avoid plunging the country
into further turmoil.

We have taken note of the report of the expert
verification mission of the Organization of American
States, including its conclusions and recommendations.
We have also taken note of the communique issued by
the Provisional Electoral Council of Haiti on 19 January
2011 on the report. We note as well that the appeals
process is still under way. It is crucial that the current
situation be resolved within the established legal
process and in a manner that will accurately reflect the
will of the Haitian people.

Members of the international community have a
responsibility to stand by the people of Haiti, whether
bilaterally or through the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. All efforts should
provide the Government and the people of Haiti with
the requisite support. In that regard, we express our
support and appreciation to the Organization of
American States and the Caribbean Community for
their commitment to Haiti. We also commend all the
bilateral efforts of many countries in addressing the
multiple needs of the country.

Moreover, the Security Council's continued
engagement and focus on Haiti is very important at this
critical stage. It is essential that the Council continue to
support the electoral process in Haiti by demanding
that all the parties - individual candidates as well as
the population of Haiti - refrain from violence and
address the current situation through the legal
processes provided for by the Constitution and the
electoral law.

In addressing all these pressing needs my
delegation stands ready to work with partners in the
Council to ensure that we remain seized on the matter
and serve the interests of the Haitians.

