Mr. Pham Hai Anh (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui for her insightful briefing. I would like to highlight the following points. First, regarding the political and security situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, my delegation takes note of the continued efforts of the Government in reducing tensions and ensuring a favourable political climate for the sake of peace and stability. We also take note of the Government's endeavours to engage all the relevant stakeholders, especially women, in political life. On the security front, while more than two thirds of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is stable, the persistence of insecurity and violence in the eastern part of the country - especially in North Kivu, South Kivu and Ituri - remains a source of grave concern. It is deeply troubling to see that the increased intensity of attacks by armed groups, including the Allied Democratic Forces, claimed numerous civilian lives during the recent reporting period. Viet Nam strongly condemnsall attacks against civilians, the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo, personnel of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and humanitarian workers on the ground. This must stop. MONUSCO and the national protection capacity needs to be supported and strengthened. We fully share the view that the protracted conflicts in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo require a sustainable solution. The root causes of conflict need to be addressed by focusing on restoring State authority in various regions, strengthening the capacity of national security forces, enhancing political dialogue and advancing socioeconomic efforts. Special attention should also be given to furthering progress in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, as well as security sector reform. We note that a tailored approach has been adopted to meet local needs. Secondly, the continued deterioration of the humanitarian situation, aggravated by insecurity, an economic downturn and the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, is alarming. According to recently released statistics, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has the largest number of internally displaced persons in Africa - 5.2 million people. Between July and December, 21.8 million people faced high levels of acute food insecurity, including 5.7 million in phase 4 of the Integrated Phase Classification - emergency. People in conflict-affected regions, such as North and South Kivu, Ituri and Kasai Central, suffer the most. On a more positive note, we commend the swift actions taken by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to end the eleventh Ebola outbreak in the west of the country and to prevent the spread of COVID-19. However, there are still enormous challenges that cannot be overcome without the valuable assistance of international partners. We therefore call for strengthened international efforts to support the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Thirdly, we would like to reiterate the importance of intensifying regional cooperation to achieve sustained peace, security and development. In that regard, we welcome the continued engagement of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries of the region, notably the summit held among the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Angola, Rwanda and Uganda to discuss the troubling security situation in the Great Lakes subregion, the improvement of economic cooperation and the fight against COVID-19, as well as bilateral engagement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi. We would also like to highlight the critical contributions of the African Union, the Southern African Development Community, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other subregional and international partners to the pursuit of peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. Last but not least, the support of MONUSCO remains crucial given the dire security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially with regard to protecting civilians and strengthening State institutions. We warmly welcome the constructive engagement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities and the Mission in order to elaborate a joint strategy on the progressive and the phased drawdown of MONUSCO. We take note of the careful deliberation of the situation in the six provinces, as stated in the Secretary-General's letter (S/2020/1041). We would like to reiterate the particular significance of a prudent approach in its implementation, which should consider the evolving situation on the ground and an assessment of the capacity of the Government authorities. It is vital to ensure that we can preserve our hard-won achievements.
