Mr. Sawers (United Kingdom): My delegation
thanks the Special Coordinator for his briefing today.
We listened very carefully to the very full contributions
from Ambassadors Mansour and Shalev, and I thank
them for their statements.

This debate comes very soon after the Security
Council discussions on Tuesday. Today is an
opportunity to hear the views of the parties and other
Member States, as we ourselves made clear in the
earlier Council debate. But, let me begin, as others
have, by welcoming the adoption of resolution 1850
(2008).

Since the last ministerial meeting to discuss the
Middle East last summer, we have seen momentum
steadily build towards a greater Security Council role
in the Middle East peace process. Resolution 1850
(2008) is an important milestone in a series of
resolutions, including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003). Taken together, these
resolutions set out the goals of the peace and the
framework for the peace process. Resolution 1850

(2008) serves to underline the key points that we
believe are essential for progress towards a lasting
settlement.

First, let me stress the importance of building on
the current negotiations, including both the Israel-
Palestine and the Israel-Syria tracks. Secondly, both
parties need to fill their commitments under the Road
Map. For Israel, this means taking action to freeze
settlement building and improving conditions for
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza. For
Palestinians, it means finding a way to reunite around
negotiations and non-violence, with Hamas ceasing
their rocket attacks and moving towards the Quartet
principles.

Thirdly, it sets out the need for a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, with all States in the region and
the wider international community working to build an
atmosphere conducive to the negotiations. We welcome
the specific reference in the resolution to the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Arab engagement on the peace
process that lies behind that initiative. As Foreign
Secretary Miliband said in his intervention on Tuesday,
resolving the Middle East conflict will require more
than a two-State solution; it will require Israel and all
Arab States to live side by side in security.

The Security Council resolution follows the
recent and highly significant letter from the Arab
League to President-elect Obama calling for a
comprehensive solution to the Middle East peace
process and signalling the willingness of the Arab
world to work with the new United States
Administration on this issue. And the resolution also
follows the European Council declaration made on 12
December setting out strong European Union support
for and participation in the efforts to achieve a
negotiated solution. Taken together, those
developments give us momentum to make real progress
in 2009 and we look forward to an early commitment
from the next United States Administration to
sustaining the peace process from the start of its term
in office.

The political process is inseparable from the
situation on the ground. We welcome the emphasis that
resolution 1850 (2008) gives to the development of
Palestinian capacity and the development of the
institutions of a Palestinian State. The United
Kingdom, along with the European Union, continues to
support the Palestinian Authority in improving its
security forces and in building up its economy, both of
which we believe will lead in time to better security for
Israel and a lessening of tensions.

Insecurity in the wider Middle East region, not
least the activities of Iran, makes the need for progress
in peace negotiations between Israel and its neighbours
ever more urgent. The United Kingdom supports the
statement made by the Quartet this week and their
continued work in engaging with the parties and
galvanizing the international community. The United
Kingdom will continue to work closely with those in
the region and beyond to reinforce the peace process
and we will work within the Security Council to build
on the authority and direction that the Council
engagement has given and will continue to give to the
peace process.

