The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/1146, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council on the
situation in Burundi.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for the peace process of the Arusha
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
Burundi (the Arusha Agreement), calls on all the
Burundian parties to implement their
commitments and assures them of its
determination to support their efforts in this
direction.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress recently made by the Burundian parties,
in particular by the signing, in Pretoria, of the 8
October and 2 November 2003 Protocols, and by
the conclusion, on 16 November 2003 in Dar es
Salaam, of the Global Ceasefire Agreement
between the Transitional Government and the
Forces pour la defense de la democratic (CNDD- FDD) of Mr. Nkurunziza.

"The Security Council welcomes with
satisfaction the formation of the new Transitional
Government and the participation of the CNDD-
FDD in the transitional institutions. It again urges
the Forces nationales de liberation
(PALIPEHUTU-FNL) of Mr. Rwasa, the last
rebel group that has not yet joined the peace

process of the Arusha Agreement, to do so
without further delay.
"The Security Council pays tribute to the
efforts of the States of the Regional Initiative and
of the Facilitation, in particular South Africa, in
favour of peace in Burundi. It expresses its
support for the mission of the African Union in
Burundi and for its South African, Ethiopian and
Mozambican contingents, and calls on donors to
give it financial, material and logistical support as
soon as possible.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
mission of the Economic and Social Council's Ad
Hoc Advisory Group, and calls on donors and the
international financial community to mobilize
during the next forum of Burundi's partners for
development, scheduled for 13 and 14 January
2004 in Brussels, and to honour fully the pledges
made so far.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the dire humanitarian situation of the
population of Burundi and recalls that all parties
involved are responsible for the security of the
civilian population, which includes facilitating
total, unrestricted and immediate access to the
population for the humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council condemns all acts of
violence as well as violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law, and reaffirms its
determination to support Burundian efforts to
prevent such acts, based on the rule of law, in
order to put an end to impunity.

"The Security Council takes note of the
address made by the Burundian President, Mr.
Ndayizeye, to the Council on 22 September 2003.
It takes note also of the request made by the
South African Deputy President, Mr. Zuma, on
behalf of the States of the Regional Initiative,
when he spoke before the Council on 4 December
2003, which is referred to in paragraph 71 of the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi, dated 4 December 2003
(S/2003/ll46).

"The Security Council welcomes the
Secretary-General's decision to examine the
situation with a view to submitting
recommendations to the Council, and requests

him in this regard to undertake, as soon as he
deems it convenient, the appropriate preparatory
work and assessment on how the United Nations
might provide the most efficient support for the
full implementation of the Arusha peace
agreement.

"The Security Council takes note of the
latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi; it welcomes the work
accomplished, in often difficult conditions, by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the staff of the United Nations Office in
Burundi, and approves the recommendations of
paragraphs 63 to 65 regarding the renewal of the
Office's mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2003/30.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

Before adjourning the meeting, I would like to
take this opportunity to offer a few words as Permanent
Representative of Bulgaria, since this is no doubt the
last public meeting of the Council before Bulgaria's
term in the Council expires.

Like others before me, I would first of all like to
thank all the members of the Council for their support
and their team spirit during these two remarkable years
in the history of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretariat for its excellent work, in
particular Mr. Stefanides's team, who have been
extremely supportive to my delegation. I would warmly
thank the interpreters and the others who have helped
our work throughout these past two years. I also thank
the security officers for ensuring our safety. I would
also like to thank the representatives of the
international media who provided coverage of the work
of the Council and of the work of the Bulgarian
delegation in a very responsible and professional
manner.

In conclusion, may I say that Bulgaria is
extraordinarily pleased to see Romania following us in
the Security Council as representative of our regional
group. Romania is a neighbour and friend of Bulgaria
and, in its foreign policy, it pursues the same principles
and holds the same values as we do. We are glad that
our Romanian friends will follow us here in the
Council.

The meeting rose at 4.15pm.
