Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa wishes
to extend our appreciation to the Principals of the
Tribunals for their very useful briefings and for the
important work that they are doing. We also express
our appreciation to Ambassador Rosenthal and his
delegation for their able chairing of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

Allow us to extend particular gratitude to the
President, Prosecutor and Registrar of the newly
established Residual Mechanism, whose first report to
the Council we received today (S/2012/849, annex I).
We applaud their commitment, given that they have
assumed their responsibilities under the Residual
Mechanism while simultaneously serving as President
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and Registrar of the ICTY,
respectively.

When the ICTY and the ICTR were established
by the Security Council, it was understood that, as
ad hoc tribunals, their existence would not continue
indefinitely. The establishment of the Residual
Mechanism under resolution 1966 (2010) and the
beginning of the operations of the Arusha branch in
July 2012 are a reflection of the temporary nature of
those Tribunals, coupled with the recognition of the
need to prevent any impunity gaps that may arise from
the abrupt conclusion of the work of the Tribunals.
South Africa looks forward to the full realization of that
dual objective once the Hague branch of the Residual
Mechanism begins functioning.

My delegation wishes to pay tribute to both the
ICTY and the ICTR for their immense contribution to
the promotion of the rule of law and the fight against
impunity, thereby significantly contributing to the
development of international criminal law. Notable
in the jurisprudential contribution of the Tribunals
is the development of a set of criteria, including fair
trial requirements for the transfer of trials to national
jurisdictions. We are confident that those standards
will contribute meaningfully to the development
of the principle of complementarity to which South
Africa attaches particular importance. Additionally,
the two Tribunals have set a high standard for judicial
independence while operating in a highly charged
political environment.

The phasing out of the functions of the ICTR,
which is now in its final phase, is indicative of the
strides made towards its completion strategy. We look
forward to the ICTR delivering its final judgement in
the Ngirabatware case and we encourage the Tribunal,
while adhering to due process standards, to expedite the
appeals that are currently pending by 2014, as initially
determined.

While the ICTY will continue its functions into
2013 and with the Mladic', Hadzic and Karadfic' trials
beyond 2013, we recognize the immense efforts of the
Tribunal in securing cooperation and ensuring the
arrests of all indictees. We encourage the ICTY, even
with the constraints and challenges highlighted in the
report (see S/2012/592), to proceed in finalizing the
remaining trials and appeals, as determined by the
Council.

We have taken note of the activities of the Arusha
branch of the Residual Mechanism and we commend
the Residual Mechanism for its efficiency and cost-
saving efforts. Those include the appointment ofajudge
already residing in Arusha to act as duty judge for the
branch, the Prosecutor's decision to designate, as an
interim measure, members of the ICTR Office of the
Prosecutor to double hat in the Residual Mechanism,
and the President's decision to preside over the appeal
against a decision to transfer the Munyarugarama case
to Rwanda. We have also noted, in that regard, the
intention of the President to preside over any potential
appeal in the Ngirabatware case and to appoint judges
already residing in the Hague in that appeal.

We welcome such attention to efficiency and the
economical use of resources, while also calling for
burden-sharing in the management of judicial caseloads.

Consistent with its mandate under the statute, we
encourage the Residual Mechanism to continue its
effort to track fugitives and to secure the cooperation
of States in the arrest of those individuals under ICTR
arrest warrants. We are encouraged by the consultations
between the Prosecutor and the States where those
individuals are believed to be present. We urge States,
in compliance with their obligations under the statute, to
increase their efforts to secure the arrest of individuals
with outstanding arrest warrants.

Finally, we wish to welcome the high level of
cooperation among the ICTY, the ICTR and the
Residual Mechanism, including through the sharing of
resources. We encourage continued and, to the extent
possible, increased cooperation to ensure a smooth
transition, particularly as the ICTY and the ICTR wind
down their functions.

