Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Faced
with the Iraqi crisis, the international community is
now at a crossroads. The Government of Iraq has failed
to dispel the suspicion that it still possesses weapons of
mass destruction - weapons that it has used in the past
both against its own people and in its military
operations abroad. By refusing to cooperate with the
United Nations, it has inflicted enormous suffering on
its own people, in particular its most vulnerable
sectors.

On 8 November 2002, the Security Council gave
the Iraqi regime a chance to resume its place within the
international community. To that end, the Security
Council demanded that the Iraqi Government cooperate
fully, actively and unconditionally with the inspectors
who are responsible for identifying and destroying
banned weapons.
The inspectors have worked in an exemplary
manner. Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei have reported to
the Security Council on several occasions. The facts set
out in their conclusions, however, fall short of what we
expected. The inspectors have pointed out that they
have been granted access to all the sites they wanted to
visit without hindrance and that they are making
progress with their mission. They have also highlighted
the fact that they have found no irrefutable proof that
Iraq is continuing to manufacture weapons of mass
destruction or that it is preparing to use them. But they
have deplored the lack of active cooperation. We had
expected the Iraqi Government to respond with a clear
sign of good will. Its ambivalent attitude has not
restored confidence.

Does that mean that the moment has come to
resort to the use of force? We do not believe so. Our
position is based on a dispassionate analysis of the
situation. We are aware of the dangers inherent in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and we
do not underestimate the risk that such weapons might
one day fall into the hands of international terrorist
networks. We are concerned, however, that a hasty
military operation might create a violent shockwave in
a region where a sustainable balance based on peace
and mutual confidence has not yet been established.
Furthermore, we dread the potential consequences of
such action for the civilian population.

Rightly concerned about the fate of the civilian
population affected by the crisis in Iraq and the
surrounding region, Switzerland recently held, in
Geneva, a humanitarian meeting to suggest a platform
for a humanitarian dialogue, to strengthen the exchange
of information in that area and to highlight the
humanitarian aspects of the crisis. The meeting was
attended by 30 countries, including those neighbouring
Iraq, and 20 humanitarian organizations, including all
the main humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
system, as well as the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and other humanitarian non-
governmental organizations.

The actors involved explained what preparations
they had made and what measures they had planned to
respond in the event of armed conflict, inter alia, Iraq's
neighbours expressed their concerns about the
consequences they would face if hostilities broke out,
while reminding participants of the overall dimension
of the Iraq crisis and the need to share the burden fairly
among States, in particular with regard to the question
of refugees. The importance of ensuring respect for
international humanitarian law, in particular the 1949
Geneva Conventions, was strongly reaffirmed. The
discussion also covered the need to make the necessary
resources available to humanitarian partners, both for
planning and preparatory activities and to deal with
immediate needs.

The meeting provided an opportunity to clarify
the humanitarian agenda. It was agreed that
humanitarian dialogue must be followed up and
strengthened through a platform to address
humanitarian questions concerning Iraq. If such a
group is formed, it will act as a forum for the exchange
of views aimed at strengthening existing coordinating
mechanisms, rather than at duplicating them.
Switzerland has declared its readiness to promote and
to support such a group.

During that meeting, the participants agreed that
an armed conflict in the region would very probably
have grave consequences for the local civilian
population, not only in Iraq, where the situation is
already precarious, but also in neighbouring countries.
Against that background, we reiterate that resorting to
force should be considered only after all peaceful
means to find a solution to the crisis have been
exhausted.

Of course, we understand the argument of those

who consider that readiness to use force is essential in
order to strengthen the position of the United Nations
inspectors. We appreciate that view and the efforts of
those who have expressed it. But the time to make such
a decision has not yet come. There is still a chance to
achieve the objectives of resolution 1441 (2002)
without violence and to contain the danger posed by
proscribed weapons in Iraq. We can strengthen the
inspection regime. The inspectors have made proposals
to this effect, and we advocate giving them the
additional means they require to enable them to pursue
their task with the necessary efficiency and speed. The
Security Council must remain determined and must
persevere. If that option fails, we recall that in any case
the use of force must be authorized by a Security
Council resolution.

Iraq holds the key to the resolution of the crisis.
Switzerland appeals to the Iraqi Government to act in
the true interests of its country. The international
community recognizes Iraq's inalienable right to
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It is urgent that the
Iraqi Government understand the message of the
Security Council and that it respond in the way that is
expected of it.

For its part, Switzerland will continue to work in
the conviction that a negotiated solution can be found;
we remain available to assist in any new effort that
could contribute to the cause of peace.

