Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Like previous speakers, I wish to thank the
Chairs of the Committee established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) - Ambassadors Gary Quinlan, Mohammed
Loulichki and Oh Joon, respectively - for their
briefings and for the commitment with which they lead
the work of the Committees. I thank our Australian
colleague for his joint briefing, which underscored the
ongoing cooperation among the three Committees and
their panels of experts.

The briefings of our colleagues described the
efforts of the United Nations to combat terrorism.
However, such efforts will be effective only if all
Member States take the necessary steps to meet their
obligations. Today's meeting is important in that regard
as it enables the Council to show all Member States what
its subsidiary bodies are doing to counter terrorism and
to raise awareness with regard to those activities.

In the same spirit of transparency and outreach,
as Ambassador Quinlan said in his joint briefing, the
Chairs of the three Committees and of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1718 (2006), 1737
(2006) and 1988 (2011) spoke in the presence of the
President of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
at an open briefing on 18 November on the respective
roles of the Security Council and the FATF in the fight
against terrorism and proliferation. That meeting was
useful, we hope, in briefing Member States sooner on
the measures decided by the Council and the relevant
recommendations and guidance of the FATF and in
underscoring the assistance that the Committees, their
panels of experts and the FATF can provide to Member
States.

The sanctions against Al-Qaida have an important
role in the fight against terrorism. 1 pay tribute to the
Monitoring Team for the excellent work that it continues
to undertake, which clearly shows the changing natuire
of the terrorist threat. The sanctions list is continually
updated so as to ensure the relevance and effectiveness
ofthe sanctions regime. We also commend the activities
undertaken by the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities in underscoring the
implementation ofthe sanctions. The special meeting of
the Committee on the changing nature of the terrorist

threat posed by Al-Qaida in the Sahel and the Mahgreb,
to be held on 3 December, seems particularly timely in
that regard.

We can never stress enough that the fight against
terrorism should be guided by respect for fundamental
democratic values and the principle of the rule of law.
Luxembourg fully supports the work of the Office of
the Ombudsperson and thanks Ms. Kimberley Prost
for the examplary way in which she carries out her
mandate. We call on all Member States to continue to
cooperate fully with the Office of the Ombudsperson.
We commend the steps taken in recent years to ensure
the clear, fair and transparent procedures in the
context of the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. It is
important to continue to work for the improvement of
those procedures. The authority and legitimacy of the
measures imposed by the Council depends on that. In
that regard, we await with interest next year's review of
resolution 2083 (2012).

Luxembourg also acknowledges the important work
carried out by the 1373 Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
particularly with regard to their outreach role. I would
like to take this opporunity to welcome the new CTED
Executive Director, Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, We are
certain that he will continue his predecessor's excellent
work and assure him of Luxembourg's full support for
the activities under his leadership. As the end of his
term approaches, we would like to pay a strong tribute
to Ambassador Loulichki and his team for the work
accomplished at the helm of the 1373 Committee, in
particular in building the capacity of the countries of
the Sahel.

The year 2014 marks the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1540 (2004), which plays a key role in curbing
the threat of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons. That continues to seriousouly
threaten international peace and security. Resolution
1540 (2004) will be effective only if all Member
States are determined to implement its provisions. We
encourage all new initiatives in that regard and await
with interest the lessons learned from the peer review
process on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), led by Croatia and Poland.

During the period under consideration, Liberia
and South Sudan submitted their reports on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to the
Committee. We support the objective of the Committee's
Chair to achieve the universality of reports by the
end of 2014. Cooperation, information-sharing and
outreach and assistance activities will make it possible
to strengthen the capacity of Member States to deal
with the threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. We encourage the 1540 Committee and its
panel of experts to persevere in their efforts to match
the requests for and offers of assistance in that regard.

