The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Following consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf.

"The Security Council welcomes the recent
progress in Yemen's political transition, in line
with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, including the recent
meeting of the National Authority for Monitoring
the Implementation of the National Dialogue
Outcomes on 11 August; and the economic reform
agenda. The Security Council supports President
Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour in his efforts
to address the concerns of all parties within the
framework of the National Dialogue Conference
Outcomes, urging the Yemeni authorities to
expedite the process of reforms, including army
and security sector reform.

"The Security Council urges all the parties
in Yemen to adhere to resolving their differences
through dialogue and consultation, reject acts of
violence to achieve political goals, refrain from
provocation and fully abide by resolutions 2014
(2011), 2051 (2012) and 2140 (2014). Furthermore,
the Security Council calls on all Member States
to refrain from external interference which seeks
to foment conflict and instability and instead to
support the political transition.

"The members of the Security Council note
with concern that the Houthis and others continue
to stoke the conflict in the north in an attempt
to obstruct the political transition. The Security
Council recalls that resolution 2140 (2014)
introduced targeted sanctions measures against
individuals or entities engaging in or providing
support for acts that threaten the peace, security
or stability in Yemen. The Security Council

supports the efforts of the Panel of Experts in
gathering and analysing information regarding the
implementation of these measures, in particular
incidents of undermining the political transition.

"The Security Council expresses grave
concern about the deterioration of the security
situation in Yemen in the light of the action taken
by the Houthis, led by Abdul Malik al Houthi, and
those who support them, to undermine the political
transition and the security of Yemen. These actions
include their escalating campaign to bring down
the Government; establishing camps in and around
Sana'a; seeking to supplant the authority of the
State by installing checkpoints on strategic routes
into Sana'a; as well as ongoing fighting in al Jawf.
The Security Council calls on all armed groups to
refrain from any action which might exacerbate
this already fragile situation.

"The Security Council condemns the actions
of Houthi forces commanded by Abdu11ah Yahya
al Hakim (Abu Ali a1 Hakim) who overran Amran
including the Yemeni Army Brigade headquarters
on 8 July.

"The Security Council calls on the Houthis
to withdraw their forces from Amran and return
Amran to Government of Yemen control, cease all
armed hostilities against the Government of Yemen
in al Jawf and remove the camps and dismantle
the checkpoints they have erected in and around
Sana'a.

"The Security Council condemns the growing
number of attacks carried out or sponsored by
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, and expresses
its determination to address this threat in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, including applicable human
rights, refugee and humanitarian law, and in this
regard, through the Al-Qaida sanctions regime
administered by the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) and reiterates its readiness, under the
above-mentioned regime, to sanction further
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities who
do not cut off all ties to Al-Qaida and associated
groups.

"The Security Council stresses the need for an
initial draft of the constitution to be passed to the
National Authority review in a timely manner in

order to conduct a referendum on the constitution
without undue delay.

"The Security Council reiterates its call
for comprehensive, independent and impartial
investigations, consistent with international
standards, into alleged human rights violations and
abuses in line with the outcomes of the National
Dialogue Conference and the Gulf Cooperation
Council Initiative and Implementation Mechanism.
The Security Council recalls its reference in
resolution 2140 (2014) to the early adoption ofa law
on transitional justice and national reconciliation.

"The Security Council notes the formidable
economic, security and social challenges
confronting Yemen, which continue to leave many
Yemenis in acute need of humanitarian assistance.
It reaffirms the need to expedite economic
reforms, which are a necessary part of achieving
macroeconomic stability, fighting poverty and
addressing the chronic humanitarian consequences
of the crisis in a sustainable manner. It encourages
rapid implementation of Government of Yemen
plans to improve social protection, as well as
urging the international community to support
the humanitarian response plan which remains
underfunded. The Security Council also urges all
parties to facilitate safe and unhindered access
for humanitarian actors to reach people in need
of humanitarian assistance. It also reaffirms the
need for all parties to ensure the safety of civilians,
including those receiving assistance, as well as
the need to ensure the security of humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and its associated
personnel.

"The Security Council remains closely engaged
on the situation in Yemen and will continue to closely
follow the next steps towards a peaceful political
transition. In this regard, it welcomes the continued
and coordinated efforts of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the Group of Ten Ambassadors, the
Secretary-General's good offices, including
through the Special Adviser Jamal Benomar,
the wider diplomatic community, and the next
Friends of Yemen meeting that will take place on
24 September in New York. The Security Council
underscores the need for continued international
support for Yemen's political transition, including
through the fulfillment of commitments made by
donors to support Yemen."

This statement will be issued as a document of the

Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/18.

I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.

