Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): By
holding a debate on the subject of post-conflict
peacebuilding, the Security Council is tackling an issue
of fundamental importance for regional and
international stability and security - an issue that
requires sustained special attention.

The establishment, on 20 December 2005, of the
Peacebuilding Commission in an effort to increase the
focus of the international community on countries
emerging from conflict represents a decisive milestone
in the reform process towards enabling the United
Nations to meet the challenges of the new millennium.
Post-conflict countries are like recovering patients who
need to be closely monitored to ensure that they do not
suffer a potentially fatal relapse.

In order to support such countries as they work to
restore peace and stability and to help them to avoid
relapsing into violence, we need to help them to put a
definitive end to the root causes of such conflicts,
which are essentially related to the transfer of power,
problems of governance and social factors. That is why
it is essential to support post-conflict countries in order
07-22708

to strengthen their institutional and administrative
capacities and help them to establish mechanisms to
develop democratic governance, to reform their justice
and security sectors and to restore their economies.

Similarly, the space for dialogue needs to be
established and strengthened through the significant
involvement of women and young people, who are the
primary victims of conflict. The involvement of
women and young people is particularly desirable
because they generally constitute the majority of the
populations of such countries and are necessary
conveyors of information and opinion. For that reason,
Senegal calls on all Member States to continue their
efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000), on
women, peace and security. Six years after its adoption,
that resolution, which has led to major progress, must
continue to be supported by the international
community.

Building peace also requires the establishment of
programmes aimed at reintegrating former combatants
and finding solutions to issues relating to employment
for young people, who are easy prey for unscrupulous
warlords. However, none of this will be possible if the
Peacebuilding Commission does not possess the means
to support the efforts of post-conflict countries, which
continue to be in a vulnerable position long after the
resolution of the crisis. My country therefore appeals
to the traditional donors and international civil society
partners to make the Peacebuilding Fund a viable and
effective tool to meet the urgent needs of post-conflict
countries. We need to provide the Commission with the
tools that will enable it to pursue its actions by giving
it the financial and technical support that it needs so as
to ensure that millions of children emerging from
darkness will have an opportunity to go to school
without fear of being felled by a mine.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the
Commission Chairman, Ismael Abraao Gaspar Martins,
and the other members of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which has already reviewed the cases of
Sierra Leone and Burundi - two African countries that
have gone through many years of conflict but which,
thanks to the genius of their peoples and the support of
the international community, have made their way back
to the path of peace and stability.

