Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by once again expressing the United Kingdom's
continued support for the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugsolavia (ICTY), the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. Their
work remains vital to ensuring accountability and
promoting international justice across the globe. I
would like to thank the Tribunals' Presidents and
Prosecutors for their reports and today's presentations,
and to commend the progress they have made to date.
I would also like to thank Chile for its chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group.

I will begin with the ICTY. We are pleased to see
that the trial of Radovan Karadiie remains on track,
and we hope that the Goran Hadzic' trial and the Ratko
Mladie trial timetables can also be maintained. We
note the position in the Vojislav Seselj case. While we
understand the complexities, we encourage the ICTY
to take all necessary steps to ensure that his trial can
recommence as soon as possible. The timely completion
of all ICTY trials remains a top priority. The ICTY
Prosecutor is once again concerned about the slow
progress of war crime in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
share those concerns. More needs to be done to address
the most complex cases, as envisaged by the National
War Crimes Strategy of 2008, and for joint cases that
have been broken up by the State Prosecutors' Office and
thus move between State and municipality prosecutors'
offices. That issue is becoming increasingly urgent,
and it is vital that these cases be completed in a timely
manner.

It is good to see that the Bosnian Prosecutor's Office
has been provided with additional resources to help
address the slow progress of those cases. That activity
should be prioritized in accordance with the European
Union-funded Instrument for Pro-Accession Assistance
project. In order to ensure the timely disbursement of
the second tranche of this project's budget, we urge
the relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
take the necessary steps to adopt the new justice sector
reform strategy. We also share the Prosecutor's concern
about the threats posed by barriers being raised, which
may hinder regional reconciliation We urge all parties
to ensure that those barriers do not materialize, and
that the rights and feelings of victims continue to
be respected. We are particularly concerned about
genocide denial, which is unacceptable.

However, on a positive note, the United Kingdom
welcomes the continued cooperation of Serbia, Croatia
and Bosnia with the ICTY. That is vital if the ICTY
is to operate effectively, complete its mandate and
deliver justice for the countless victims of the wars in
the former Yugoslavia. We thank those States for their
continued support, and we trust that this will continue
as the Tribunal moves ever closer to the completion of
its mandate.

Turning to the ICTR, 2014 marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Rwandan genocide, a global
tragedy that has had an immeasurable influence on
the international community's approach to conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and international justice.
Between April and July 1994, in 100 short days,
1 million people were killed, many in the most horrific
manner. Rwanda's transformation since those dark
days has been extraordinary. I would like to echo the
comments of the Minister of State at the Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, Baroness Anelay, and commend
the work of the ICTR on the Tribunal's recent twentieth
anniversary. The ICTY's work over the past 20 years has
been instrumental in developing international law and
ensuring that those most responsible for the Rwandan
genocide are held accountable. We are pleased that the
Tribunal has now completed its substantive trial cases.

However, it is disappointing that there has been
no progress in apprehending the nine fugitives. The
work of ensuring accountability cannot be completed
until those individuals have been brought to justice.
We encourage all States to provide their full support
to Rwanda and the Mechanism so as to achieve their
arrest and surrender. We also regret that the problem
of relocating individuals in Arusha who have been
acquitted or have completed their sentences remains
unresolved. Such individuals must be able to resume
their lives. We thank the ICTR and the Mechanism for
their continued efforts to try to resolve that problem,
and we commend Belgium for accepting one of these
individuals. But more work needs to be done to find
a long-term solution to that issue. In the meantime,
we encourage all States to cooperate to resolve that
matter as quickly as possible. We wish to assure the
Tribunals of our support regarding the extension of the
judges" and prosecutors' mandates. That is essential for
the work of the Tribunals if they are to complete their
mandates.

To conclude on a positive note, we commend
both Tribunals for the ongoing smooth transition of
activities to the Mechanism. That is a priority for the
United Kingdom and we hope that it will continue.
We encourage both Tribunals and the Mechanism
to continue to collaborate closely on that important
objective. We commend the outreach, capacity-building
and training activities of the Tribunals and Mechanism,
which are essential for continuing the fight against
impunity and ensuring that the excellent legacy of the
Tribunals is used to good effect.

